Wuthering Heights
CHAPTER I
1801. - I have just return from a visit to my landlord - the
solitary neighbour that I shall be trouble with. this be
certainly a beautiful country! in all England, I do not believe
that I could have fix on a situation so completely remove from
the stir of society. a perfect misanthropist's heaven: and Mr.
Heathcliff and I be such a suitable pair to divide the desolation
between we. a capital fellow! he little imagine how my heart
warm towards he when I behold his black eye withdraw so
suspiciously under their brow, as I ride up, and when his finger
shelter themselves, with a jealous resolution, still far in
his waistcoat, as I announce my name.
'Mr. Heathcliff?' I say.
a nod be the answer.
'Mr. Lockwood, your new tenant, sir. I do myself the honour of
call as soon as possible after my arrival, to express the hope
that I have not inconvenience you by my perseverance in solicit
the occupation of Thrushcross Grange: I hear yesterday you have
have some thought - '
'Thrushcross Grange be my own, sir,' he interrupt, wince. 'I
should not allow any one to inconvenience I, if I could hinder it
- walk in!'
the 'walk in' be utter with closed tooth, and express the
sentiment, 'go to the deuce:' even the gate over which he leant
manifest no sympathise movement to the word; and I think that
circumstance determine I to accept the invitation: I feel
interested in a man who seem more exaggeratedly reserved than
myself.
when he see my horse's breast fairly push the barrier, he do
put out his hand to unchain it, and then sullenly precede I up
the causeway, call, as we enter the court, - 'Joseph, take Mr.
Lockwood's horse; and bring up some wine.'
'here we have the whole establishment of domestic, I suppose,' be
the reflection suggest by this compound order. 'no wonder the
grass grow up between the flag, and cattle be the only hedge-
cutter.'
Joseph be an elderly, nay, an old man: very old, perhaps, though
hale and sinewy. 'the Lord help we!' he soliloquise in an
undertone of peevish displeasure, while relieve I of my horse:
look, meantime, in my face so sourly that I charitably
conjecture he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner,
and his pious ejaculation have no reference to my unexpected advent.
wuthere Heights be the name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling.
'wuthere' be a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station be expose in stormy
weather. pure, brace ventilation they must have up there at all
time, indeed: one may guess the power of the north wind blow
over the edge, by the excessive slant of a few stunt fir at the
end of the house; and by a range of gaunt thorn all stretch
their limb one way, as if craving alm of the sun. happily, the
architect have foresight to build it strong: the narrow window be
deeply set in the wall, and the corner defend with large jutting
stone.
before pass the threshold, I pause to admire a quantity of
grotesque carving lavish over the front, and especially about the
principal door; above which, among a wilderness of crumble
griffin and shameless little boy, I detect the date '1500,' and
the name 'Hareton Earnshaw.' I would have make a few comment, and
request a short history of the place from the surly owner; but
his attitude at the door appear to demand my speedy entrance, or
complete departure, and I have no desire to aggravate his impatience
previous to inspect the penetralium.
one stop bring we into the family sitting-room, without any
introductory lobby or passage: they call it here 'the house' pre-
eminently. it include kitchen and parlour, generally; but I
believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen be force to retreat
altogether into another quarter: at least I distinguish a
chatter of tongue, and a clatter of culinary utensil, deep
within; and I observe no sign of roasting, boiling, or bake,
about the huge fireplace; nor any glitter of copper saucepan and
tin cullender on the wall. one end, indeed, reflect splendidly
both light and heat from rank of immense pewter dish,
intersperse with silver jug and tankard, tower row after row,
on a vast oak dresser, to the very roof. the latter have never be
under-draw: its entire anatomy lie bare to an inquire eye,
except where a frame of wood laden with oatcake and cluster of
leg of beef, mutton, and ham, conceal it. above the chimney
be sundry villainous old gun, and a couple of horse-pistol:
and, by way of ornament, three gaudily-paint canister dispose
along its ledge. the floor be of smooth, white stone; the chair,
high-back, primitive structure, paint green: one or two heavy
black one lurk in the shade. in an arch under the dresser
repose a huge, liver-colour bitch pointer, surround by a swarm
of squealing puppy; and other dog haunt other recess.
the apartment and furniture would have be nothing extraordinary
as belong to a homely, northern farmer, with a stubborn
countenance, and stalwart limb set out to advantage in knee-
breech and gaiter. such an individual seat in his arm-chair,
his mug of ale froth on the round table before he, be to be
see in any circuit of five or six mile among these hill, if you
go at the right time after dinner. but Mr. Heathcliff form a
singular contrast to his abode and style of living. he be a dark-
skin gipsy in aspect, in dress and manner a gentleman: that
be, as much a gentleman as many a country squire: rather slovenly,
perhaps, yet not look amiss with his negligence, because he have
an erect and handsome figure; and rather morose. possibly, some
people might suspect he of a degree of under-breed pride; I have a
sympathetic chord within that tell I it be nothing of the sort:
I know, by instinct, his reserve spring from an aversion to showy
display of feeling - to manifestation of mutual kindliness.
hewill love and hate equally under cover, and esteem it a species of
impertinence to be love or hat again. no, Ibe run on too
fast: I bestow my own attribute over-liberally on he. Mr.
Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reason for keep his
hand out of the way when he meet a would-be acquaintance, to those
which actuate I. let I hope my constitution be almost peculiar:
my dear mother use to say I should never have a comfortable home;
and only last summer I prove myself perfectly unworthy of one.
while enjoy a month of fine weather at the sea-coast, I be
throw into the company of a most fascinating creature: a real
goddess in my eye, as long as she take no notice of I. I 'never
tell my love' vocally; still, if look have language, the merest
idiot might have guess I be over head and ear: she understand
I at last, and look a return - the sweetest of all imaginable
look. and what do I do? I confess it with shame - shrunk icily
into myself, like a snail; at every glance retire cold and
far; till finally the poor innocent be lead to doubt her own
sens, and, overwhelm with confusion at her suppose mistake,
persuade her mamma to decamp. by this curious turn of disposition
I have gain the reputation of deliberate heartlessness; how
undeserved, I alone can appreciate.
I take a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards
which my landlord advance, and fill up an interval of silence by
attempt to caress the canine mother, who have leave her nursery,
and be sneak wolfishly to the back of my leg, her lip curl
up, and her white tooth water for a snatch. my caress provoke
a long, guttural gnarl.
'youwould well let the dog alone,' growl Mr. Heathcliff in unison,
check fiercer demonstration with a punch of his foot. 'shebe
not accustomed to be spoil - not keep for a pet.' then, stride
to a side door, he shout again, 'Joseph!'
Joseph mumble indistinctly in the depth of the cellar, but give
no intimation of ascending; so his master dive down to he,
leave I VIS-a-vis the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy
sheep-dog, who share with she a jealous guardianship over all my
movement. not anxious to come in contact with their fang, I sit
still; but, imagine they would scarcely understand tacit insult,
I unfortunately indulge in wink and make face at the trio,
and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam, that she
suddenly break into a fury and leapt on my knee. I fling she
back, and hasten to interpose the table between we. this
proceeding arouse the whole hive: half-a-dozen four-footed
fiend, of various size and age, issue from hidden den to the
common centre. I feel my heel and coat-lap peculiar subject of
assault; and parry off the large combatant as effectually as I
could with the poker, I be constrain to demand, aloud,
assistance from some of the household in re-establish peace.
Mr. Heathcliff and his man climb the cellar step with vexatious
phlegm: I donot think they move one second fast than usual,
though the hearth be an absolute tempest of worrying and yelp.
happily, an inhabitant of the kitchen make more despatch: a lusty
dame, with tuck-up gown, bare arm, and fire-flush cheek,
rush into the midst of we flourish a frying-pan: and use
that weapon, and her tongue, to such purpose, that the storm
subside magically, and she only remain, heave like a sea after
a high wind, when her master enter on the scene.
'what the devil be the matter?' he ask, eye I in a manner
that I could ill endure, after this inhospitable treatment.
'what the devil, indeed!' I mutter. 'the herd of possess swine
could have have no bad spirit in they than those animal of
your, sir. you might as well leave a stranger with a brood of
tiger!'
'they willnot meddle with person who touch nothing,' he remark,
put the bottle before I, and restore the displace table.
'the dog do right to be vigilant. take a glass of wine?'
'no, thank you.'
'not bite, be you?'
'if I have be, I would have set my signet on the biter.'
Heathcliff's countenance relax into a grin.
'come, come,' he say, 'you be flurry, Mr. Lockwood. here, take
a little wine. guest be so exceedingly rare in this house that I
and my dog, I be willing to own, hardly know how to receive they.
your health, sir?'
I bow and return the pledge; begin to perceive that it
would be foolish to sit sulk for the misbehaviour of a pack of
cur; besides, I feel loth to yield the fellow further amusement at
my expense; since his humour take that turn. he - probably sway
by prudential consideration of the folly of offend a good tenant
- relax a little in the laconic style of chip off his
pronoun and auxiliary verbs, and introduce what he suppose would
be a subject of interest to I, - a discourse on the advantage and
disadvantage of my present place of retirement. I find he very
intelligent on the topic we touch; and before I go home, I be
encourage so far as to volunteer another visit to-morrow. he
evidently wish no repetition of my intrusion. I shall go,
notwithstanding. it be astonish how sociable I feel myself
compare with he.
CHAPTER II
yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I have half a mind to
spend it by my study fire, instead of wad through heath and mud
to Wuthering Heights. on come up from dinner, however, (N.B. - I
dine between twelve and one o'clock; the housekeeper, a matronly
lady, take as a fixture along with the house, could not, or would
not, comprehend my request that I might be serve at five) - on
mount the stair with this lazy intention, and step into the
room, I see a servant-girl on her knee surround by brush and
coal-scuttle, and raise an infernal dust as she extinguish the
flame with heap of cinder. this spectacle drive I back
immediately; I take my hat, and, after a four-mile' walk, arrive
at Heathcliff's garden-gate just in time to escape the first
feathery flake of a snow-shower.
on that bleak hill-top the earth be hard with a black frost, and
the air make I shiver through every limb. be unable to remove
the chain, I jump over, and, run up the flagged causeway
border with straggle gooseberry-bush, knock vainly for
admittance, till my knuckle tingle and the dog howl.
'wretched inmate!' I ejaculate, mentally, 'you deserve perpetual
isolation from your specie for your churlish inhospitality. at
least, I would not keep my door bar in the day-time. I donot
care - I will get in!' so resolve, I grasp the latch and shake
it vehemently. vinegar-face Joseph project his head from a
round window of the barn.
'what be ye for?' he shout. 'T' maister's down I' t' fowld. go
round by th' end o' t' laith, if ye go to spake to he.'
'be there nobody inside to open the door?' I halloo,
responsively.
'there's nobbut t' missis; and shoo'll not oppen 't an ye mak' yer
flaysome din till neeght.'
'why? cannot you tell she whom I be, eh, Joseph?'
'nor-ne I! Iwill hae no hend wi't,' mutter the head, vanish.
the snow begin to drive thickly. I seize the handle to essay
another trial; when a young man without coat, and shoulder a
pitchfork, appear in the yard behind. he hail I to follow
he, and, after march through a wash-house, and a paved area
contain a coal-shed, pump, and pigeon-cot, we at length arrive
in the huge, warm, cheerful apartment where I be formerly
receive. it glow delightfully in the radiance of an immense
fire, compound of coal, peat, and wood; and near the table, lay
for a plentiful evening meal, I be pleased to observe the
'missis,' an individual whose existence I have never previously
suspect. I bow and wait, think she would bid I take a
seat. she look at I, lean back in her chair, and remain
motionless and mute.
'rough weather!' I remark. 'Ibe afraid, Mrs. Heathcliff, the
door must bear the consequence of your servant' leisure
attendance: I have hard work to make they hear I.'
she never open her mouth. I star - she star also: at any
rate, she keep her eye on I in a cool, regardless manner,
exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable.
'sit down,' say the young man, gruffly. 'hewill be in soon.'
I obey; and hem, and call the villain Juno, who deign, at
this second interview, to move the extreme tip of her tail, in
token of own my acquaintance.
'a beautiful animal!' I commence again. 'do you intend parting
with the little one, madam?'
'they be not mine,' say the amiable hostess, more repellingly
than Heathcliff himself could have reply.
'ah, your favourite be among these?' I continue, turn to an
obscure cushion full of something like cat.
'a strange choice of favourite!' she observe scornfully.
unluckily, it be a heap of dead rabbit. I hem once more, and
draw close to the hearth, repeat my comment on the wildness of
the evening.
'you should not have come out,' she say, rise and reach from
the chimney-piece two of the paint canister.
her position before be shelter from the light; now, I have a
distinct view of her whole figure and countenance. she be
slender, and apparently scarcely past girlhood: an admirable form,
and the most exquisite little face that I have ever have the
pleasure of behold; small feature, very fair; flaxen ringlet,
or rather golden, hang loose on her delicate neck; and eye, have
they be agreeable in expression, that would have be
irresistible: fortunately for my susceptible heart, the only
sentiment they evince hover between scorn and a kind of
desperation, singularly unnatural to be detect there. the
canister be almost out of her reach; I make a motion to aid she;
she turn upon I as a miser might turn if any one attempt to
assist he in count his gold.
'I donot want your help,' she snap; 'I can get they for myself.'
'I beg your pardon!' I hasten to reply.
'be you ask to tea?' she demand, tie an apron over her neat
black frock, and stand with a spoonful of the leaf poise over
the pot.
'I shall be glad to have a cup,' I answer.
'be you ask?' she repeat.
'no,' I say, half smile. 'you be the proper person to ask I.'
she fling the tea back, spoon and all, and resume her chair in a
pet; her forehead corrugate, and her red under-lip push out,
like a child's ready to cry.
meanwhile, the young man have sling on to his person a decidedly
shabby upper garment, and, erect himself before the blaze,
look down on I from the corner of his eye, for all the world as
if there be some mortal feud unavenge between we. I begin to
doubt whether he be a servant or not: his dress and speech be
both rude, entirely devoid of the superiority observable in Mr. and
Mrs. Heathcliff; his thick brown curl be rough and uncultivated,
his whisker encroach bearishly over his cheek, and his hand
be embrown like those of a common labourer: still his bearing
be free, almost haughty, and he show none of a domestic's
assiduity in attend on the lady of the house. in the absence of
clear proof of his condition, I deem it well to abstain from
notice his curious conduct; and, five minute afterwards, the
entrance of Heathcliff relieve I, in some measure, from my
uncomfortable state.
'you see, sir, I be come, accord to promise!' I exclaim,
assume the cheerful; 'and I fear I shall be weather-bind for
half an hour, if you can afford I shelter during that space.'
'half an hour?' he say, shake the white flake from his clothe;
'I wonder you should select the thick of a snow-storm to ramble
about in. do you know that you run a risk of be lose in the
marsh? People familiar with these moor often miss their road on
such evening; and I can tell you there be no chance of a change at
present.'
'perhaps I can get a guide among your lad, and he might stay at
the Grange till morning - could you spare I one?'
'no, I could not.'
'oh, indeed! well, then, I must trust to my own sagacity.'
'umph!'
'be you go to mak' the tea?' demand he of the shabby coat,
shift his ferocious gaze from I to the young lady.
'is he to have any?' she ask, appeal to Heathcliff.
'get it ready, will you?' be the answer, utter so savagely that
I start. the tone in which the word be say reveal a
genuine bad nature. I no long feel inclined to call Heathcliff a
capital fellow. when the preparation be finish, he invite I
with - 'now, sir, bring forward your chair.' and we all, include
the rustic youth, draw round the table: an austere silence
prevail while we discuss our meal.
I think, if I have cause the cloud, it be my duty to make an
effort to dispel it. they could not every day sit so grim and
taciturn; and it be impossible, however ill-temper they might
be, that the universal scowl they wear be their every-day
countenance.
'it be strange,' I begin, in the interval of swallow one cup of
tea and receive another - 'it be strange how custom can mould our
taste and idea: many could not imagine the existence of
happiness in a life of such complete exile from the world as you
spend, Mr. Heathcliff; yet, Iwill venture to say, that, surround
by your family, and with your amiable lady as the preside genius
over your home and heart - '
'my amiable lady!' he interrupt, with an almost diabolical sneer
on his face. 'where be she - my amiable lady?'
'Mrs. Heathcliff, your wife, I mean.'
'well, yes - oh, you would intimate that her spirit have take the
post of minister angel, and guard the fortune of Wuthering
Heights, even when her body be go. be that it?'
perceive myself in a blunder, I attempt to correct it. I might
have see there be too great a disparity between the age of the
party to make it likely that they be man and wife. one be
about forty: a period of mental vigour at which man seldom cherish
the delusion of be marry for love by girl: that dream be
reserve for the solace of our decline year. the other do not
look seventeen.
then it flash on I - 'the clown at my elbow, who be drink his
tea out of a basin and eat his broad with unwashed hand, may be
her husband: Heathcliff junior, of course. here be the
consequence of be bury alive: she have throw herself away
upon that boor from sheer ignorance that well individual
exist! a sad pity - I must beware how I cause she to regret she
choice.' the last reflection may seem conceited; it be not. my
neighbour strike I as border on repulsive; I know, through
experience, that I be tolerably attractive.
'Mrs. Heathcliff be my daughter-in-law,' say Heathcliff,
corroborate my surmise. he turn, as he speak, a peculiar look
in her direction: a look of hatred; unless he have a most perverse
set of facial muscle that will not, like those of other people,
interpret the language of his soul.
'ah, certainly - I see now: you be the favour possessor of the
beneficent fairy,' I remark, turn to my neighbour.
this be bad than before: the youth grow crimson, and clench
his fist, with every appearance of a meditated assault. but he
seem to recollect himself presently, and smother the storm in a
brutal curse, mutter on my behalf: which, however, I take care
not to notice.
'unhappy in your conjecture, sir,' observe my host; 'we neither
of we have the privilege of own your good fairy; her mate be
dead. I say she be my daughter-in-law: therefore, she must have
marry my son.'
'and this young man be - '
'not my son, assuredly.'
Heathcliff smile again, as if it be rather too bold a jest to
attribute the paternity of that bear to he.
'my name be Hareton Earnshaw,' growl the other; 'and Iwould counsel
you to respect it!'
'Ihave show no disrespect,' be my reply, laugh internally at
the dignity with which he announce himself.
he fix his eye on I long than I care to return the stare, for
fear I might be tempt either to box his ear or render my
hilarity audible. I begin to feel unmistakably out of place in
that pleasant family circle. the dismal spiritual atmosphere
overcame, and more than neutralise, the glowing physical comfort
round I; and I resolve to be cautious how I venture under those
rafter a third time.
the business of eat be conclude, and no one utter a word
of sociable conversation, I approach a window to examine the
weather. a sorrowful sight I see: dark night come down
prematurely, and sky and hill mingle in one bitter whirl of wind
and suffocate snow.
'I donot think it possible for I to get home now without a guide,'
I could not help exclaim. 'the road will be bury already;
and, if they be bare, I could scarcely distinguish a foot in
advance.'
'Hareton, drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch. theywill be
cover if leave in the fold all night: and put a plank before
they,' say Heathcliff.
'how must I do?' I continue, with rise irritation.
there be no reply to my question; and on look round I see only
Joseph bring in a pail of porridge for the dog, and Mrs.
Heathcliff lean over the fire, divert herself with burn a
bundle of match which have fall from the chimney-piece as she
restore the tea-canister to its place. the former, when he have
deposit his burden, take a critical survey of the room, and in
crack tone grate out - 'aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand
thear I' idleness un war, when all on 'ems goan out! Bud yah're a
nowt, and itbe no use talk - yah'll niver mend o'yer ill way,
but goa raight to t' divil, like yer mother afore ye!'
I imagine, for a moment, that this piece of eloquence be
address to I; and, sufficiently enrage, step towards the
aged rascal with an intention of kick he out of the door. Mrs.
Heathcliff, however, check I by her answer.
'you scandalous old hypocrite!' she reply. 'be you not afraid
of be carry away bodily, whenever you mention the devil's
name? I warn you to refrain from provoke I, or Iwill ask your
abduction as a special favour! stop! look here, Joseph,' she
continue, take a long, dark book from a shelf; 'Iwill show you
how far Ihave progress in the Black Art: I shall soon be
competent to make a clear house of it. the red cow donot die by
chance; and your rheumatism can hardly be reckon among
providential visitation!'
'oh, wicked, wicked!' gasp the elder; 'may the Lord deliver we
from evil!'
'no, reprobate! you be a castaway - be off, or Iwill hurt you
seriously! Iwill have you all model in wax and clay! and the
first who pass the limit I fix shall - Iwill not say what he
shall be do to - but, youwill see! go, Ibe look at you!'
the little witch put a mock malignity into her beautiful eye, and
Joseph, tremble with sincere horror, hurry out, pray, and
ejaculate 'wicked' as he go. I think her conduct must be
prompt by a species of dreary fun; and, now that we be alone, I
endeavour to interest she in my distress.
'Mrs. Heathcliff,' I say earnestly, 'you must excuse I for
trouble you. I presume, because, with that face, Ibe sure you
cannot help be good-hearted. do point out some landmark by
which I may know my way home: I have no more idea how to get there
than you would have how to get to London!'
'take the road you come,' she answer, ensconce herself in a
chair, with a candle, and the long book open before she. 'it be
brief advice, but as sound as I can give.'
'then, if you hear of I be discover dead in a bog or a pit
full of snow, your conscience willnot whisper that it be partly your
fault?'
'how so? I cannot escort you. they wouldnot let I go to the end
of the garden wall.'
'you! I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold, for my
convenience, on such a night,' I cry. 'I want you to tell I my
way, not to show it: or else to persuade Mr. Heathcliff to give I
a guide.'
'who? there be himself, Earnshaw, Zillah, Joseph and I. which
would you have?'
'be there no boy at the farm?'
'no; those be all.'
'then, it follow that I be compel to stay.'
'that you may settle with your host. I have nothing to do with
it.'
'I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journey on
these hill,' cry Heathcliff's stern voice from the kitchen
entrance. 'as to stay here, I donot keep accommodation for
visitor: you must share a bed with Hareton or Joseph, if you do.'
'I can sleep on a chair in this room,' I reply.
'no, no! a stranger be a stranger, be he rich or poor: it will
not suit I to permit any one the range of the place while I be off
guard!' say the unmannerly wretch.
with this insult my patience be at an end. I utter an
expression of disgust, and push past he into the yard, run
against Earnshaw in my haste. it be so dark that I could not see
the mean of exit; and, as I wander round, I hear another
speciman of their civil behaviour amongst each other. at first the
young man appear about to befriend I.
'Iwill go with he as far as the park,' he say.
'youwill go with he to hell!' exclaim his master, or whatever
relation he bear. 'and who be to look after the horse, eh?'
'a man's life be of more consequence than one evening's neglect of
the horse: somebody must go,' murmur Mrs. Heathcliff, more
kindly than I expect.
'not at your command!' retort Hareton. 'if you set store on he,
youwould well be quiet.'
'then I hope his ghost will haunt you; and I hope Mr. Heathcliff
will never get another tenant till the Grange be a ruin,' she
answer, sharply.
'Hearken, hearken, shoo's cursing on them!' mutter Joseph, towards
whom I have be steer.
he sit within earshot, milk the cow by the light of a lantern,
which I seize unceremoniously, and, call out that I would send
it back on the morrow, rush to the near postern.
'Maister, maister, hebe staling t' lanthern!' shout the ancient,
pursue my retreat. 'hey, Gnasher! hey, dog! hey Wolf, holld
he, holld he!'
on open the little door, two hairy monster fly at my throat,
bear I down, and extinguish the light; while a mingled
guffaw from Heathcliff and Hareton put the copestone on my rage and
humiliation. fortunately, the beast seem more bent on
stretch their paw, and yawning, and flourish their tail,
than devour I alive; but they would suffer no resurrection, and
I be force to lie till their malignant master pleased to deliver
I: then, hatless and tremble with wrath, I order the
miscreant to let I out - on their peril to keep I one minute
long - with several incoherent threat of retaliation that, in
their indefinite depth of virulency, smack of King Lear.
the vehemence of my agitation bring on a copious bleeding at the
nose, and still Heathcliff laugh, and still I scold. I donot
know what would have conclude the scene, have there not be one
person at hand rather more rational than myself, and more
benevolent than my entertainer. this be Zillah, the stout
housewife; who at length issue forth to inquire into the nature of
the uproar. she think that some of they have be lay violent
hand on I; and, not dare to attack her master, she turn she
vocal artillery against the young scoundrel.
'well, Mr. Earnshaw,' she cry, 'I wonder what youwill have agait
next? be we go to murder folk on our very door-stone? I see
this house will never do for I - look at t' poor lad, hebe fair
choking! Wisht, wisht; you mun'n't go on so. come in, and Iwill
cure that: there now, hold ye still.'
with these word she suddenly splash a pint of icy water down my
neck, and pull I into the kitchen. Mr. Heathcliff follow, his
accidental merriment expire quickly in his habitual moroseness.
I be sick exceedingly, and dizzy, and faint; and thus compel
perforce to accept lodging under his roof. he tell Zillah to give
I a glass of brandy, and then pass on to the inner room; while
she condole with I on my sorry predicament, and have obey his
order, whereby I be somewhat revive, usher I to bed.
CHAPTER III
while lead the way upstairs, she recommend that I should hide
the candle, and not make a noise; for her master have an odd notion
about the chamber she would put I in, and never let anybody lodge
there willingly. I ask the reason. she do not know, she
answer: she have only live there a year or two; and they have so
many queer going on, she could not begin to be curious.
too stupefied to be curious myself, I fasten my door and glanced
round for the bed. the whole furniture consist of a chair, a
clothe-press, and a large oak case, with square cut out near the
top resemble coach window. have approach this structure, I
look inside, and perceive it to be a singular sort of old-
fashioned couch, very conveniently design to obviate the
necessity for every member of the family have a room to himself.
in fact, it form a little closet, and the ledge of a window,
which it enclose, serve as a table. I slide back the panel
side, get in with my light, pull they together again, and feel
secure against the vigilance of Heathcliff, and every one else.
the ledge, where I place my candle, have a few mildewed book pile
up in one corner; and it be cover with writing scratch on the
paint. this writing, however, be nothing but a name repeat in
all kind of character, large and small - CATHERINE EARNSHAW, here
and there vary to CATHERINE HEATHCLIFF, and then again to
CATHERINE LINTON.
in vapid listlessness I leant my head against the window, and
continue spelling over Catherine Earnshaw - Heathcliff - Linton,
till my eye close; but they have not rest five minute when a
glare of white letter start from the dark, as vivid as spectre
- the air swarm with Catherines; and rouse myself to dispel the
obtrusive name, I discover my candle-wick reclining on one of the
antique volume, and perfume the place with an odour of roasted
calf-skin. I snuff it off, and, very ill at ease under the
influence of cold and lingering nausea, sit up and spread open the
injure tome on my knee. it be a Testament, in lean type, and
smell dreadfully musty: a fly-leaf bore the inscription -
'Catherine Earnshaw, her book,' and a date some quarter of a
century back. I shut it, and take up another and another, till I
have examine all. Catherine's library be select, and its state of
dilapidation prove it to have be well use, though not
altogether for a legitimate purpose: scarcely one chapter have
escape, a pen-and-ink commentary - at least the appearance of one
- cover every morsel of blank that the printer have leave. some
be detach sentence; other part take the form of a regular
diary, scrawl in an unformed, childish hand. at the top of an
extra page (quite a treasure, probably, when first light on) I
be greatly amuse to behold an excellent caricature of my friend
Joseph, - rudely, yet powerfully sketch. an immediate interest
kindle within I for the unknown Catherine, and I begin forthwith
to decipher her fade hieroglyphic.
'an awful Sunday,' commence the paragraph beneath. 'I wish my
father be back again. Hindley be a detestable substitute - his
conduct to Heathcliff be atrocious - h. and I be go to rebel -
we take our initiatory step this evening.
'all day have be flood with rain; we could not go to church, so
Joseph must need get up a congregation in the garret; and, while
Hindley and his wife bask downstairs before a comfortable fire -
do anything but read their bible, Iwill answer for it -
Heathcliff, myself, and the unhappy ploughboy be command to
take our prayer-book, and mount: we be range in a row, on a
sack of corn, groan and shivering, and hop that Joseph would
shiver too, so that he might give we a short homily for his own
sake. a vain idea! the service last precisely three hour; and
yet my brother have the face to exclaim, when he see we descend,
"what, do already?" on Sunday evening we use to be permit
to play, if we do not make much noise; now a mere titter be
sufficient to send we into corner.
'"you forget you have a master here," say the tyrant. "Iwill
demolish the first who put I out of temper! I insist on perfect
sobriety and silence. oh, boy! be that you? france darling,
pull his hair as you go by: I hear he snap his finger."
Frances pull his hair heartily, and then go and seat herself
on her husband's knee, and there they be, like two baby,
kissing and talk nonsense by the hour - foolish palaver that we
should be ashamed of. we make ourselves as snug as our mean
allow in the arch of the dresser. I have just fasten our
pinafore together, and hang they up for a curtain, when in come
Joseph, on an errand from the stable. he tear down my handiwork,
box my ear, and croak:
'"T' maister nobbut just bury, and Sabbath not o'ered, und t'
sound o' t' gospel still I' yer lug, and ye darr be laiking!
shame on ye! sit ye down, ill childer! therebe good book eneugh if
ye'll read them: sit ye down, and think o' yer sowl!"
'say this, he compel we so to square our position that we
might receive from the far-off fire a dull ray to show we the text
of the lumber he thrust upon we. I could not bear the employment.
I take my dingy volume by the scroop, and hurl it into the dog-
kennel, vow I hat a good book. Heathcliff kick his to the
same place. then there be a hubbub!
'"Maister Hindley!" shout our chaplain. " Maister, coom hither!
Miss Cathy's riven th' back off 'Th' Helmet o' salvation,' un'
Heathcliff's pawse his fit into t' first part o' 'T' Brooad Way to
destruction!' itbe fair flaysome that ye let them go on this gait.
Ech! th' owd man wad ha' lace them properly - but hebe goan!"
'Hindley hurry up from his paradise on the hearth, and seize
one of we by the collar, and the other by the arm, hurl both into
the back-kitchen; where, Joseph asseverate, "owd Nick would fetch
we as sure as we be live: and, so comfort, we each seek a
separate nook to await his advent. I reach this book, and a pot
of ink from a shelf, and push the house-door ajar to give I
light, and I have get the time on with writing for twenty minute;
but my companion be impatient, and propose that we should
appropriate the dairywoman's cloak, and have a scamper on the
moor, under its shelter. a pleasant suggestion - and then, if the
surly old man come in, he may believe his prophecy verify - we
cannot be damper, or colder, in the rain than we be here.'
* * * * * *
I suppose Catherine fulfil her project, for the next sentence
take up another subject: she wax lachrymose.
'how little do I dream that Hindley would ever make I cry so!'
she write. 'my head ache, till I cannot keep it on the pillow;
and still I cannot give over. poor Heathcliff! Hindley call he a
vagabond, and willnot let he sit with we, nor eat with we any more;
and, he say, he and I must not play together, and threaten to
turn he out of the house if we break his order. he have be
blame our father (how dare he?) for treat H. too liberally;
and swear he will reduce he to his right place - '
* * * * * *
I begin to nod drowsily over the dim page: my eye wander from
manuscript to print. I see a red ornament title - 'seventy Times
Seven, and the First of the Seventy-First.' a Pious Discourse
deliver by the Reverend Jabez Branderham, in the Chapel of
Gimmerden Sough.' and while I be, half-consciously, worry my
brain to guess what Jabez Branderham would make of his subject, I
sink back in bed, and fall asleep. alas, for the effect of bad
tea and bad temper! what else could it be that make I pass such a
terrible night? I donot remember another that I can at all compare
with it since I be capable of suffering.
I begin to dream, almost before I cease to be sensible of my
locality. I think it be morning; and I have set out on my way
home, with Joseph for a guide. the snow lie yard deep in our
road; and, as we flounder on, my companion weary I with
constant reproach that I have not bring a pilgrim's staff:
tell I that I could never get into the house without one, and
boastfully flourish a heavy-headed cudgel, which I understand to
be so denominated. for a moment I consider it absurd that I
should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence.
then a new idea flash across I. I be not go there: we be
journey to hear the famous Jabez Branderham preach, from the
text - 'seventy Times Seven;' and either Joseph, the preacher, or I
have commit the 'first of the Seventy-first,' and be to be
publicly expose and excommunicate.
we come to the chapel. I have pass it really in my walk, twice
or thrice; it lie in a hollow, between two hill: an elevated
hollow, near a swamp, whose peaty moisture be say to answer all
the purpose of embalm on the few corps deposit there. the
roof have be keep whole hitherto; but as the clergyman's stipend
be only twenty pound per annum, and a house with two room,
threaten speedily to determine into one, no clergyman will
undertake the duty of pastor: especially as it be currently
report that his flock would rather let he starve than increase
the living by one penny from their own pocket. however, in my
dream, Jabez have a full and attentive congregation; and he preach
- good God! what a sermon; divide into four hundred and ninety
part, each fully equal to an ordinary address from the pulpit, and
each discuss a separate sin! where he search for they, I
cannot tell. he have his private manner of interpret the phrase,
and it seem necessary the brother should sin different sin on
every occasion. they be of the most curious character: odd
transgression that I never imagine previously.
oh, how weary I grow. how I writhe, and yawn, and nod, and
revive! how I pinch and prick myself, and rub my eye, and
stand up, and sit down again, and nudge Joseph to inform I if he
would ever have do. I be condemn to hear all out: finally,
he reach the 'first of the SEVENTY-first.' at that crisis, a
sudden inspiration descend on I; I be move to rise and
denounce Jabez Branderham as the sinner of the sin that no
Christian need pardon.
'Sir,' I exclaim, 'sit here within these four wall, at one
stretch, I have endure and forgive the four hundred and ninety
head of your discourse. seventy time seven time have I pluck
up my hat and be about to depart - seventy time seven time have
you preposterously force I to resume my seat. the four hundred
and ninety-first be too much. fellow-martyr, have at he! drag
he down, and crush he to atom, that the place which know he
may know he no more!'
'thou ART the MAN!' cry Jabez, after a solemn pause, lean over
his cushion. 'seventy time seven time didst thou gapingly
contort thy visage - seventy time seven do I take counsel with my
soul - Lo, this be human weakness: this also may be absolve! the
First of the Seventy-First be come. brother, execute upon he the
judgment write. such honour have all his saint!'
with that concluding word, the whole assembly, exalt their
pilgrim's stave, rush round I in a body; and I, have no
weapon to raise in self-defence, commence grappling with Joseph,
my near and most ferocious assailant, for his. in the
confluence of the multitude, several club cross; blow, aim at
I, fall on other sconce. presently the whole chapel resound
with rapping and counter rapping: every man's hand be against
his neighbour; and Branderham, unwilling to remain idle, pour
forth his zeal in a shower of loud tap on the board of the
pulpit, which respond so smartly that, at last, to my unspeakable
relief, they wake I. and what be it that have suggest the
tremendous tumult? what have play Jabez's part in the row?
merely the branch of a fir-tree that touch my lattice as the
blast wail by, and rattle its dry cone against the pane! I
listen doubtingly an instant; detect the disturber, then turn
and doze, and dream again: if possible, still more disagreeably
than before.
this time, I remember I be lie in the oak closet, and I hear
distinctly the gusty wind, and the driving of the snow; I hear,
also, the fir bough repeat its teasing sound, and ascribe it to
the right cause: but it annoy I so much, that I resolve to
silence it, if possible; and, I think, I rise and endeavour to
unhasp the casement. the hook be solder into the staple: a
circumstance observe by I when awake, but forget. 'I must
stop it, nevertheless!' I mutter, knock my knuckle through
the glass, and stretch an arm out to seize the importunate
branch; instead of which, my finger close on the finger of a
little, ice-cold hand! the intense horror of nightmare come over
I: I try to draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a
most melancholy voice sob, 'let I in - let I in!' 'who be
you?' I ask, struggle, meanwhile, to disengage myself.
'Catherine Linton,' it reply, shiveringly (why do I think of
LINTON? I have read EARNSHAW twenty time for Linton) - 'Ibe come
home: Iwould lose my way on the moor!' as it speak, I discern,
obscurely, a child's face look through the window. Terror make
I cruel; and, find it useless to attempt shake the creature
off, I pull its wrist on to the broken pane, and rub it to and
fro till the blood run down and soak the bedclothe: still it
wail, 'let I in!' and maintain its tenacious gripe, almost
madden I with fear. 'how can I!' I say at length. 'let I
go, if you want I to let you in!' the finger relax, I snatch
mine through the hole, hurriedly pile the book up in a pyramid
against it, and stop my ear to exclude the lamentable prayer.
I seem to keep they close above a quarter of an hour; yet, the
instant I listen again, there be the doleful cry moan on!
'begone!' I shout. 'Iwill never let you in, not if you beg for
twenty year.' 'it be twenty year,' mourn the voice: 'twenty
year. Ihave be a waif for twenty year!' thereat begin a feeble
scratch outside, and the pile of book move as if thrust
forward. I try to jump up; but could not stir a limb; and so
yell aloud, in a frenzy of fright. to my confusion, I discover
the yell be not ideal: hasty footstep approach my chamber
door; somebody push it open, with a vigorous hand, and a light
glimmer through the square at the top of the bed. I sit
shudder yet, and wipe the perspiration from my forehead: the
intruder appear to hesitate, and mutter to himself. at last,
he say, in a half-whisper, plainly not expect an answer, 'be
any one here?' I consider it well to confess my presence; for I
know Heathcliff's accent, and fear he might search far, if I
keep quiet. with this intention, I turn and open the panel.
I shall not soon forget the effect my action produce.
Heathcliff stand near the entrance, in his shirt and trouser; with
a candle dripping over his finger, and his face as white as the
wall behind he. the first creak of the oak startle he like an
electric shock: the light leap from his hold to a distance of
some foot, and his agitation be so extreme, that he could hardly
pick it up.
'it be only your guest, sir,' I call out, desirous to spare he
the humiliation of expose his cowardice far. 'I have the
misfortune to scream in my sleep, owe to a frightful nightmare.
Ibe sorry I disturb you.'
'oh, God confound you, Mr. Lockwood! I wish you be at the - '
commence my host, set the candle on a chair, because he find
it impossible to hold it steady. 'and who show you up into this
room?' he continue, crush his nail into his palm, and
grind his tooth to subdue the maxillary convulsion. 'who be
it? Ihave a good mind to turn they out of the house this moment?'
'it be your servant Zillah,' I reply, fling myself on to the
floor, and rapidly resume my garment. 'I should not care if you
do, Mr. Heathcliff; she richly deserve it. I suppose that she
want to get another proof that the place be haunt, at my
expense. well, it be - swarm with ghost and goblin! you have
reason in shut it up, I assure you. no one will thank you for
a doze in such a den!'
'what do you mean?' ask Heathcliff, 'and what be you do? lie
down and finish out the night, since you be here; but, for
heaven's sake! donot repeat that horrid noise: nothing could
excuse it, unless you be have your throat cut!'
'if the little fiend have get in at the window, she probably would
have strangle I!' I return. 'Ibe not go to endure the
persecution of your hospitable ancestor again. be not the
Reverend Jabez Branderham akin to you on the mother's side? and
that minx, Catherine Linton, or Earnshaw, or however she be call
- she must have be a changeling - wicked little soul! she tell
I she have be walk the earth these twenty year: a just
punishment for her mortal transgression, Ihave no doubt!'
Scarcely be these word utter when I recollect the
association of Heathcliff's with Catherine's name in the book,
which have completely slip from my memory, till thus awaken. I
blush at my inconsideration: but, without show far
consciousness of the offence, I hasten to add - 'the truth be,
sir, I pass the first part of the night in - ' here I stop
afresh - I be about to say 'peruse those old volume,' then it
would have reveal my knowledge of their write, as well as their
print, content; so, correct myself, I go on - 'in spelling
over the name scratch on that window-ledge. a monotonous
occupation, calculate to set I asleep, like counting, or - '
'what can you mean by talk in this way to I!' thunder
Heathcliff with savage vehemence. 'how - how DARE you, under my
roof? - God! hebe mad to speak so!' and he strike his forehead
with rage.
I do not know whether to resent this language or pursue my
explanation; but he seem so powerfully affect that I take pity
and proceed with my dream; affirm I have never hear the
appellation of 'Catherine Linton' before, but read it often over
produce an impression which personify itself when I have no
long my imagination under control. Heathcliff gradually fall
back into the shelter of the bed, as I speak; finally sit down
almost conceal behind it. I guess, however, by his irregular
and intercept breathing, that he struggle to vanquish an excess
of violent emotion. not like to show he that I have hear the
conflict, I continue my toilette rather noisily, look at my
watch, and soliloquise on the length of the night: 'not three
o'clock yet! I could have take oath it have be six. time
stagnate here: we must surely have retire to rest at eight!'
'always at nine in winter, and rise at four,' say my host,
suppress a groan: and, as I fancy, by the motion of his arm's
shadow, dash a tear from his eye. 'Mr. Lockwood,' he add,
'you may go into my room: youwill only be in the way, come down-
stair so early: and your childish outcry have send sleep to the
devil for I.'
'and for I, too,' I reply. 'Iwill walk in the yard till
daylight, and then Iwill be off; and you need not dread a repetition
of my intrusion. Ibe now quite cure of seek pleasure in
society, be it country or town. a sensible man ought to find
sufficient company in himself.'
'delightful company!' mutter Heathcliff. 'take the candle, and
go where you please. I shall join you directly. keep out of the
yard, though, the dog be unchained; and the house - Juno mount
sentinel there, and - nay, you can only ramble about the step and
passage. but, away with you! Iwill come in two minute!'
I obey, so far as to quit the chamber; when, ignorant where the
narrow lobby lead, I stand still, and be witness, involuntarily,
to a piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which belie,
oddly, his apparent sense. he get on to the bed, and wrench open
the lattice, burst, as he pull at it, into an uncontrollable
passion of tear. 'come in! come in!' he sob. 'Cathy, do come.
oh, do - once more! oh! my heart's darling! hear I this time,
Catherine, at last!' the spectre show a spectre's ordinary
caprice: it give no sign of be; but the snow and wind whirl
wildly through, even reach my station, and blow out the
light.
there be such anguish in the gush of grief that accompany this
raving, that my compassion make I overlook its folly, and I draw
off, half angry to have listen at all, and vex at have
relate my ridiculous nightmare, since it produce that agony;
though why be beyond my comprehension. I descend cautiously to
the low region, and land in the back-kitchen, where a gleam of
fire, rake compactly together, enable I to rekindle my candle.
nothing be stir except a brindle, grey cat, which creep from
the ash, and salute I with a querulous mew.
two bench, shape in section of a circle, nearly enclose the
hearth; on one of these I stretch myself, and Grimalkin mount
the other. we be both of we nod ere any one invade our
retreat, and then it be Joseph, shuffle down a wooden ladder
that vanish in the roof, through a trap: the ascent to his
garret, I suppose. he cast a sinister look at the little flame
which I have entice to play between the rib, sweep the cat from
its elevation, and bestow himself in the vacancy, commence the
operation of stuff a three-inch pipe with tobacco. my presence
in his sanctum be evidently esteem a piece of impudence too
shameful for remark: he silently apply the tube to his lip,
fold his arm, and puff away. I let he enjoy the luxury
unannoyed; and after suck out his last wreath, and heave a
profound sigh, he get up, and depart as solemnly as he come.
a more elastic footstep enter next; and now I open my mouth for
a 'good-morning,' but close it again, the salutation unachieve;
for Hareton Earnshaw be perform his orison SOTTO VOCE, in a
series of curse direct against every object he touch, while he
rummage a corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drift.
he glance over the back of the bench, dilate his nostril, and
think as little of exchange civility with I as with my
companion the cat. I guess, by his preparation, that egress be
allow, and, leave my hard couch, make a movement to follow he.
he notice this, and thrust at an inner door with the end of his
spade, intimate by an inarticulate sound that there be the place
where I must go, if I change my locality.
it open into the house, where the female be already astir;
Zillah urge flake of flame up the chimney with a colossal
bellow; and Mrs. Heathcliff, kneel on the hearth, read a
book by the aid of the blaze. she hold her hand interpose between
the furnace-heat and her eye, and seem absorb in her
occupation; desist from it only to chide the servant for
cover she with spark, or to push away a dog, now and then, that
snoozle its nose overforwardly into her face. I be surprised to
see Heathcliff there also. he stand by the fire, his back towards
I, just finish a stormy scene with poor Zillah; who ever and
anon interrupt her labour to pluck up the corner of her apron,
and heave an indignant groan.
'and you, you worthless - ' he break out as I enter, turn to
his daughter-in-law, and employ an epithet as harmless as duck,
or sheep, but generally represent by a dash - . 'there you be,
at your idle trick again! the rest of they do earn their bread -
you live on my charity! put your trash away, and find something to
do. you shall pay I for the plague of have you eternally in my
sight - do you hear, damnable jade?'
'Iwill put my trash away, because you can make I if I refuse,'
answer the young lady, close her book, and throw it on a
chair. 'but Iwill not do anything, though you should swear your
tongue out, except what I please!'
Heathcliff lift his hand, and the speaker spring to a safe
distance, obviously acquaint with its weight. have no desire
to be entertain by a cat-and-dog combat, I step forward
briskly, as if eager to partake the warmth of the hearth, and
innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted dispute. each have
enough decorum to suspend further hostility: Heathcliff place
his fist, out of temptation, in his pocket; Mrs. Heathcliff
curl her lip, and walk to a seat far off, where she keep she
word by play the part of a statue during the remainder of my
stay. that be not long. I decline join their breakfast, and,
at the first gleam of dawn, take an opportunity of escape into
the free air, now clear, and still, and cold as impalpable ice.
my landlord halloe for I to stop ere I reach the bottom of the
garden, and offer to accompany I across the moor. it be well
he do, for the whole hill-back be one billowy, white ocean; the
swell and fall not indicate corresponding rise and depression
in the ground: many pit, at least, be fill to a level; and
entire range of mound, the refuse of the quarry, blot from
the chart which my yesterday's walk leave picture in my mind. I
have remark on one side of the road, at interval of six or seven
yard, a line of upright stone, continue through the whole length
of the barren: these be erect and daub with lime on purpose
to serve as guide in the dark, and also when a fall, like the
present, confound the deep swamp on either hand with the firm
path: but, except a dirty dot pointing up here and there, all
trace of their existence have vanish: and my companion find it
necessary to warn I frequently to steer to the right or leave, when
I imagine I be follow, correctly, the winding of the road.
we exchange little conversation, and he halt at the entrance of
Thrushcross Park, say, I could make no error there. our adieux
be limit to a hasty bow, and then I push forward, trust to
my own resource; for the porter's lodge be untenante as yet. the
distance from the gate to the grange be two mile; I believe I
manage to make it four, what with lose myself among the tree,
and sink up to the neck in snow: a predicament which only those
who have experience it can appreciate. at any rate, whatever be
my wandering, the clock chime twelve as I enter the house; and
that give exactly an hour for every mile of the usual way from
Wuthering Heights.
my human fixture and her satellite rush to welcome I;
exclaim, tumultuously, they have completely give I up:
everybody conjecture that I perish last night; and they be
wonder how they must set about the search for my remain. I bid
they be quiet, now that they see I return, and, benumb to my
very heart, I drag up-stair; whence, after put on dry
clothe, and pace to and fro thirty or forty minute, to restore
the animal heat, I adjourn to my study, feeble as a kitten:
almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smoking coffee
which the servant have prepare for my refreshment.
CHAPTER IV
what vain weathercock we be! I, who have determine to hold
myself independent of all social intercourse, and thank my star
that, at length, I have light on a spot where it be next to
impracticable - I, weak wretch, after maintain till dusk a
struggle with low spirit and solitude, be finally compel to
strike my colour; and under pretence of gain information
concern the necessity of my establishment, I desire Mrs.
Dean, when she bring in supper, to sit down while I eat it;
hop sincerely she would prove a regular gossip, and either rouse
I to animation or lull I to sleep by her talk.
'you have live here a considerable time,' I commence; 'do you
not say sixteen year?'
'Eighteen, sir: I come when the mistress be marry, to wait on
she; after she die, the master retain I for his housekeeper.'
'indeed.'
there ensue a pause. she be not a gossip, I fear; unless about
her own affair, and those could hardly interest I. however,
have study for an interval, with a fist on either knee, and a
cloud of meditation over her ruddy countenance, she ejaculate -
'ah, time be greatly change since then!'
'yes,' I remark, 'youhave see a good many alteration, I
suppose?'
'I have: and trouble too,' she say.
'oh, Iwill turn the talk on my landlord's family!' I think to
myself. 'a good subject to start! and that pretty girl-widow, I
should like to know her history: whether she be a native of the
country, or, as be more probable, an exotic that the surly
INDIGENAE will not recognise for kin.' with this intention I ask
Mrs. Dean why Heathcliff let Thrushcross Grange, and preferred
live in a situation and residence so much inferior. 'be he not
rich enough to keep the estate in good order?' I inquire.
'Rich, sir!' she return. 'he have nobody know what money, and
every year it increase. yes, yes, hebe rich enough to live in a
fine house than this: but hebe very near - close-handed; and, if
he have mean to flit to Thrushcross Grange, as soon as he hear of
a good tenant he could not have bear to miss the chance of get
a few hundred more. it be strange people should be so greedy,
when they be alone in the world!'
'he have a son, it seem?'
'yes, he have one - he be dead.'
'and that young lady, Mrs. Heathcliff, be his widow?'
'yes.'
'where do she come from originally?'
'why, sir, she be my late master's daughter: Catherine Linton be
her maiden name. I nurse she, poor thing! I do wish Mr.
Heathcliff would remove here, and then we might have be together
again.'
'what! Catherine Linton?' I exclaim, astonish. but a minute's
reflection convince I it be not my ghostly Catherine. then,' I
continue, 'my predecessor's name be Linton?'
'it be.'
'and who be that Earnshaw: Hareton Earnshaw, who live with Mr.
Heathcliff? be they relation?'
'no; he be the late Mrs. Linton's nephew.'
'the young lady's cousin, then?'
'yes; and her husband be her cousin also: one on the mother's,
the other on the father's side: Heathcliff marry Mr. Linton's
sister.'
'I see the house at Wuthering Heights have "Earnshaw" carve over
the front door. be they an old family?'
'very old, sir; and Hareton be the last of they, as our Miss Cathy
be of we - I mean, of the Lintons. have you be to Wuthering
Heights? I beg pardon for ask; but I should like to hear how
she be!'
'Mrs. Heathcliff? she look very well, and very handsome; yet, I
think, not very happy.'
'oh dear, I donot wonder! and how do you like the master?'
'a rough fellow, rather, Mrs. Dean. be not that his character?
'rough as a saw-edge, and hard as whinstone! the less you meddle
with he the well.'
'he must have have some up and down in life to make he such a
churl. do you know anything of his history?'
'itbe a cuckoo's, sir - I know all about it: except where he be
bear, and who be his parent, and how he get his money at first.
and Hareton have be cast out like an unfledged dunnock! the
unfortunate lad be the only one in all this parish that do not
guess how he have be cheat.'
'well, Mrs. Dean, it will be a charitable deed to tell I something
of my neighbour: I feel I shall not rest if I go to bed; so be
good enough to sit and chat an hour.'
'oh, certainly, sir! Iwill just fetch a little sewing, and then
Iwill sit as long as you please. but youhave catch cold: I see you
shivering, and you must have some gruel to drive it out.'
the worthy woman bustle off, and I crouch near the fire; my
head feel hot, and the rest of I chill: moreover, I be excited,
almost to a pitch of foolishness, through my nerve and brain.
this cause I to feel, not uncomfortable, but rather fearful (as I
be still) of serious effect from the incident of to-day and
yesterday. she return presently, bring a smoking basin and a
basket of work; and, have place the former on the hob, draw in
her seat, evidently pleased to find I so companionable.
before I come to live here, she commence - wait no far
invitation to her story - I be almost always at Wuthering Heights;
because my mother have nurse Mr. Hindley Earnshaw, that be
Hareton's father, and I get use to play with the child: I
run errand too, and help to make hay, and hang about the farm
ready for anything that anybody would set I to. one fine summer
morning - it be the beginning of harvest, I remember - Mr.
Earnshaw, the old master, come down-stair, dress for a journey;
and, after he have tell Joseph what be to be do during the day,
he turn to Hindley, and Cathy, and I - for I sit eat my
porridge with they - and he say, speak to his son, 'now, my
bonny man, Ibe go to Liverpool to-day, what shall I bring you?
you may choose what you like: only let it be little, for I shall
walk there and back: sixty mile each way, that be a long spell!'
Hindley name a fiddle, and then he ask Miss Cathy; she be
hardly six year old, but she could ride any horse in the stable,
and she choose a whip. he do not forget I; for he have a kind
heart, though he be rather severe sometimes. he promise to bring
I a pocketful of apple and pear, and then he kiss his
child, say good-bye, and set off.
it seem a long while to we all - the three day of his absence -
and often do little Cathy ask when he would be home. Mrs.
Earnshaw expect he by supper-time on the third evening, and she
put the meal off hour after hour; there be no sign of his
coming, however, and at last the child get tired of run down
to the gate to look. then it grow dark; she would have have they to
bed, but they beg sadly to be allow to stay up; and, just
about eleven o'clock, the door-latch be raise quietly, and in
step the master. he throw himself into a chair, laugh and
groaning, and bid they all stand off, for he be nearly kill - he
would not have such another walk for the three kingdom.
'and at the end of it to be flight to death!' he say, open
his great-coat, which he hold bundle up in his arm. 'see here,
wife! I be never so beat with anything in my life: but you
must e'en take it as a gift of God; though itbe as dark almost as
if it come from the devil.'
we crowd round, and over Miss Cathy's head I have a peep at a
dirty, ragged, black-haired child; big enough both to walk and
talk: indeed, its face look old than Catherine's; yet when it
be set on its foot, it only star round, and repeat over and
over again some gibberish that nobody could understand. I be
frightened, and Mrs. Earnshaw be ready to fle it out of door:
she do fly up, ask how he could fashion to bring that gipsy
brat into the house, when they have their own bairn to feed and
fend for? what he mean to do with it, and whether he be mad?
the master try to explain the matter; but he be really half dead
with fatigue, and all that I could make out, amongst her scolding,
be a tale of his see it starve, and houseless, and as good as
dumb, in the street of Liverpool, where he pick it up and
inquire for its owner. not a soul know to whom it belong, he
say; and his money and time be both limit, he think it
well to take it home with he at once, than run into vain
expense there: because he be determined he would not leave it as
he find it. well, the conclusion be, that my mistress grumble
herself calm; and Mr. Earnshaw tell I to wash it, and give it
clean thing, and let it sleep with the child.
Hindley and Cathy content themselves with look and listen
till peace be restore: then, both begin search their father's
pocket for the present he have promise they. the former be a
boy of fourteen, but when he draw out what have be a fiddle,
crush to morsel in the great-coat, he blubber aloud; and
Cathy, when she learn the master have lose her whip in attend
on the stranger, show her humour by grin and spit at the
stupid little thing; earn for her pain a sound blow from her
father, to teach her clean manner. they entirely refuse to
have it in bed with they, or even in their room; and I have no more
sense, so I put it on the landing of the stair, hop it might he
go on the morrow. by chance, or else attract by hear his
voice, it creep to Mr. Earnshaw's door, and there he find it on
quit his chamber. inquiry be make as to how it get there;
I be oblige to confess, and in recompense for my cowardice and
inhumanity be send out of the house.
this be Heathcliff's first introduction to the family. on come
back a few day afterwards (for I do not consider my banishment
perpetual), I find they have christen he 'Heathcliff': it be
the name of a son who die in childhood, and it have serve he ever
since, both for Christian and surname. Miss Cathy and he be now
very thick; but Hindley hat he: and to say the truth I do the
same; and we plague and go on with he shamefully: for I benot
reasonable enough to feel my injustice, and the mistress never put
in a word on his behalf when she see he wrong.
he seem a sullen, patient child; harden, perhaps, to ill-
treatment: he would stand Hindley's blow without wink or
shed a tear, and my pinch move he only to draw in a breath
and open his eye, as if he have hurt himself by accident, and
nobody be to blame. this endurance make old Earnshaw furious,
when he discover his son persecute the poor fatherless child,
as he call he. he take to Heathcliff strangely, believe all
he say (for that matter, he say precious little, and generally
the truth), and pet he up far above Cathy, who be too
mischievous and wayward for a favourite.
so, from the very beginning, he breed bad feeling in the house; and
at Mrs. Earnshaw's death, which happen in less than two year
after, the young master have learn to regard his father as an
oppressor rather than a friend, and Heathcliff as a usurper of his
parent's affection and his privilege; and he grow bitter with
brood over these injury. I sympathise a while; but when the
child fall ill of the measle, and I have to tend they, and take
on I the care of a woman at once, I change my idea. Heathcliff
be dangerously sick; and while he lie at the bad he would have
I constantly by his pillow: I suppose he feel I do a good deal
for he, and he havenot wit to guess that I be compel to do it.
however, I will say this, he be the quiet child that ever nurse
watch over. the difference between he and the other force I
to be less partial. Cathy and her brother harass I terribly:
he be as uncomplaine as a lamb; though hardness, not gentleness,
make he give little trouble.
he get through, and the doctor affirm it be in a great measure
owe to I, and praise I for my care. I be vain of his
commendation, and soften towards the being by whose mean I
earn they, and thus Hindley lose his last ally: still I couldnot
dote on Heathcliff, and I wonder often what my master see to
admire so much in the sullen boy; who never, to my recollection,
repay his indulgence by any sign of gratitude. he be not
insolent to his benefactor, he be simply insensible; though
know perfectly the hold he have on his heart, and conscious he
have only to speak and all the house would be oblige to bend to his
wish. as an instance, I remember Mr. Earnshaw once buy a
couple of colt at the parish fair, and give the lad each one.
Heathcliff take the handsome, but it soon fall lame, and when he
discover it, he say to Hindley -
'you must exchange horse with I: I donot like mine; and if you
willnot I shall tell your father of the three thrashing youhave give
I this week, and show he my arm, which be black to the shoulder.'
Hindley put out his tongue, and cuff he over the ear. 'youwould
well do it at once,' he persist, escape to the porch (they
be in the stable): 'you will have to: and if I speak of these
blow, youwill get they again with interest.' 'off, dog!' cry
Hindley, threaten he with an iron weight use for weigh
potato and hay. 'throw it,' he reply, stand still, 'and
then Iwill tell how you boast that you would turn I out of door
as soon as he die, and see whether he will not turn you out
directly.' Hindley throw it, hit he on the breast, and down
he fall, but stagger up immediately, breathless and white; and,
have not I prevent it, he would have go just so to the master,
and get full revenge by let his condition plead for he,
intimate who have cause it. 'take my colt, Gipsy, then!' say
young Earnshaw. 'and I pray that he may break your neck: take
he, and he damn, you beggarly interloper! and wheedle my father
out of all he have: only afterwards show he what you be, imp of
Satan. - and take that, I hope hewill kick out your brain!'
Heathcliff have go to loose the beast, and shift it to his own
stall; he be pass behind it, when Hindley finish his speech
by knock he under its foot, and without stop to examine
whether his hope be fulfil, run away as fast as he could. I
be surprised to witness how coolly the child gather himself up,
and go on with his intention; exchange saddle and all, and
then sit down on a bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which
the violent blow occasion, before he enter the house. I
persuade he easily to let I lay the blame of his bruise on the
horse: he mind little what tale be tell since he have what he
want. he complain so seldom, indeed, of such stir as these,
that I really think he not vindictive: I be deceive
completely, as you will hear.
CHAPTER V
in the course of time Mr. Earnshaw begin to fail. he have be
active and healthy, yet his strength leave he suddenly; and when he
be confine to the chimney-corner he grow grievously irritable. a
nothing vex he; and suspect slight of his authority nearly
throw he into fit. this be especially to be remark if any one
attempt to impose upon, or domineer over, his favourite: he be
painfully jealous lest a word should be speak amiss to he;
seem to have get into his head the notion that, because he like
Heathcliff, all hat, and long to do he an ill-turn. it be a
disadvantage to the lad; for the kinder among we do not wish to
fret the master, so we humour his partiality; and that humour
be rich nourishment to the child's pride and black temper. still
it become in a manner necessary; twice, or thrice, Hindley's
manifestation of scorn, while his father be near, rouse the old
man to a fury: he seize his stick to strike he, and shake with
rage that he could not do it.
at last, our curate (we have a curate then who make the living
answer by teach the little Lintons and Earnshaws, and farming
his bit of land himself) advise that the young man should be send
to college; and Mr. Earnshaw agree, though with a heavy spirit,
for he say - 'Hindley be nought, and would never thrive as where
he wander.'
I hop heartily we should have peace now. it hurt I to think the
master should be make uncomfortable by his own good deed. I
fancy the discontent of age and disease arise from his family
disagreement; as he would have it that it do: really, you know,
sir, it be in his sink frame. we might have get on tolerably,
notwithstanding, but for two people - Miss Cathy, and Joseph, the
servant: you see he, I daresay, up yonder. he be, and be yet
most likely, the wearisome self-righteous Pharisee that ever
ransack a Bible to rake the promise to himself and fle the
curse to his neighbour. by his knack of sermonise and pious
discoursing, he contrive to make a great impression on Mr.
Earnshaw; and the more feeble the master become, the more influence
he gain. he be relentless in worry he about his soul's
concern, and about rule his child rigidly. he encourage he
to regard Hindley as a reprobate; and, night after night, he
regularly grumble out a long string of tale against Heathcliff
and Catherine: always mind to flat Earnshaw's weakness by
heap the heavy blame on the latter.
certainly she have way with her such as I never see a child take up
before; and she put all of we past our patience fifty time and
oftener in a day: from the hour she come down-stair till the hour
she go to bed, we have not a minute's security that she wouldnot
be in mischief. her spirit be always at high-water mark, her
tongue always go - sing, laughing, and plague everybody who
would not do the same. a wild, wicked slip she be - but she have
the bonniest eye, the sweetest smile, and light foot in the
parish: and, after all, I believe she mean no harm; for when once
she make you cry in good earnest, it seldom happen that she would
not keep you company, and oblige you to be quiet that you might
comfort she. she be much too fond of Heathcliff. the great
punishment we could invent for she be to keep she separate from
he: yet she get chide more than any of we on his account. in
play, she like exceedingly to act the little mistress; use she
hand freely, and command her companion: she do so to I, but
I would not bear slapping and ordering; and so I let she know.
now, Mr. Earnshaw do not understand joke from his child: he
have always be strict and grave with they; and Catherine, on her
part, have no idea why her father should be crosser and less patient
in his ail condition than he be in his prime. his peevish
reproof waken in she a naughty delight to provoke he: she be
never so happy as when we be all scold she at once, and she
defy we with her bold, saucy look, and her ready word; turn
Joseph's religious curse into ridicule, bait I, and do just
what her father hat most - show how her pretended insolence,
which he think real, have more power over Heathcliff than his
kindness: how the boy would do she bid in anything, and HIS
only when it suit his own inclination. after behave as badly
as possible all day, she sometimes come fondle to make it up at
night. 'Nay, Cathy,' the old man would say, 'I cannot love thee,
thou'rt bad than thy brother. go, say thy prayer, child, and
ask God's pardon. I doubt thy mother and I must rue that we ever
rear thee!' that make she cry, at first; and then be repulse
continually harden she, and she laugh if I tell she to say she
be sorry for her fault, and beg to be forgive.
but the hour come, at last, that end Mr. Earnshaw's trouble on
earth. he die quietly in his chair one October evening, seat by
the fire-side. a high wind bluster round the house, and roar
in the chimney: it sound wild and stormy, yet it be not cold,
and we be all together - I, a little removed from the hearth,
busy at my knitting, and Joseph read his Bible near the table
(for the servant generally sit in the house then, after their work
be do). Miss Cathy have be sick, and that make she still; she
leant against her father's knee, and Heathcliff be lie on the
floor with his head in her lap. I remember the master, before he
fall into a doze, stroke her bonny hair - it please he rarely
to see her gentle - and say, 'why canst thou not always be a
good lass, Cathy?' and she turn she face up to his, and laugh,
and answer, 'why cannot you always be a good man, father?' but
as soon as she see he vex again, she kiss his hand, and say
she would sing he to sleep. she begin sing very low, till his
finger drop from her, and his head sink on his breast. then I
tell she to hush, and not stir, for fear she should wake he. we
all keep as mute as mouse a full half-hour, and should have do so
long, only Joseph, have finish his chapter, get up and say
that he must rouse the master for prayer and bed. he step
forward, and call he by name, and touch his shoulder; but he
would not move: so he take the candle and look at he. I
think there be something wrong as he set down the light; and
seize the child each by an arm, whisper they to 'frame up-
stair, and make little din - they might pray alone that evening -
he have summut to do.'
'I shall bid father good-night first,' say Catherine, put she
arm round his neck, before we could hinder she. the poor thing
discover her loss directly - she scream out - 'oh, hebe dead,
Heathcliff! hebe dead!' and they both set up a heart-break cry.
I join my wail to theirs, loud and bitter; but Joseph ask what
we could be think of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven.
he tell I to put on my cloak and run to Gimmerton for the doctor
and the parson. I could not guess the use that either would be of,
then. however, I go, through wind and rain, and bring one, the
doctor, back with I; the other say he would come in the morning.
leave Joseph to explain matter, I run to the child's room:
their door be ajar, I see they have never lain down, though it be
past midnight; but they be calm, and do not need I to console
they. the little soul be comfort each other with well
thought than I could have hit on: no parson in the world ever
picture heaven so beautifully as they do, in their innocent talk;
and, while I sob and listen, I could not help wish we be
all there safe together.
CHAPTER VI
MR. HINDLEY come home to the funeral; and - a thing that amaze we,
and set the neighbour gossip right and leave - he bring a wife
with he. what she be, and where she be bear, he never inform
us: probably, she have neither money nor name to recommend she, or
he would scarcely have keep the union from his father.
she be not one that would have disturb the house much on her own
account. every object she see, the moment she cross the
threshold, appear to delight she; and every circumstance that
take place about she: except the preparing for the burial, and the
presence of the mourner. I think she be half silly, from her
behaviour while that go on: she run into her chamber, and make
I come with she, though I should have be dress the child:
and there she sit shiver and clasp her hand, and ask
repeatedly - 'be they go yet?' then she begin describe with
hysterical emotion the effect it produce on she to see black; and
start, and tremble, and, at last, fall a-weep - and when I
ask what be the matter, answer, she donot know; but she feel
so afraid of die! I imagine she as little likely to die as
myself. she be rather thin, but young, and fresh-complexion,
and her eye sparkle as bright as diamond. I do remark, to be
sure, that mount the stair make she breathe very quick; that
the least sudden noise set she all in a quiver, and that she
cough troublesomely sometimes: but I know nothing of what these
symptom portend, and have no impulse to sympathise with she. we
donot in general take to foreigner here, Mr. Lockwood, unless they
take to we first.
Young Earnshaw be alter considerably in the three year of his
absence. he have grow sparer, and lose his colour, and speak and
dress quite differently; and, on the very day of his return, he
tell Joseph and I we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the
back-kitchen, and leave the house for he. indeed, he would have
carpet and paper a small spare room for a parlour; but his wife
express such pleasure at the white floor and huge glowing
fireplace, at the pewter dish and delf-case, and dog-kennel, and
the wide space there be to move about in where they usually sit,
that he think it unnecessary to her comfort, and so drop the
intention.
she express pleasure, too, at find a sister among her new
acquaintance; and she prattle to Catherine, and kiss she, and
run about with she, and give her quantity of present, at the
beginning. her affection tired very soon, however, and when she
grow peevish, Hindley become tyrannical. a few word from she,
evince a dislike to Heathcliff, be enough to rouse in he all
his old hatred of the boy. he drive he from their company to the
servant, deprive he of the instruction of the curate, and
insist that he should labour out of door instead; compel he
to do so as hard as any other lad on the farm.
Heathcliff bear his degradation pretty well at first, because Cathy
teach he what she learn, and work or play with he in the
field. they both promise fair to grow up as rude as savage; the
young master be entirely negligent how they behave, and what
they do, so they keep clear of he. he would not even have see
after their go to church on Sundays, only Joseph and the curate
reprimand his carelessness when they absent themselves; and
that remind he to order Heathcliff a flogging, and Catherine a
fast from dinner or supper. but it be one of their chief
amusement to run away to the moor in the morning and remain there
all day, and the after punishment grow a mere thing to laugh at.
the curate might set as many chapter as he please for Catherine
to get by heart, and Joseph might thrash Heathcliff till his arm
ache; they forget everything the minute they be together again:
at least the minute they have contrive some naughty plan of
revenge; and many a time Ihave cry to myself to watch they grow
more reckless daily, and I not dare to speak a syllable, for fear
of lose the small power I still retain over the unfriended
creature. one Sunday evening, it chance that they be banish
from the sitting-room, for make a noise, or a light offence of
the kind; and when I go to call they to supper, I could discover
they nowhere. we search the house, above and below, and the yard
and stable; they be invisible: and, at last, Hindley in a
passion tell we to bolt the door, and swear nobody should let they
in that night. the household go to bed; and I, too, anxious to
lie down, open my lattice and put my head out to hearken, though
it rain: determined to admit they in spite of the prohibition,
should they return. in a while, I distinguish step come up
the road, and the light of a lantern glimmer through the gate. I
throw a shawl over my head and run to prevent they from wake Mr.
Earnshaw by knock. there be Heathcliff, by himself: it give
I a start to see he alone.
'where be Miss Catherine?' I cry hurriedly. 'no accident, I
hope?' 'at Thrushcross Grange,' he answer; 'and I would have
be there too, but they have not the manner to ask I to stay.'
'well, you will catch it!' I say: 'youwill never be content till
yoube send about your business. what in the world lead you
wander to Thrushcross Grange?' 'let I get off my wet clothe,
and Iwill tell you all about it, nelly,' he reply. I bid he
beware of rouse the master, and while he undress and I wait
to put out the candle, he continue - 'Cathy and I escape from the
wash-house to have a ramble at liberty, and get a glimpse of
the Grange light, we think we would just go and see whether the
Lintons pass their Sunday evening stand shivering in corner,
while their father and mother sit eat and drink, and singing
and laugh, and burn their eye out before the fire. do you
think they do? or read sermon, and be catechise by their
manservant, and set to learn a column of scripture name, if they
donot answer properly?' 'probably not,' I respond. 'they be
good child, no doubt, and donot deserve the treatment you
receive, for your bad conduct.' 'donot cannot, nelly,' he say:
'nonsense! we run from the top of the Heights to the park, without
stop - Catherine completely beat in the race, because she be
barefoot. youwill have to seek for her shoe in the bog to-morrow.
we creep through a broken hedge, grope our way up the path, and
plant ourselves on a flower-plot under the drawing-room window.
the light come from thence; they have not put up the shutter, and
the curtain be only half close. both of we be able to look
in by stand on the basement, and cling to the ledge, and we
see - ah! it be beautiful - a splendid place carpet with
crimson, and crimson-cover chair and table, and a pure white
ceiling border by gold, a shower of glass-drop hang in silver
chain from the centre, and shimmer with little soft taper.
Old Mr. and Mrs. Linton be not there; Edgar and his sister have
it entirely to themselves. shouldnot they have be happy? we
should have think ourselves in heaven! and now, guess what your
good child be do? Isabella - I believe she be eleven, a
year young than Cathy - lie scream at the farth end of the
room, shriek as if witch be run red-hot needle into
she. Edgar stand on the hearth weep silently, and in the middle
of the table sit a little dog, shake its paw and yelping; which,
from their mutual accusation, we understand they have nearly pull
in two between they. the idiot! that be their pleasure! to
quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair, and each begin to cry
because both, after struggle to get it, refuse to take it. we
laugh outright at the pet thing; we do despise they! when
would you catch I wish to have what Catherine want? or find
we by ourselves, seek entertainment in yelling, and sobbing, and
roll on the ground, divide by the whole room? Iwould not
exchange, for a thousand life, my condition here, for Edgar
Linton's at Thrushcross Grange - not if I might have the privilege
of fling Joseph off the high gable, and paint the house-
front with Hindley's blood!'
'hush, hush!' I interrupt. 'still you have not tell I,
Heathcliff, how Catherine be leave behind?'
'I tell you we laugh,' he answer. 'the Lintons hear we, and
with one accord they shoot like arrow to the door; there be
silence, and then a cry, "oh, mamma, mamma! oh, papa! oh, mamma,
come here. oh, papa, oh!" they really do howl out something in
that way. we make frightful noise to terrify they still more, and
then we drop off the ledge, because somebody be draw the
bar, and we feel we have well flee. I have Cathy by the hand, and
be urge she on, when all at once she fall down. "run,
Heathcliff, run!" she whisper. "they have let the bull-dog
loose, and he hold I!" the devil have seize her ankle, nelly: I
hear his abominable snorting. she do not yell out - no! she
would have scorn to do it, if she have be spit on the horn
of a mad cow. I do, though: I vociferate curse enough to
annihilate any fiend in Christendom; and I get a stone and thrust
it between his jaw, and try with all my might to cram it down
his throat. a beast of a servant come up with a lantern, at last,
shout - "keep fast, Skulker, keep fast!" he change his note,
however, when he see Skulker's game. the dog be throttle off;
his huge, purple tongue hang half a foot out of his mouth, and
his pendent lip stream with bloody slaver. the man take Cathy
up; she be sick: not from fear, Ibe certain, but from pain. he
carry she in; I follow, grumble execration and vengeance.
"what prey, Robert?" halloo Linton from the entrance. "Skulker
have catch a little girl, sir," he reply; "and therebe a lad
here," he add, make a clutch at I, "who look an out-and-
outer! very like the robber be for put they through the
window to open the door to the gang after all be asleep, that
they might murder we at their ease. hold your tongue, you foul-
mouthed thief, you! you shall go to the gallow for this. Mr.
Linton, sir, donot lay by your gun." "no, no, Robert," say the
old fool. "the rascal know that yesterday be my rent-day: they
think to have I cleverly. come in; Iwill furnish they a
reception. there, John, fasten the chain. give Skulker some
water, Jenny. to beard a magistrate in his stronghold, and on the
Sabbath, too! where will their insolence stop? oh, my dear Mary,
look here! donot be afraid, it be but a boy - yet the villain
scowl so plainly in his face; would it not be a kindness to the
country to hang he at once, before he show his nature in act as
well as feature?" he pull I under the chandelier, and Mrs.
Linton place her spectacle on her nose and raise her hand in
horror. the cowardly child creep near also, Isabella lisping
- "frightful thing! put he in the cellar, papa. hebe exactly
like the son of the fortune-teller that steal my tame pheasant.
benot he, Edgar?"
'while they examine I, Cathy come round; she hear the last
speech, and laugh. Edgar Linton, after an inquisitive stare,
collect sufficient wit to recognise she. they see we at church,
you know, though we seldom meet they elsewhere. "thatbe Miss
Earnshaw?" he whisper to his mother, "and look how Skulker have
bite she - how her foot bleed!"
'"Miss Earnshaw? nonsense!" cry the dame; "Miss Earnshaw
scour the country with a gipsy! and yet, my dear, the child be
in mourning - surely it be - and she may be lamed for life!"
'"what culpable carelessness in her brother!" exclaim Mr. Linton,
turn from I to Catherine. "Ihave understand from shielder"'
(that be the curate, sir) '"that he let she grow up in absolute
heathenism. but who be this? where do she pick up this
companion? Oho! I declare he be that strange acquisition my late
neighbour make, in his journey to Liverpool - a little Lascar, or
an american or spanish castaway."
'"a wicked boy, at all event," remark the old lady, "and quite
unfit for a decent house! do you notice his language, Linton?
Ibe shocked that my child should have hear it."
'I recommence cursing - donot be angry, Nelly - and so Robert be
order to take I off. I refuse to go without Cathy; he drag
I into the garden, push the lantern into my hand, assure I
that Mr. Earnshaw should be inform of my behaviour, and, bid
I march directly, secure the door again. the curtain be still
loop up at one corner, and I resume my station as spy; because,
if Catherine have wish to return, I intend shatter their
great glass pane to a million of fragment, unless they let she
out. she sit on the sofa quietly. Mrs. Linton take off the grey
cloak of the dairy-maid which we have borrow for our excursion,
shake her head and expostulate with she, I suppose: she be a
young lady, and they make a distinction between her treatment and
mine. then the woman-servant bring a basin of warm water, and
wash her foot; and Mr. Linton mix a tumbler of negus, and
Isabella empty a plateful of cake into her lap, and Edgar stand
gap at a distance. afterwards, they dry and comb she
beautiful hair, and give she a pair of enormous slipper, and
wheel she to the fire; and I leave she, as merry as she could be,
divide her food between the little dog and Skulker, whose nose
she pinch as he eat; and kindle a spark of spirit in the vacant
blue eye of the Lintons - a dim reflection from her own enchanting
face. I see they be full of stupid admiration; she be so
immeasurably superior to they - to everybody on earth, be she not,
nelly?'
'there will more come of this business than you reckon on,' I
answer, cover he up and extinguish the light. 'you be
incurable, Heathcliff; and Mr. Hindley will have to proceed to
extremity, see if he willnot.' my word come truer than I desire.
the luckless adventure make Earnshaw furious. and then Mr. Linton,
to mend matter, pay we a visit himself on the morrow, and read
the young master such a lecture on the road he guide his family,
that he be stir to look about he, in earnest. Heathcliff
receive no flogging, but he be tell that the first word he speak
to Miss Catherine should ensure a dismissal; and Mrs. Earnshaw
undertake to keep her sister-in-law in due restraint when she
return home; employ art, not force: with force she would have
find it impossible.
CHAPTER VII
CATHY stay at Thrushcross Grange five week: till Christmas. by
that time her ankle be thoroughly cure, and her manner much
improve. the mistress visit she often in the interval, and
commence her plan of reform by try to raise her self-respect
with fine clothe and flattery, which she take readily; so that,
instead of a wild, hatless little savage jump into the house,
and rush to squeeze we all breathless, there 'light from a
handsome black pony a very dignified person, with brown ringlet
fall from the cover of a feathered beaver, and a long cloth
habit, which she be oblige to hold up with both hand that she
might sail in. Hindley lift she from her horse, exclaim
delightedly, 'why, Cathy, you be quite a beauty! I should
scarcely have know you: you look like a lady now. Isabella
Linton be not to be compare with she, be she, Frances?' 'Isabella
have not her natural advantage,' reply his wife: 'but she must
mind and not grow wild again here. ellen, help Miss Catherine off
with her thing - stay, dear, you will disarrange your curl - let
I untie your hat.'
I remove the habit, and there shine forth beneath a grand plaid
silk frock, white trouser, and burnish shoe; and, while her
eye sparkle joyfully when the dog come bound up to welcome
she, she dare hardly touch they lest they should fawn upon her
splendid garment. she kiss I gently: I be all flour make
the Christmas cake, and it would not have do to give I a hug;
and then she look round for Heathcliff. Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw
watch anxiously their meeting; think it would enable they to
judge, in some measure, what ground they have for hop to succeed
in separate the two friend.
Heathcliff be hard to discover, at first. if he be careless,
and uncare for, before Catherine's absence, he have be ten time
more so since. nobody but I even do he the kindness to call he
a dirty boy, and bid he wash himself, once a week; and child of
his age seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water.
therefore, not to mention his clothe, which have see three month'
service in mire and dust, and his thick uncombed hair, the surface
of his face and hand be dismally becloud. he might well skulk
behind the settle, on behold such a bright, graceful damsel
enter the house, instead of a rough-headed counterpart of himself,
as he expect. 'be Heathcliff not here?' she demand, pull
off her glove, and display finger wonderfully whiten with
do nothing and stay indoor.
'Heathcliff, you may come forward,' cry Mr. Hindley, enjoy his
discomfiture, and gratify to see what a forbid young
blackguard he would be compel to present himself. 'you may come
and wish Miss Catherine welcome, like the other servant.'
Cathy, catch a glimpse of her friend in his concealment, fly to
embrace he; she bestow seven or eight kiss on his cheek within
the second, and then stop, and draw back, burst into a laugh,
exclaim, 'why, how very black and cross you look! and how - how
funny and grim! but thatbe because Ibe use to Edgar and Isabella
Linton. well, Heathcliff, have you forget I?'
she have some reason to put the question, for shame and pride throw
double gloom over his countenance, and keep he immovable.
'shake hand, Heathcliff,' say Mr. Earnshaw, condescendingly;
'once in a way, that be permit.'
'I shall not,' reply the boy, find his tongue at last; 'I
shall not stand to be laugh at. I shall not bear it!' and he
would have break from the circle, but Miss Cathy seize he again.
'I do not mean to laugh at you,' she say; 'I could not hinder
myself: Heathcliff, shake hand at least! what be you sulky for?
it be only that you look odd. if you wash your face and brush
your hair, it will be all right: but you be so dirty!'
she gaze concernedly at the dusky finger she hold in her own, and
also at her dress; which she fear have gain no embellishment
from its contact with his.
'you neednot have touch I!' he answer, follow her eye and
snatch away his hand. 'I shall be as dirty as I please: and I
like to be dirty, and I will be dirty.'
with that he dash headforemost out of the room, amid the
merriment of the master and mistress, and to the serious
disturbance of Catherine; who could not comprehend how her remark
should have produce such an exhibition of bad temper.
after play lady's-maid to the new-comer, and put my cake in
the oven, and make the house and kitchen cheerful with great
fire, befit Christmas-eve, I prepare to sit down and amuse
myself by sing carol, all alone; regardless of Joseph's
affirmation that he consider the merry tune I choose as next
door to song. he have retire to private prayer in his chamber,
and Mr. and Mrs. Earnshaw be engage Missy's attention by sundry
gay trifle buy for she to present to the little linton, as an
acknowledgment of their kindness. they have invite they to spend
the morrow at Wuthering Heights, and the invitation have be
accept, on one condition: Mrs. Linton beg that her darling
might be keep carefully apart from that 'naughty swearing boy.'
under these circumstance I remain solitary. I smell the rich
scent of the heating spice; and admire the shin kitchen
utensil, the polished clock, deck in holly, the silver mug
range on a tray ready to be fill with mulled ale for supper; and
above all, the speckless purity of my particular care - the scour
and well-sweep floor. I give due inward applause to every object,
and then I remember how old Earnshaw use to come in when all be
tidy, and call I a cannot lass, and slip a shilling into my hand
as a Christmas-box; and from that I go on to think of his
fondness for Heathcliff, and his dread lest he should suffer
neglect after death have remove he: and that naturally lead I to
consider the poor lad's situation now, and from sing I change
my mind to cry. it strike I soon, however, there would be more
sense in endeavour to repair some of his wrong than shed
tear over they: I get up and walk into the court to seek he.
he be not far; I find he smooth the glossy coat of the new
pony in the stable, and feed the other beast, accord to
custom.
'make haste, Heathcliff!' I say, 'the kitchen be so comfortable;
and Joseph be up-stair: make haste, and let I dress you smart
before Miss Cathy come out, and then you can sit together, with
the whole hearth to yourself, and have a long chatter till
bedtime.'
he proceed with his task, and never turn his head towards I.
'come - be you come?' I continue. 'therebe a little cake for
each of you, nearly enough; and youwill need half-an-hour's
don.'
I wait five minute, but get no answer leave he. Catherine
sup with her brother and sister-in-law: Joseph and I join at
an unsociable meal, season with reproof on one side and
sauciness on the other. his cake and cheese remain on the table
all night for the fairy. he manage to continue work till nine
o'clock, and then march dumb and dour to his chamber. Cathy sit
up late, have a world of thing to order for the reception of her
new friend: she come into the kitchen once to speak to her old
one; but he be go, and she only stay to ask what be the
matter with he, and then go back. in the morning he rise early;
and, as it be a holiday, carry his ill-humour on to the moor;
not re-appear till the family be depart for church. fast
and reflection seem to have bring he to a well spirit. he
hang about I for a while, and have screw up his courage,
exclaim abruptly - 'nelly, make I decent, Ibe go to be good.'
'high time, Heathcliff,' I say; 'you have grieve Catherine:
shebe sorry she ever come home, I daresay! it look as if you
envy she, because she be more thought of than you.'
the notion of ENVYING Catherine be incomprehensible to he, but
the notion of grieve she he understand clearly enough.
'do she say she be grieve?' he inquire, look very serious.
'she cry when I tell she you be off again this morning.'
'well, I cry last night,' he return, 'and I have more reason to
cry than she.'
'yes: you have the reason of go to bed with a proud heart and an
empty stomach,' say I. 'proud people breed sad sorrow for
themselves. but, if you be ashamed of your touchiness, you must
ask pardon, mind, when she come in. you must go up and offer to
kiss she, and say - you know well what to say; only do it heartily,
and not as if you think she convert into a stranger by her
grand dress. and now, though I have dinner to get ready, Iwill
steal time to arrange you so that Edgar Linton shall look quite a
doll beside you: and that he do. you be young, and yet, Iwill
be bind, you be tall and twice as broad across the shoulder;
you could knock he down in a twinkling; donot you feel that you
could?'
Heathcliff's face brighten a moment; then it be overcast afresh,
and he sigh.
'but, Nelly, if I knock he down twenty time, that wouldnot make
he less handsome or I more so. I wish I have light hair and a
fair skin, and be dress and behave as well, and have a chance of
be as rich as he will be!'
'and cry for mamma at every turn,' I add, 'and tremble if a
country lad heave his fist against you, and sit at home all day
for a shower of rain. oh, Heathcliff, you be show a poor
spirit! come to the glass, and Iwill let you see what you should
wish. do you mark those two line between your eye; and those
thick brow, that, instead of rise arched, sink in the middle;
and that couple of black fiend, so deeply bury, who never open
their window boldly, but lurk glinting under they, like devil's
spy? wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkle, to raise
your lid frankly, and change the fiend to confident, innocent
angel, suspecting and doubt nothing, and always see friend
where they be not sure of foe. donot get the expression of a
vicious cur that appear to know the kick it get be its desert,
and yet hat all the world, as well as the kicker, for what it
suffer.'
'in other word, I must wish for Edgar Linton's great blue eye and
even forehead,' he reply. 'I do - and that willnot help I to
they.'
'a good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad,' I continue,
'if you be a regular black; and a bad one will turn the bonniest
into something bad than ugly. and now that wehave do washing,
and comb, and sulk - tell I whether you donot think yourself
rather handsome? Iwill tell you, I do. yoube fit for a prince in
disguise. who know but your father be Emperor of China, and your
mother an indian queen, each of they able to buy up, with one
week's income, Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange together?
and you be kidnap by wicked sailor and bring to England.
be I in your place, I would frame high notion of my birth; and
the thought of what I be should give I courage and dignity to
support the oppression of a little farmer!'
so I chatter on; and Heathcliff gradually lose his frown and
begin to look quite pleasant, when all at once our conversation be
interrupt by a rumble sound move up the road and enter the
court. he run to the window and I to the door, just in time to
behold the two Lintons descend from the family carriage, smother
in cloak and fur, and the Earnshaws dismount from their horse:
they often ride to church in winter. Catherine take a hand of each
of the child, and bring they into the house and set they
before the fire, which quickly put colour into their white face.
I urge my companion to hasten now and show his amiable humour, and
he willingly obey; but ill luck would have it that, as he open
the door lead from the kitchen on one side, Hindley open it on
the other. they meet, and the master, irritate at see he clean
and cheerful, or, perhaps, eager to keep his promise to Mrs.
Linton, shove he back with a sudden thrust, and angrily bid
Joseph 'keep the fellow out of the room - send he into the garret
till dinner be over. hewill be cram his finger in the tart
and steal the fruit, if leave alone with they a minute.'
'Nay, sir,' I could not avoid answer, 'hewill touch nothing, not
he: and I suppose he must have his share of the dainty as well
as we.'
'he shall have his share of my hand, if I catch he downstairs till
dark,' cry Hindley. 'begone, you vagabond! what! you be
attempt the coxcomb, be you? wait till I get hold of those
elegant lock - see if I willnot pull they a bit long!'
'they be long enough already,' observe Master Linton, peep
from the doorway; 'I wonder they donot make his head ache. itbe
like a colt's mane over his eye!'
he venture this remark without any intention to insult; but
Heathcliff's violent nature be not prepared to endure the
appearance of impertinence from one whom he seem to hate, even
then, as a rival. he seize a tureen of hot apple sauce (the first
thing that come under his gripe) and dash it full against the
speaker's face and neck; who instantly commence a lament that
bring Isabella and Catherine hurry to the place. Mr. Earnshaw
snatch up the culprit directly and convey he to his chamber;
where, doubtless, he administer a rough remedy to cool the fit of
passion, for he appear red and breathless. I get the dishcloth,
and rather spitefully scrub Edgar's nose and mouth, affirm it
serve he right for meddle. his sister begin weep to go
home, and Cathy stand by confounded, blush for all.
'you should not have speak to he!' she expostulate with Master
Linton. 'he be in a bad temper, and now youhave spoil your visit;
and hewill be flog: I hate he to be flog! I cannot eat my
dinner. why do you speak to he, Edgar?'
'I donot,' sob the youth, escape from my hand, and finish
the remainder of the purification with his cambric pocket-
handkerchief. 'I promise mamma that I wouldnot say one word to
he, and I donot.'
'well, donot cry,' reply Catherine, contemptuously; 'yoube not
kill. donot make more mischief; my brother be come: be quiet!
Hush, Isabella! have anybody hurt you?'
'there, there, child - to your seat!' cry Hindley, bustle
in. 'that brute of a lad have warm I nicely. next time, Master
Edgar, take the law into your own fist - it will give you an
appetite!'
the little party recover its equanimity at sight of the fragrant
feast. they be hungry after their ride, and easily console,
since no real harm have befall they. Mr. Earnshaw carve
bountiful plateful, and the mistress make they merry with lively
talk. I wait behind her chair, and be pain to behold
Catherine, with dry eye and an indifferent air, commence cutting
up the wing of a goose before she. 'an unfeele child,' I think
to myself; 'how lightly she dismiss her old playmate's trouble.
I could not have imagine she to be so selfish.' she lift a
mouthful to her lip: then she set it down again: her cheek
flush, and the tear gush over they. she slip her fork to
the floor, and hastily dive under the cloth to conceal her
emotion. I do not call she unfeele long; for I perceive she
be in purgatory throughout the day, and weary to find an
opportunity of get by herself, or pay a visit to Heathcliff,
who have be lock up by the master: as I discover, on
endeavour to introduce to he a private mess of victual.
in the evening we have a dance. Cathy beg that he might be
liberate then, as Isabella Linton have no partner: her entreaty
be vain, and I be appoint to supply the deficiency. we get
rid of all gloom in the excitement of the exercise, and our
pleasure be increase by the arrival of the Gimmerton band,
muster fifteen strong: a trumpet, a trombone, clarionet,
bassoon, french horn, and a bass viol, besides singer. they go
the round of all the respectable house, and receive contribution
every Christmas, and we esteem it a first-rate treat to hear
they. after the usual carol have be sing, we set they to song
and glee. Mrs. Earnshaw love the music, and so they give we
plenty.
Catherine love it too: but she say it sound sweetest at the
top of the step, and she go up in the dark: I follow. they
shut the house door below, never note our absence, it be so full
of people. she make no stay at the stairs'-head, but mount
far, to the garret where Heathcliff be confine, and call
he. he stubbornly decline answer for a while: she
persevere, and finally persuade he to hold communion with she
through the board. I let the poor thing converse unmoleste,
till I suppose the song be go to cease, and the singer to
get some refreshment: then I clamber up the ladder to warn she.
instead of find she outside, I hear her voice within. the
little monkey have creep by the skylight of one garret, along the
roof, into the skylight of the other, and it be with the utmost
difficulty I could coax she out again. when she do come,
Heathcliff come with she, and she insist that I should take he
into the kitchen, as my fellow-servant have go to a neighbour's,
to be remove from the sound of our 'devil's psalmody,' as it
please he to call it. I tell they I intend by no mean to
encourage their trick: but as the prisoner have never break his
fast since yesterday's dinner, I would wink at his cheat Mr.
Hindley that once. he go down: I set he a stool by the fire,
and offer he a quantity of good thing: but he be sick and
could eat little, and my attempt to entertain he be throw
away. he lean his two elbow on his knee, and his chin on his
hand and remain rapt in dumb meditation. on my inquire the
subject of his thought, he answer gravely - 'Ibe try to
settle how I shall pay Hindley back. I donot care how long I wait,
if I can only do it at last. I hope he will not die before I do!'
'for shame, Heathcliff!' say I. 'it be for God to punish wicked
people; we should learn to forgive.'
'no, God willnot have the satisfaction that I shall,' he return.
'I only wish I know the good way! let I alone, and Iwill plan it
out: while Ibe think of that I donot feel pain.'
'but, Mr. Lockwood, I forget these tale cannot divert you. Ibe
annoyed how I should dream of chatter on at such a rate; and
your gruel cold, and you nod for bed! I could have tell
Heathcliff's history, all that you need hear, in half a dozen
word.'
thus interrupt herself, the housekeeper rise, and proceed to
lay aside her sewing; but I feel incapable of move from the
hearth, and I be very far from nod. 'sit still, Mrs. Dean,' I
cry; 'do sit still another half-hour. youhave do just right to
tell the story leisurely. that be the method I like; and you must
finish it in the same style. I be interested in every character
you have mention, more or less.'
'the clock be on the stroke of eleven, sir.'
'no matter - Ibe not accustomed to go to bed in the long hour.
one or two be early enough for a person who lie till ten.'
'you shouldnot lie till ten. therebe the very prime of the morning
go long before that time. a person who have not do one-half his
day's work by ten o'clock, run a chance of leave the other half
undo.'
'nevertheless, Mrs. Dean, resume your chair; because to-morrow I
intend lengthen the night till afternoon. I prognosticate for
myself an obstinate cold, at least.'
'I hope not, sir. well, you must allow I to leap over some three
year; during that space Mrs. Earnshaw - '
'no, no, Iwill allow nothing of the sort! be you acquainted with
the mood of mind in which, if you be seat alone, and the cat
lick its kitten on the rug before you, you would watch the
operation so intently that puss's neglect of one ear would put you
seriously out of temper?'
'a terribly lazy mood, I should say.'
'on the contrary, a tiresomely active one. it be mine, at present;
and, therefore, continue minutely. I perceive that people in these
region acquire over people in town the value that a spider in a
dungeon do over a spider in a cottage, to their various
occupant; and yet the deepen attraction be not entirely owe to
the situation of the looker-on. they do live more in earnest, more
in themselves, and less in surface, change, and frivolous external
thing. I could fancy a love for life here almost possible; and I
be a fix unbeliever in any love of a year's standing. one state
resemble set a hungry man down to a single dish, on which he
may concentrate his entire appetite and do it justice; the other,
introduce he to a table lay out by french cook: he can
perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole; but each part be
a mere atom in his regard and remembrance.'
'oh! here we be the same as anywhere else, when you get to know
we,' observe Mrs. Dean, somewhat puzzled at my speech.
'excuse I,' I respond; 'you, my good friend, be a striking
evidence against that assertion. except a few provincialism of
slight consequence, you have no mark of the manner which I be
habituate to consider as peculiar to your class. I be sure you
have think a great deal more than the generality of servant
think. you have be compel to cultivate your reflective
faculty for want of occasion for fritter your life away in
silly trifle.'
Mrs. Dean laugh.
'I certainly esteem myself a steady, reasonable kind of body,' she
say; 'not exactly from live among the hill and see one set
of face, and one series of action, from year's end to year's end;
but I have undergo sharp discipline, which have teach I wisdom;
and then, I have read more than you would fancy, Mr. Lockwood. you
could not open a book in this library that I have not look into,
and get something out of also: unless it be that range of Greek
and Latin, and that of French; and those I know one from another:
it be as much as you can expect of a poor man's daughter. however,
if I be to follow my story in true gossip's fashion, I have well
go on; and instead of leap three year, I will be content to
pass to the next summer - the summer of 1778, that be nearly
twenty-three year ago.'
CHAPTER VIII
on the morning of a fine June day my first bonny little nursle,
and the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock, be bear. we be busy
with the hay in a far-away field, when the girl that usually
bring our breakfast come run an hour too soon across the
meadow and up the lane, call I as she run.
'oh, such a grand bairn!' she pant out. 'the fine lad that
ever breathe! but the doctor say missis must go: he say shebe
be in a consumption these many month. I hear he tell Mr.
Hindley: and now she have nothing to keep she, and shewill be dead
before winter. you must come home directly. yoube to nurse it,
nelly: to feed it with sugar and milk, and take care of it day and
night. I wish I be you, because it will be all your when there
be no missis!'
'but be she very ill?' I ask, fling down my rake and tie my
bonnet.
'I guess she be; yet she look bravely,' reply the girl, 'and she
talk as if she think of live to see it grow a man. shebe out
of her head for joy, itbe such a beauty! if I be she Ibe certain
I should not die: I should get well at the bare sight of it, in
spite of Kenneth. I be fairly mad at he. Dame Archer bring
the cherub down to master, in the house, and his face just begin to
light up, when the old croaker step forward, and say he -
"Earnshaw, itbe a blessing your wife have be spar to leave you
this son. when she come, I feel convinced we shouldnot keep she
long; and now, I must tell you, the winter will probably finish
she. donot take on, and fret about it too much: it cannot be
help. and besides, you should have know well than to choose
such a rush of a lass!"'
'and what do the master answer?' I inquire.
'I think he swear: but I donot mind he, I be strain to see
the bairn,' and she begin again to describe it rapturously. I, as
zealous as herself, hurry eagerly home to admire, on my part;
though I be very sad for Hindley's sake. he have room in his heart
only for two idol - his wife and himself: he dot on both, and
adore one, and I couldnot conceive how he would bear the loss.
when we get to Wuthering Heights, there he stand at the front door;
and, as I pass in, I ask, 'how be the baby?'
'nearly ready to run about, Nell!' he reply, put on a
cheerful smile.
'and the mistress?' I venture to inquire; 'the doctor say shebe -
'
'damn the doctor!' he interrupt, redden. 'france be quite
right: shewill be perfectly well by this time next week. be you
go up-stair? will you tell she that Iwill come, if shewill
promise not to talk. I leave she because she would not hold she
tongue; and she must - tell she Mr. Kenneth say she must be
quiet.'
I deliver this message to Mrs. Earnshaw; she seem in flighty
spirit, and reply merrily, 'I hardly speak a word, Ellen, and
there he have go out twice, cry. well, say I promise I willnot
speak: but that do not bind I not to laugh at he!'
poor soul! till within a week of her death that gay heart never
fail she; and her husband persist doggedly, nay, furiously, in
affirm her health improve every day. when Kenneth warn he
that his medicine be useless at that stage of the malady, and he
neednot put he to further expense by attend she, he retort,
'I know you need not - shebe well - she do not want any more
attendance from you! she never be in a consumption. it be a
fever; and it be go: her pulse be as slow as mine now, and her
cheek as cool.'
he tell his wife the same story, and she seem to believe he; but
one night, while lean on his shoulder, in the act of say she
think she should be able to get up to-morrow, a fit of cough
take she - a very slight one - he raise she in his arm; she put
her two hand about his neck, her face change, and she be dead.
as the girl have anticipate, the child Hareton fall wholly into my
hand. Mr. Earnshaw, provide he see he healthy and never hear
he cry, be content, as far as regard he. for himself, he
grow desperate: his sorrow be of that kind that will not lament.
he neither weep nor pray; he curse and defy: execrate God
and man, and give himself up to reckless dissipation. the servant
could not bear his tyrannical and evil conduct long: Joseph and I
be the only two that would stay. I have not the heart to leave my
charge; and besides, you know, I have be his foster-sister, and
excuse his behaviour more readily than a stranger would. Joseph
remain to hector over tenant and labourer; and because it be
his vocation to be where he have plenty of wickedness to reprove.
the master's bad way and bad companion form a pretty example
for Catherine and Heathcliff. his treatment of the latter be
enough to make a fiend of a saint. and, truly, it appear as if
the lad be possess of something diabolical at that period. he
delight to witness Hindley degrade himself past redemption; and
become daily more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity. I
could not half tell what an infernal house we have. the curate
drop call, and nobody decent come near we, at last; unless
Edgar Linton's visit to Miss Cathy might be an exception. at
fifteen she be the queen of the country-side; she have no peer; and
she do turn out a haughty, headstrong creature! I own I do not
like she, after infancy be past; and I vex she frequently by
try to bring down her arrogance: she never take an aversion to
I, though. she have a wondrous constancy to old attachment: even
Heathcliff keep his hold on her affection unalterably; and young
Linton, with all his superiority, find it difficult to make an
equally deep impression. he be my late master: that be his
portrait over the fireplace. it use to hang on one side, and his
wife's on the other; but hers have be remove, or else you might
see something of what she be. can you make that out?
Mrs. Dean raise the candle, and I discern a soft-feature face,
exceedingly resemble the young lady at the Heights, but more
pensive and amiable in expression. it form a sweet picture. the
long light hair curl slightly on the temple; the eye be large
and serious; the figure almost too graceful. I do not marvel how
Catherine Earnshaw could forget her first friend for such an
individual. I marvel much how he, with a mind to correspond
with his person, could fancy my idea of Catherine Earnshaw.
'a very agreeable portrait,' I observe to the house-keeper. 'be
it like?'
'yes,' she answer; 'but he look well when he be animate;
that be his everyday countenance: he want spirit in general.'
Catherine have keep up her acquaintance with the Lintons since her
five-week' residence among they; and as she have no temptation to
show her rough side in their company, and have the sense to be
ashamed of be rude where she experience such invariable
courtesy, she impose unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by
her ingenious cordiality; gain the admiration of Isabella, and
the heart and soul of her brother: acquisition that flatter she
from the first - for she be full of ambition - and lead she to
adopt a double character without exactly intending to deceive any
one. in the place where she hear Heathcliff term a 'vulgar
young ruffian,' and 'bad than a brute,' she take care not to act
like he; but at home she have small inclination to practise
politeness that would only be laugh at, and restrain an unruly
nature when it would bring she neither credit nor praise.
Mr. Edgar seldom muster courage to visit Wuthering Heights
openly. he have a terror of Earnshaw's reputation, and shrink from
encounter he; and yet he be always receive with our good
attempt at civility: the master himself avoid offend he,
know why he come; and if he could not be gracious, keep out of
the way. I rather think his appearance there be distasteful to
Catherine; she be not artful, never play the coquette, and have
evidently an objection to her two friend meet at all; for when
Heathcliff express contempt of Linton in his presence, she could
not half coincide, as she do in his absence; and when Linton
evince disgust and antipathy to Heathcliff, she dare not treat
his sentiment with indifference, as if depreciation of her
playmate be of scarcely any consequence to she. Ihave have many a
laugh at her perplexity and untold trouble, which she vainly
strove to hide from my mockery. that sound ill-natured: but she
be so proud it become really impossible to pity her distress,
till she should be chasten into more humility. she do bring
herself, finally, to confess, and to confide in I: there be not
a soul else that she might fashion into an adviser.
Mr. Hindley have go from home one afternoon, and Heathcliff
presume to give himself a holiday on the strength of it. he have
reach the age of sixteen then, I think, and without have bad
feature, or be deficient in intellect, he contrive to convey
an impression of inward and outward repulsiveness that his present
aspect retain no trace of. in the first place, he have by that
time lose the benefit of his early education: continual hard work,
begin soon and conclude late, have extinguish any curiosity he
once possess in pursuit of knowledge, and any love for book or
learning. his childhood's sense of superiority, instill into he
by the favour of old Mr. Earnshaw, be fade away. he struggle
long to keep up an equality with Catherine in her study, and
yield with poignant though silent regret: but he yield
completely; and there be no prevail on he to take a step in
the way of move upward, when he find he must, necessarily, sink
beneath his former level. then personal appearance sympathise
with mental deterioration: he acquire a slouching gait and
ignoble look; his naturally reserved disposition be exaggerated
into an almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness; and he take
a grim pleasure, apparently, in exciting the aversion rather than
the esteem of his few acquaintance.
Catherine and he be constant companion still at his season of
respite from labour; but he have cease to express his fondness for
she in word, and recoil with angry suspicion from her girlish
caress, as if conscious there could be no gratification in
lavish such mark of affection on he. on the before-name
occasion he come into the house to announce his intention of do
nothing, while I be assist Miss Cathy to arrange her dress:
she have not reckon on his take it into his head to be idle; and
imagine she would have the whole place to herself, she manage,
by some mean, to inform Mr. Edgar of her brother's absence, and
be then prepare to receive he.
'Cathy, be you busy this afternoon?' ask Heathcliff. 'be you
go anywhere?'
'no, it be rain,' she answer.
'why have you that silk frock on, then?' he say. 'nobody come
here, I hope?'
'not that I know of,' stammer Miss: 'but you should be in the
field now, Heathcliff. it be an hour past dinnertime: I think
you be go.'
'Hindley do not often free we from his accursed presence,'
observe the boy. 'Iwill not work any more to-day: Iwill stay with
you.'
'oh, but Joseph will tell,' she suggest; 'youwould well go!'
'Joseph be load lime on the further side of Penistone Crags; it
will take he till dark, and hewill never know.'
so, say, he lounge to the fire, and sit down. Catherine
reflect an instant, with knit brow - she find it needful to
smooth the way for an intrusion. 'Isabella and Edgar Linton talk
of call this afternoon,' she say, at the conclusion of a
minute's silence. 'as it rain, I hardly expect they; but they may
come, and if they do, you run the risk of be scold for no
good.'
'Order Ellen to say you be engage, Cathy,' he persist; 'donot
turn I out for those pitiful, silly friend of your! Ibe on the
point, sometimes, of complain that they - but Iwill not - '
'that they what?' cry Catherine, gaze at he with a troubled
countenance. 'oh, Nelly!' she add petulantly, jerk her head
away from my hand, 'youhave comb my hair quite out of curl!
thatbe enough; let I alone. what be you on the point of
complain about, Heathcliff?'
'nothing - only look at the almanack on that wall;' he point to a
frame sheet hang near the window, and continue, 'the cross
be for the evening you have spend with the Lintons, the dot for
those spend with I. do you see? Ihave mark every day.'
'yes - very foolish: as if I take notice!' reply Catherine, in a
peevish tone. 'and where be the sense of that?'
'to show that I do take notice,' say Heathcliff.
'and should I always be sit with you?' she demand, grow
more irritated. 'what good do I get? what do you talk about? you
might be dumb, or a baby, for anything you say to amuse I, or for
anything you do, either!'
'you never tell I before that I talk too little, or that you
dislike my company, Cathy!' exclaim Heathcliff, in much
agitation.
'itbe no company at all, when people know nothing and say nothing,'
she mutter.
her companion rise up, but he havenot time to express his feeling
far, for a horse's foot be hear on the flag, and have
knock gently, young Linton enter, his face brilliant with
delight at the unexpected summon she have receive. Doubtless
Catherine mark the difference between her friend, as one come in
and the other go out. the contrast resemble what you see in
exchange a bleak, hilly, coal country for a beautiful fertile
valley; and his voice and greeting be as opposite as his aspect.
he have a sweet, low manner of speak, and pronounce his word as
you do: thatbe less gruff than we talk here, and soft.
'Ibe not come too soon, be I?' he say, cast a look at I: I
have begin to wipe the plate, and tidy some drawer at the far end
in the dresser.
'no,' answer Catherine. 'what be you do there, nelly?'
'my work, Miss,' I reply. (Mr. Hindley have give I direction
to make a third party in any private visit Linton choose to pay.)
she step behind I and whisper crossly, 'take yourself and
your duster off; when company be in the house, servant donot
commence scour and clean in the room where they be!'
'itbe a good opportunity, now that master be away,' I answer
aloud: 'he hat I to be fidget over these thing in his
presence. Ibe sure Mr. Edgar will excuse I.'
'I hate you to be fidget in MY presence,' exclaim the young
lady imperiously, not allow her guest time to speak: she have
fail to recover her equanimity since the little dispute with
Heathcliff.
'Ibe sorry for it, Miss Catherine,' be my response; and I
proceed assiduously with my occupation.
she, suppose Edgar could not see she, snatch the cloth from my
hand, and pinch I, with a prolonged wrench, very spitefully on
the arm. Ihave say I do not love she, and rather relish
mortify her vanity now and then: besides, she hurt I
extremely; so I start up from my knee, and scream out, 'oh,
Miss, thatbe a nasty trick! you have no right to nip I, and Ibe
not go to bear it.'
'I donot touch you, you lie creature!' cry she, her finger
tingle to repeat the act, and her ear red with rage. she never
have power to conceal her passion, it always set her whole
complexion in a blaze.
'whatbe that, then?' I retort, show a decide purple witness
to refute she.
she stamp her foot, waver a moment, and then, irresistibly
impel by the naughty spirit within she, slap I on the cheek:
a stinging blow that fill both eye with water.
'Catherine, love! Catherine!' interpose Linton, greatly shock
at the double fault of falsehood and violence which his idol have
commit.
'leave the room, Ellen!' she repeat, tremble all over.
Little Hareton, who follow I everywhere, and be sit near I
on the floor, at see my tear commence cry himself, and
sob out complaint against 'wicked aunt Cathy,' which draw she
fury on to his unlucky head: she seize his shoulder, and shake
he till the poor child wax livid, and Edgar thoughtlessly lay
hold of her hand to deliver he. in an instant one be wring
free, and the astonished young man feel it apply over his own ear
in a way that could not be mistake for jest. he draw back in
consternation. I lift Hareton in my arm, and walk off to the
kitchen with he, leave the door of communication open, for I be
curious to watch how they would settle their disagreement. the
insult visitor move to the spot where he have lay his hat, pale
and with a quivering lip.
'thatbe right!' I say to myself. 'take warning and begone! itbe
a kindness to let you have a glimpse of her genuine disposition.'
'where be you go?' demand Catherine, advance to the door.
he swerve aside, and attempt to pass.
'you must not go!' she exclaim, energetically.
'I must and shall!' he reply in a subdued voice.
'no,' she persist, grasp the handle; 'not yet, Edgar Linton:
sit down; you shall not leave I in that temper. I should be
miserable all night, and I willnot be miserable for you!'
'can I stay after you have strike I?' ask Linton.
Catherine be mute.
'youhave make I afraid and ashamed of you,' he continue; 'Iwill not
come here again!'
her eye begin to glisten and her lid to twinkle.
'and you tell a deliberate untruth!' he say.
'I donot!' she cry, recover her speech; 'I do nothing
deliberately. well, go, if you please - get away! and now Iwill
cry - Iwill cry myself sick!'
she drop down on her knee by a chair, and set to weeping in
serious earnest. Edgar persevere in his resolution as far as the
court; there he linger. I resolve to encourage he.
'Miss be dreadfully wayward, sir,' I call out. 'as bad as any
mar child: youwould well be rid home, or else she will be
sick, only to grieve we.'
the soft thing look askance through the window: he possess the
power to depart as much as a cat possess the power to leave a
mouse half kill, or a bird half eat. ah, I think, there will
be no save he: hebe doom, and fly to his fate! and so it
be: he turn abruptly, hasten into the house again, shut the
door behind he; and when I go in a while after to inform they
that Earnshaw have come home rabid drunk, ready to pull the whole
place about our ear (his ordinary frame of mind in that
condition), I see the quarrel have merely effect a close intimacy
- have break the outwork of youthful timidity, and enable they to
forsake the disguise of friendship, and confess themselves lover.
Intelligence of Mr. Hindley's arrival drive Linton speedily to his
horse, and Catherine to her chamber. I go to hide little
Hareton, and to take the shot out of the master's fowling-piece,
which he be fond of play with in his insane excitement, to the
hazard of the life of any who provoke, or even attract his
notice too much; and I have hit upon the plan of remove it, that
he might do less mischief if he do go the length of fire the
gun.
CHAPTER ix
he enter, vociferate oath dreadful to hear; and catch I in
the act of stow his son sway in the kitchen cupboard. Hareton
be impress with a wholesome terror of encounter either his
wild beast's fondness or his madman's rage; for in one he run a
chance of be squeeze and kiss to death, and in the other of
be fling into the fire, or dash against the wall; and the poor
thing remain perfectly quiet wherever I choose to put he.
'there, Ihave find it out at last!' cry Hindley, pull I back
by the skin of my neck, like a dog. 'by heaven and hell, youhave
swear between you to murder that child! I know how it be, now,
that he be always out of my way. but, with the help of Satan, I
shall make you swallow the carving-knife, nelly! you neednot
laugh; for Ihave just cram Kenneth, head-downmost, in the Black-
horse marsh; and two be the same as one - and I want to kill some
of you: I shall have no rest till I do!'
'but I donot like the carving-knife, Mr. Hindley,' I answer; 'it
have be cut red herring. Iwould rather be shoot, if you please.'
'youwould rather be damn!' he say; 'and so you shall. no law in
England can hinder a man from keep his house decent, and mine's
abominable! open your mouth.' he hold the knife in his hand, and
push its point between my tooth: but, for my part, I be never
much afraid of his vagary. I spit out, and affirm it taste
detestably - I would not take it on any account.
'oh!' say he, release I, 'I see that hideous little villain be
not Hareton: I beg your pardon, Nell. if it be, he deserve
flay alive for not run to welcome I, and for scream as
if I be a goblin. unnatural cub, come hither! Iwill teach thee
to impose on a good-hearted, deluded father. now, donot you think
the lad would be handsomer crop? it make a dog fiercer, and I
love something fierce - get I a scissor - something fierce and
trim! besides, itbe infernal affectation - devilish conceit it be,
to cherish our ear - webe asse enough without they. hush,
child, hush! well then, it be my darling! wisht, dry thy eye -
therebe a joy; kiss I. what! it willnot? kiss I, Hareton! damn
thee, kiss I! by God, as if I would rear such a monster! as sure
as Ibe live, Iwill break the brat's neck.'
Poor Hareton be squall and kick in his father's arm with
all his might, and redouble his yell when he carry he up-
stair and lift he over the banister. I cry out that he would
frighten the child into fit, and run to rescue he. as I reach
they, Hindley leant forward on the rail to listen to a noise
below; almost forget what he have in his hand. 'who be that?'
he ask, hear some one approach the stairs'-foot. I leant
forward also, for the purpose of sign to Heathcliff, whose step
I recognise, not to come far; and, at the instant when my eye
quit Hareton, he give a sudden spring, deliver himself from
the careless grasp that hold he, and fall.
there be scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we
see that the little wretch be safe. Heathcliff arrive underneath
just at the critical moment; by a natural impulse he arrest his
descent, and set he on his foot, look up to discover the
author of the accident. a miser who have part with a lucky
lottery ticket for five shilling, and find next day he have lose
in the bargain five thousand pound, could not show a blanker
countenance than he do on behold the figure of Mr. Earnshaw
above. it express, plain than word could do, the intense
anguish at have make himself the instrument of thwart his own
revenge. have it be dark, I daresay he would have try to remedy
the mistake by smash Hareton's skull on the step; but, we
witness his salvation; and I be presently below with my precious
charge press to my heart. Hindley descend more leisurely,
sober and abash.
'it be your fault, Ellen,' he say; 'you should have keep he out
of sight: you should have take he from I! be he injure
anywhere?'
'injure!' I cry angrily; 'if he be not kill, hewill be an
idiot! oh! I wonder his mother do not rise from her grave to
see how you use he. yoube bad than a heathen - treat your
own flesh and blood in that manner!' he attempt to touch the
child, who, on find himself with I, sob off his terror
directly. at the first finger his father lay on he, however, he
shriek again louder than before, and struggle as if he would go
into convulsion.
'you shall not meddle with he!' I continue. 'he hat you - they
all hate you - thatbe the truth! a happy family you have; and a
pretty state yoube come to!'
'I shall come to a pretty, yet, nelly,' laugh the misguided
man, recover his hardness. 'at present, convey yourself and he
away. and hark you, Heathcliff! clear you too quite from my reach
and hearing. I wouldnot murder you to-night; unless, perhaps, I
set the house on fire: but thatbe as my fancy go.'
while say this he take a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser,
and pour some into a tumbler.
'Nay, donot!' I entreat. 'Mr. Hindley, do take warning. have
mercy on this unfortunate boy, if you care nothing for yourself!'
'any one will do well for he than I shall,' he answer.
'have mercy on your own soul!' I say, endeavour to snatch the
glass from his hand.
'not I! on the contrary, I shall have great pleasure in send it
to perdition to punish its maker,' exclaim the blasphemer.
'herebe to its hearty damnation!'
he drink the spirit and impatiently bid we go; terminate his
command with a sequel of horrid imprecation too bad to repeat or
remember.
'itbe a pity he cannot kill himself with drink,' observe
Heathcliff, mutter an echo of curse back when the door be
shut. 'hebe do his very utmost; but his constitution defy
he. Mr. Kenneth say he would wager his mare that hewill outlive
any man on this side Gimmerton, and go to the grave a hoary sinner;
unless some happy chance out of the common course befall he.'
I go into the kitchen, and sit down to lull my little lamb to
sleep. Heathcliff, as I think, walk through to the barn. it
turn out afterwards that he only get as far as the other side the
settle, when he fling himself on a bench by the wall, remove from
the fire and remain silent.
I be rock Hareton on my knee, and hum a song that begin, -
it be far in the night, and the bairnie grat,
the mither beneath the mool hear that,
when Miss Cathy, who have listen to the hubbub from her room, put
her head in, and whisper, - 'be you alone, nelly?'
'yes, Miss,' I reply.
she enter and approach the hearth. I, suppose she be go
to say something, look up. the expression of her face seem
disturbed and anxious. her lip be half asunder, as if she mean
to speak, and she draw a breath; but it escape in a sigh instead
of a sentence. I resume my song; not have forget her recent
behaviour.
'wherebe Heathcliff?' she say, interrupt I.
'about his work in the stable,' be my answer.
he do not contradict I; perhaps he have fall into a doze. there
follow another long pause, during which I perceive a drop or two
trickle from Catherine's cheek to the flag. be she sorry for her
shameful conduct? - I ask myself. that will be a novelty: but
she may come to the point - as she will - I sha'n't help she! no,
she feel small trouble regard any subject, save her own
concern.
'oh, dear!' she cry at last. 'Ibe very unhappy!'
'a pity,' observed I. 'yoube hard to please; so many friend and
so few care, and cannot make yourself content!'
'nelly, will you keep a secret for I?' she pursue, kneel down
by I, and lift her winsome eye to my face with that sort of
look which turn off bad temper, even when one have all the right in
the world to indulge it.
'be it worth keep?' I inquire, less sulkily.
'yes, and it worry I, and I must let it out! I want to know
what I should do. to-day, Edgar Linton have ask I to marry he,
and Ihave give he an answer. now, before I tell you whether it
be a consent or denial, you tell I which it ought to have be.'
'really, Miss Catherine, how can I know?' I reply. 'to be sure,
consider the exhibition you perform in his presence this
afternoon, I might say it would be wise to refuse he: since he
ask you after that, he must either be hopelessly stupid or a
venturesome fool.'
'if you talk so, I willnot tell you any more,' she return,
peevishly rise to her foot. 'I accept he, nelly. be quick,
and say whether I be wrong!'
'you accept he! then what good be it discuss the matter?
you have pledge your word, and cannot retract.'
'but say whether I should have do so - do!' she exclaim in an
irritated tone; chafe her hand together, and frown.
'there be many thing to be consider before that question can be
answer properly,' I say, sententiously. 'first and foremost, do
you love Mr. Edgar?'
'who can help it? of course I do,' she answer.
then I put she through the follow catechism: for a girl of
twenty-two it be not injudicious.
'why do you love he, Miss Cathy?'
'nonsense, I do - thatbe sufficient.'
'by no mean; you must say why?'
'well, because he be handsome, and pleasant to be with.'
'bad!' be my commentary.
'and because he be young and cheerful.'
'bad, still.'
'and because he love I.'
'Indifferent, come there.'
'and he will be rich, and I shall like to be the great woman of
the neighbourhood, and I shall be proud of have such a husband.'
'worst of all. and now, say how you love he?'
'as everybody love - yoube silly, nelly.'
'not at all - Answer.'
'I love the ground under his foot, and the air over his head, and
everything he touch, and every word he say. I love all his
look, and all his action, and he entirely and altogether. there
now!'
'and why?'
'Nay; you be make a jest of it: it be exceedingly ill-natured!
itbe no jest to I!' say the young lady, scowl, and turn she
face to the fire.
'Ibe very far from jest, Miss Catherine,' I reply. 'you love
Mr. Edgar because he be handsome, and young, and cheerful, and
rich, and love you. the last, however, go for nothing: you
would love he without that, probably; and with it you wouldnot,
unless he possess the four former attraction.'
'no, to be sure not: I should only pity he - hate he, perhaps,
if he be ugly, and a clown.'
'but there be several other handsome, rich young man in the world:
handsomer, possibly, and rich than he be. what should hinder you
from love they?'
'if there be any, they be out of my way: Ihave see none like
Edgar.'
'you may see some; and he willnot always be handsome, and young, and
may not always be rich.'
'he be now; and I have only to do with the present. I wish you
would speak rationally.'
'well, that settle it: if you have only to do with the present,
marry Mr. Linton.'
'I donot want your permission for that - I shall marry he: and
yet you have not tell I whether Ibe right.'
'perfectly right; if people be right to marry only for the present.
and now, let we hear what you be unhappy about. your brother will
be please; the old lady and gentleman will not object, I think;
you will escape from a disorderly, comfortless home into a wealthy,
respectable one; and you love Edgar, and Edgar love you. all
seem smooth and easy: where be the obstacle?'
'here! and here!' reply Catherine, strike one hand on her
forehead, and the other on her breast: 'in whichever place the
soul life. in my soul and in my heart, Ibe convinced Ibe wrong!'
'thatbe very strange! I cannot make it out.'
'itbe my secret. but if you will not mock at I, Iwill explain it:
I cannot do it distinctly; but Iwill give you a feeling of how I
feel.'
she seat herself by I again: her countenance grow sad and
graver, and her clasped hand tremble.
'nelly, do you never dream queer dream?' she say, suddenly, after
some minute' reflection.
'yes, now and then,' I answer.
'and so do I. Ihave dream in my life dream that have stay with
I ever after, and change my idea: theyhave go through and
through I, like wine through water, and alter the colour of my
mind. and this be one: Ibe go to tell it - but take care not
to smile at any part of it.'
'oh! donot, Miss Catherine!' I cry. 'webe dismal enough without
conjure up ghost and vision to perplex we. come, come, be
merry and like yourself! look at little Hareton! hebe dream
nothing dreary. how sweetly he smile in his sleep!'
'yes; and how sweetly his father curse in his solitude! you
remember he, I daresay, when he be just such another as that
chubby thing: nearly as young and innocent. however, Nelly, I
shall oblige you to listen: itbe not long; and Ihave no power to be
merry to-night.'
'I willnot hear it, I willnot hear it!' I repeat, hastily.
I be superstitious about dream then, and be still; and Catherine
have an unusual gloom in her aspect, that make I dread something
from which I might shape a prophecy, and foresee a fearful
catastrophe. she be vex, but she do not proceed. apparently
take up another subject, she recommence in a short time.
'if I be in heaven, Nelly, I should be extremely miserable.'
'because you be not fit to go there,' I answer. 'all sinner
would be miserable in heaven.'
'but it be not for that. I dream once that I be there.'
'I tell you I willnot hearken to your dream, Miss Catherine! Iwill
go to bed,' I interrupt again.
she laugh, and hold I down; for I make a motion to leave my
chair.
'this be nothing,' cry she: 'I be only go to say that heaven
do not seem to be my home; and I break my heart with weeping to
come back to earth; and the angel be so angry that they fling I
out into the middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights;
where I wake sob for joy. that will do to explain my secret,
as well as the other. Ihave no more business to marry Edgar Linton
than I have to be in heaven; and if the wicked man in there have not
bring Heathcliff so low, I shouldnot have think of it. it
would degrade I to marry Heathcliff now; so he shall never know
how I love he: and that, not because hebe handsome, nelly, but
because hebe more myself than I be. whatever our soul be make
of, his and mine be the same; and Linton's be as different as a
moonbeam from lightning, or frost from fire.'
Ere this speech end I become sensible of Heathcliff's presence.
have notice a slight movement, I turn my head, and see he
rise from the bench, and steal out noiselessly. he have listen
till he hear Catherine say it would degrade she to marry he, and
then he stay to hear no far. my companion, sit on the
ground, be prevent by the back of the settle from remark his
presence or departure; but I start, and bade her hush!
'why?' she ask, gaze nervously round.
'Joseph be here,' I answer, catch opportunely the roll of his
cartwheel up the road; 'and Heathcliff will come in with he. Ibe
not sure whether he be not at the door this moment.'
'oh, he couldnot overhear I at the door!' say she. 'give I
Hareton, while you get the supper, and when it be ready ask I to
sup with you. I want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience, and be
convince that Heathcliff have no notion of these thing. he have
not, have he? he do not know what be in love be!'
'I see no reason that he should not know, as well as you,' I
return; 'and if you be his choice, hewill be the most unfortunate
creature that ever be bear! as soon as you become Mrs. Linton, he
lose friend, and love, and all! have you consider how youwill
bear the separation, and how hewill bear to be quite deserted in the
world? because, Miss Catherine - '
'he quite deserted! we separate!' she exclaim, with an accent of
indignation. 'who be to separate we, pray? theywill meet the fate
of Milo! not as long as I live, Ellen: for no mortal creature.
every Linton on the face of the earth might melt into nothing
before I could consent to forsake Heathcliff. oh, thatbe not what
I intend - thatbe not what I mean! I shouldnot be Mrs. Linton be
such a price demand! hewill be as much to I as he have be all
his lifetime. Edgar must shake off his antipathy, and tolerate
he, at least. he will, when he learn my true feeling towards
he. nelly, I see now you think I a selfish wretch; but do it
never strike you that if Heathcliff and I marry, we should be
beggar? whereas, if I marry Linton I can aid Heathcliff to rise,
and place he out of my brother's power.'
'with your husband's money, Miss Catherine?' I ask. 'youwill find
he not so pliable as you calculate upon: and, though Ibe hardly a
judge, I think thatbe the bad motive youhave give yet for be
the wife of young Linton.'
'it be not,' retort she; 'it be the good! the other be the
satisfaction of my whim: and for Edgar's sake, too, to satisfy
he. this be for the sake of one who comprehend in his person my
feeling to Edgar and myself. I cannot express it; but surely you
and everybody have a notion that there be or should be an existence
of yours beyond you. what be the use of my creation, if I be
entirely contain here? my great misery in this world have be
Heathcliff's misery, and I watch and feel each from the
beginning: my great thought in living be himself. if all else
perish, and he remain, I should still continue to be; and if
all else remain, and he be annihilate, the universe would turn
to a mighty stranger: I should not seem a part of it. - my love
for Linton be like the foliage in the wood: time will change it,
Ibe well aware, as winter change the tree. my love for
Heathcliff resemble the eternal rock beneath: a source of little
visible delight, but necessary. nelly, I be Heathcliff! hebe
always, always in my mind: not as a pleasure, any more than I be
always a pleasure to myself, but as my own being. so donot talk of
our separation again: it be impracticable; and - '
she pause, and hide her face in the fold of my gown; but I jerk
it forcibly away. I be out of patience with her folly!
'if I can make any sense of your nonsense, Miss,' I say, 'it only
go to convince I that you be ignorant of the duty you
undertake in marrying; or else that you be a wicked, unprincipled
girl. but trouble I with no more secret: Iwill not promise to
keep they.'
'youwill keep that?' she ask, eagerly.
'no, Iwill not promise,' I repeat.
she be about to insist, when the entrance of Joseph finish our
conversation; and Catherine remove her seat to a corner, and
nurse Hareton, while I make the supper. after it be cook, my
fellow-servant and I begin to quarrel who should carry some to Mr.
Hindley; and we donot settle it till all be nearly cold. then we
come to the agreement that we would let he ask, if he want any;
for we fear particularly to go into his presence when he have be
some time alone.
'and how benot that nowt come in fro' th' field, be this time?
what be he about? girt idle seeght!' demand the old man, look
round for Heathcliff.
'Iwill call he,' I reply. 'hebe in the barn, Ihave no doubt.'
I go and call, but get no answer. on return, I whisper to
Catherine that he have hear a good part of what she say, I be
sure; and tell how I see he quit the kitchen just as she
complain of her brother's conduct regard he. she jump up
in a fine fright, fling Hareton on to the settle, and run to seek
for her friend herself; not take leisure to consider why she be
so flurry, or how her talk would have affect he. she be
absent such a while that Joseph propose we should wait no long.
he cunningly conjecture they be stay away in order to avoid
hear his protract blessing. they be 'ill eneugh for ony
fahl manner,' he affirm. and on their behalf he add that
night a special prayer to the usual quarter-of-an-hour's
supplication before meat, and would have tack another to the end
of the grace, have not his young mistress break in upon he with a
hurried command that he must run down the road, and, wherever
Heathcliff have ramble, find and make he re-enter directly!
'I want to speak to he, and I must, before I go upstairs,' she
say. 'and the gate be open: he be somewhere out of hearing; for
he would not reply, though I shout at the top of the fold as loud
as I could.'
Joseph object at first; she be too much in earnest, however, to
suffer contradiction; and at last he place his hat on his head,
and walk grumble forth. meantime, Catherine pace up and down
the floor, exclaim - 'I wonder where he be - I wonder where he
can be! what do I say, nelly? Ihave forget. be he vex at
my bad humour this afternoon? dear! tell I what Ihave say to
grieve he? I do wish hewould come. I do wish he would!'
'what a noise for nothing!' I cry, though rather uneasy myself.
'what a trifle scar you! itbe surely no great cause of alarm
that Heathcliff should take a moonlight saunter on the moor, or
even lie too sulky to speak to we in the hay-loft. Iwill engage
hebe lurk there. see if I donot ferret he out!'
I depart to renew my search; its result be disappointment, and
Joseph's quest end in the same.
'yon lad get war und war!' observe he on re-enter. 'hebe leave
th' gate at t' full swing, and Miss's pony have tread dahn two
rig o' corn, and plottere through, raight o'er into t' meadow!
Hahsomdiver, t' maister 'ull play t' devil to-morn, and hewill do
weel. hebe patience itsseln wi' sich careless, offald crater -
patience itsseln he be! bud hewill not be soa allus - yah's see,
all on ye! yah mun'n't drive he out of his heead for nowt!'
'have you find Heathcliff, you ass?' interrupt Catherine. 'have
you be look for he, as I order?'
'I sud more likker look for th' horse,' he reply. 'it 'ud be to
more sense. Bud I can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght
loike this - as black as t' chimbley! und Heathcliff's noan t' chap
to coom at MY whistle - happen hewill be less hard o' hear wi'
ye!'
it be a very dark evening for summer: the cloud appear
inclined to thunder, and I say we have well all sit down; the
approach rain would be certain to bring he home without further
trouble. however, Catherine would hot be persuade into
tranquillity. she keep wander to and fro, from the gate to the
door, in a state of agitation which permit no repose; and at
length take up a permanent situation on one side of the wall, near
the road: where, heedless of my expostulation and the growling
thunder, and the great drop that begin to plash around she, she
remain, call at interval, and then listen, and then cry
outright. she beat Hareton, or any child, at a good passionate fit
of cry.
about midnight, while we still sit up, the storm come rattle over
the Heights in full fury. there be a violent wind, as well as
thunder, and either one or the other split a tree off at the corner
of the building: a huge bough fall across the roof, and knock
down a portion of the east chimney-stack, send a clatter of
stone and soot into the kitchen-fire. we think a bolt have
fall in the middle of we; and Joseph swing on to his knee,
beseech the Lord to remember the patriarch Noah and Lot, and,
as in former time, spare the righteous, though he smite the
ungodly. I feel some sentiment that it must be a judgment on we
also. the Jonah, in my mind, be Mr. Earnshaw; and I shake the
handle of his den that I might ascertain if he be yet live. he
reply audibly enough, in a fashion which make my companion
vociferate, more clamorously than before, that a wide distinction
might be draw between saint like himself and sinner like his
master. but the uproar pass away in twenty minute, leave we
all unharmed; except Cathy, who get thoroughly drench for her
obstinacy in refuse to take shelter, and stand bonnetless and
shawl-less to catch as much water as she could with her hair and
clothe. she come in and lie down on the settle, all soak as she
be, turn her face to the back, and put her hand before it.
'well, Miss!' I exclaim, touch her shoulder; 'you be not bent
on get your death, be you? do you know what o'clock it be?
half-past twelve. come, come to bed! therebe no use wait any
long on that foolish boy: hewill be go to Gimmerton, and hewill
stay there now. he guess we shouldnot wait for he till this
late hour: at least, he guess that only Mr. Hindley would be up;
and hewould rather avoid have the door open by the master.'
'Nay, nay, hebe noan at Gimmerton,' say Joseph. 'Ibe niver wonder
but hebe at t' bothom of a bog-hoile. this visitation worn't for
nowt, and I wod hev' ye to look out, Miss - yah muh be t' next.
thank Hivin for all! all wark togither for gooid to they as be
chozzen, and pike out fro' th' rubbidge! yah knaw whet t'
scripture s.' and he begin quote several text, refer we
to chapter and verse where we might find they.
I, have vainly beg the wilful girl to rise and remove her wet
thing, leave he preach and her shivering, and betook myself to
bed with little Hareton, who sleep as fast as if everyone have be
sleep round he. I hear Joseph read on a while afterwards;
then I distinguish his slow step on the ladder, and then I
drop asleep.
come down somewhat later than usual, I see, by the sunbeam
pierce the chink of the shutter, Miss Catherine still seat
near the fireplace. the house-door be ajar, too; light enter
from its unclosed window; Hindley have come out, and stand on the
kitchen hearth, haggard and drowsy.
'what ail you, Cathy?' he be say when I enter: 'you look as
dismal as a drowned whelp. why be you so damp and pale, child?'
'Ihave be wet,' she answer reluctantly, 'and Ibe cold, thatbe
all.'
'oh, she be naughty!' I cry, perceive the master to be
tolerably sober. 'she get steep in the shower of yesterday
evening, and there she have sit the night through, and I couldnot
prevail on she to stir.'
Mr. Earnshaw star at we in surprise. 'the night through,' he
repeat. 'what keep she up? not fear of the thunder, surely?
that be over hour since.'
neither of we wish to mention Heathcliff's absence, as long as we
could conceal it; so I reply, I donot know how she take it into
her head to sit up; and she say nothing. the morning be fresh
and cool; I throw back the lattice, and presently the room fill
with sweet scent from the garden; but Catherine call peevishly
to I, 'Ellen, shut the window. Ibe starve!' and her tooth
chatter as she shrink close to the almost extinguish ember.
'shebe ill,' say Hindley, take her wrist; 'I suppose thatbe the
reason she would not go to bed. damn it! I donot want to be
trouble with more sickness here. what take you into the rain?'
'run after t' lad, as usuald!' croak Joseph, catch an
opportunity from our hesitation to thrust in his evil tongue. 'if
I war yah, maister, Iwould just slam t' board I' their face all on
them, gentle and simple! never a day ut yah're off, but yon cat o'
Linton come sneak hither; and Miss Nelly, shoo's a fine lass!
shoo sit watch for ye I' t' kitchen; and as yah're in at one
door, hebe out at t'other; and, then, wer grand lady go a-
courting of her side! itbe bonny behaviour, lurk amang t'
field, after twelve o' t' night, wi' that fahl, flaysome divil of
a gipsy, Heathcliff! they think i'm blind; but Ibe noan: nowt ut
t' soart! - I seed young Linton boath come and go, and I seed
YAH' (direct his discourse to I), 'yah gooid fur nowt,
slattenly witch! nip up and bolt into th' house, t' minute yah
hear t' maister's horse-fit clatter up t' road.'
'silence, eavesdropper!' cry Catherine; 'none of your insolence
before I! Edgar Linton come yesterday by chance, Hindley; and it
be I who tell he to be off: because I know you would not like to
have meet he as you be.'
'you lie, Cathy, no doubt,' answer her brother, 'and you be a
confound simpleton! but never mind Linton at present: tell I,
be you not with Heathcliff last night? speak the truth, now.
you need not he afraid of harm he: though I hate he as much
as ever, he do I a good turn a short time since that will make my
conscience tender of break his neck. to prevent it, I shall
send he about his business this very morning; and after hebe go,
Iwould advise you all to look sharp: I shall only have the more
humour for you.'
'I never see Heathcliff last night,' answer Catherine, begin
to sob bitterly: 'and if you do turn he out of door, Iwill go
with he. but, perhaps, youwill never have an opportunity:
perhaps, hebe go.' here she burst into uncontrollable grief, and
the remainder of her word be inarticulate.
Hindley lavish on her a torrent of scornful abuse, and bid she
get to her room immediately, or she shouldnot cry for nothing! I
oblige she to obey; and I shall never forget what a scene she
act when we reach her chamber: it terrify I. I think she
be go mad, and I beg Joseph to run for the doctor. it
prove the commencement of delirium: Mr. Kenneth, as soon as he
see she, pronounce she dangerously ill; she have a fever. he bleed
she, and he tell I to let she live on whey and water-gruel, and
take care she do not throw herself downstairs or out of the
window; and then he leave: for he have enough to do in the parish,
where two or three mile be the ordinary distance between cottage
and cottage.
though I cannot say I make a gentle nurse, and Joseph and the
master be no well, and though our patient be as wearisome and
headstrong as a patient could be, she weather it through. Old
Mrs. Linton pay we several visit, to be sure, and set thing to
right, and scold and order we all; and when Catherine be
convalescent, she insist on convey she to Thrushcross Grange:
for which deliverance we be very grateful. but the poor dame have
reason to repent of her kindness: she and her husband both take
the fever, and die within a few day of each other.
our young lady return to we saucy and more passionate, and
haughty than ever. Heathcliff have never be hear of since the
evening of the thunder-storm; and, one day, I have the misfortune,
when she have provoke I exceedingly, to lay the blame of his
disappearance on she: where indeed it belong, as she well know.
from that period, for several month, she cease to hold any
communication with I, save in the relation of a mere servant.
Joseph fall under a ban also: he would speak his mind, and lecture
she all the same as if she be a little girl; and she esteem
herself a woman, and our mistress, and think that her recent
illness give she a claim to be treat with consideration. then
the doctor have say that she would not bear cross much; she
ought to have her own way; and it be nothing less than murder in
her eye for any one to presume to stand up and contradict she.
from Mr. Earnshaw and his companion she keep aloof; and tutor by
Kenneth, and serious threat of a fit that often attend she
rage, her brother allow she whatever she please to demand, and
generally avoid aggravate her fiery temper. he be rather too
indulgent in humour her caprice; not from affection, but from
pride: he wish earnestly to see she bring honour to the family
by an alliance with the Lintons, and as long as she let he alone
she might trample on we like slave, for aught he care! Edgar
Linton, as multitude have be before and will be after he, be
infatuate: and believe himself the happy man alive on the day
he lead she to Gimmerton Chapel, three year subsequent to his
father's death.
much against my inclination, I be persuade to leave Wuthering
Heights and accompany she here, Little Hareton be nearly five
year old, and I have just begin to teach he his letter. we make
a sad parting; but Catherine's tear be more powerful than ours.
when I refuse to go, and when she find her entreaty do not
move I, she go lament to her husband and brother. the former
offer I munificent wage; the latter order I to pack up: he
want no woman in the house, he say, now that there be no
mistress; and as to Hareton, the curate should take he in hand,
by-and-by. and so I have but one choice leave: to do as I be
order. I tell the master he get rid of all decent people only to
run to ruin a little fast; I kiss Hareton, say good-by; and
since then he have be a stranger: and itbe very queer to think
it, but Ihave no doubt he have completely forget all about Ellen
Dean, and that he be ever more than all the world to she and she
to he!
at this point of the housekeeper's story she chance to glance
towards the time-piece over the chimney; and be in amazement on
see the minute-hand measure half-past one. she would not hear
of stay a second long: in truth, I feel rather disposed to
defer the sequel of her narrative myself. and now that she be
vanish to her rest, and I have meditate for another hour or two,
I shall summon courage to go also, in spite of ache laziness of
head and limb.
CHAPTER X
a charming introduction to a hermit's life! four week' torture,
tossing, and sickness! oh, these bleak wind and bitter northern
sky, and impassable road, and dilatory country surgeon! and
oh, this dearth of the human physiognomy! and, bad than all, the
terrible intimation of Kenneth that I need not expect to be out of
door till spring!
Mr. Heathcliff have just honour I with a call. about seven day
ago he send I a brace of grouse - the last of the season.
Scoundrel! he be not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine;
and that I have a great mind to tell he. but, alas! how could I
offend a man who be charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good
hour, and talk on some other subject than pill and draught,
blister and leech? this be quite an easy interval. I be too
weak to read; yet I feel as if I could enjoy something interesting.
why not have up Mrs. Dean to finish her tale? I can recollect its
chief incident, as far as she have go. yes: I remember her hero
have run off, and never be hear of for three year; and the
heroine be marry. Iwill ring: shewill be delighted to find I
capable of talk cheerfully. Mrs. Dean come.
'it want twenty minute, sir, to take the medicine,' she
commence.
'away, away with it!' I reply; 'I desire to have - '
'the doctor say you must drop the powder.'
'with all my heart! donot interrupt I. come and take your seat
here. keep your finger from that bitter phalanx of vial. draw
your knitting out of your pocket - that will do - now continue the
history of Mr. Heathcliff, from where you leave off, to the present
day. do he finish his education on the continent, and come back a
gentleman? or do he get a sizar's place at college, or escape to
America, and earn honour by draw blood from his foster-country?
or make a fortune more promptly on the english highway?'
'he may have do a little in all these vocation, Mr. Lockwood;
but I couldnot give my word for any. I state before that I donot
know how he gain his money; neither be I aware of the mean he
take to raise his mind from the savage ignorance into which it be
sink: but, with your leave, Iwill proceed in my own fashion, if you
think it will amuse and not weary you. be you feel well this
morning?'
'much.'
'thatbe good news.'
I get Miss Catherine and myself to Thrushcross Grange; and, to my
agreeable disappointment, she behave infinitely well than I
dare to expect. she seem almost over-fond of Mr. Linton; and
even to his sister she show plenty of affection. they be both
very attentive to her comfort, certainly. it be not the thorn
bending to the honeysuckle, but the honeysuckle embrace the
thorn. there be no mutual concession: one stand erect, and the
other yield: and who can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when
they encounter neither opposition nor indifference? I observe
that Mr. Edgar have a deep-rooted fear of ruffle her humour. he
conceal it from she; but if ever he hear I answer sharply, or
see any other servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of her,
he would show his trouble by a frown of displeasure that never
darken on his own account. he many a time speak sternly to I
about my pertness; and aver that the stab of a knife could not
inflict a bad pang than he suffer at see his lady vex.
not to grieve a kind master, I learn to be less touchy; and, for
the space of half a year, the gunpowder lie as harmless as sand,
because no fire come near to explode it. Catherine have season of
gloom and silence now and then: they be respect with
sympathise silence by her husband, who ascribe they to an
alteration in her constitution, produce by her perilous illness;
as she be never subject to depression of spirit before. the
return of sunshine be welcome by answer sunshine from he. I
believe I may assert that they be really in possession of deep
and grow happiness.
it end. well, we must be for ourselves in the long run; the mild
and generous be only more justly selfish than the domineering; and
it end when circumstance cause each to feel that the one's
interest be not the chief consideration in the other's thought.
on a mellow evening in September, I be come from the garden with
a heavy basket of apple which I have be gather. it have get
dusk, and the moon look over the high wall of the court, cause
undefined shadow to lurk in the corner of the numerous project
portion of the building. I set my burden on the house-step by
the kitchen-door, and linger to rest, and draw in a few more
breath of the soft, sweet air; my eye be on the moon, and my
back to the entrance, when I hear a voice behind I say, - 'nelly,
be that you?'
it be a deep voice, and foreign in tone; yet there be something
in the manner of pronounce my name which make it sound familiar.
I turn about to discover who speak, fearfully; for the door be
shut, and I have see nobody on approach the step. something
stir in the porch; and, move nearer, I distinguish a tall
man dress in dark clothe, with dark face and hair. he leant
against the side, and hold his finger on the latch as if intend
to open for himself. 'who can it be?' I think. 'Mr. Earnshaw?
oh, no! the voice have no resemblance to his.'
'I have wait here an hour,' he resume, while I continue
star; 'and the whole of that time all round have be as still as
death. I dare not enter. you do not know I? look, Ibe not a
stranger!'
a ray fall on his feature; the cheek be sallow, and half
cover with black whisker; the brow lower, the eye deep-set
and singular. I remember the eye.
'what!' I cry, uncertain whether to regard he as a worldly
visitor, and I raise my hand in amazement. 'what! you come back?
be it really you? be it?'
'yes, Heathcliff,' he reply, glance from I up to the window,
which reflect a score of glitter moon, but show no light
from within. 'be they at home? where be she? nelly, you be not
glad! you neednot be so disturbed. be she here? speak! I want to
have one word with she - your mistress. go, and say some person
from Gimmerton desire to see she.'
'how will she take it?' I exclaim. 'what will she do? the
surprise bewilder I - it will put she out of her head! and you
be Heathcliff! but alter! Nay, therebe no comprehend it.
have you be for a soldier?'
'go and carry my message,' he interrupt, impatiently. 'Ibe in
hell till you do!'
he lift the latch, and I enter; but when I get to the parlour
where Mr. and Mrs. Linton be, I could not persuade myself to
proceed. at length I resolve on make an excuse to ask if they
would have the candle light, and I open the door.
they sit together in a window whose lattice lie back against the
wall, and display, beyond the garden tree, and the wild green
park, the valley of Gimmerton, with a long line of mist winding
nearly to its top (for very soon after you pass the chapel, as you
may have notice, the sough that run from the marsh join a beck
which follow the bend of the glen). wuthere Heights rise above
this silvery vapour; but our old house be invisible; it rather
dip down on the other side. both the room and its occupant, and
the scene they gaze on, look wondrously peaceful. I shrank
reluctantly from perform my errand; and be actually go away
leave it unsaid, after have put my question about the candle,
when a sense of my folly compel I to return, and mutter, 'a
person from Gimmerton wish to see you ma'am.'
'what do he want?' ask Mrs. Linton.
'I do not question he,' I answer.
'well, close the curtain, nelly,' she say; 'and bring up tea.
Iwill be back again directly.'
she quit the apartment; Mr. Edgar inquire, carelessly, who it
be.
'some one mistress do not expect,' I reply. 'that Heathcliff -
you recollect he, sir - who use to live at Mr. Earnshaw's.'
'what! the gipsy - the ploughboy?' he cry. 'why do you not say
so to Catherine?'
'hush! you must not call he by those name, master,' I say.
'shewould be sadly grieve to hear you. she be nearly heartbroken
when he run off. I guess his return will make a jubilee to she.'
Mr. Linton walk to a window on the other side of the room that
overlook the court. he unfasten it, and leant out. I suppose
they be below, for he exclaim quickly: 'donot stand there,
love! bring the person in, if it be anyone particular.' Ere long,
I hear the click of the latch, and Catherine fly up-stair,
breathless and wild; too excited to show gladness: indeed, by she
face, you would rather have surmise an awful calamity.
'oh, Edgar, Edgar!' she pant, fling her arm round his neck.
'oh, Edgar darling! Heathcliff's come back - he be!' and she
tighten her embrace to a squeeze.
'well, well,' cry her husband, crossly, 'donot strangle I for
that! he never strike I as such a marvellous treasure. there be
no need to be frantic!'
'I know you donot like he,' she answer, repress a little the
intensity of her delight. 'yet, for my sake, you must be friend
now. shall I tell he to come up?'
'here,' he say, 'into the parlour?'
'where else?' she ask.
he look vexed, and suggest the kitchen as a more suitable place
for he. Mrs. Linton eye he with a droll expression - half
angry, half laugh at his fastidiousness.
'no,' she add, after a while; 'I cannot sit in the kitchen. set
two table here, Ellen: one for your master and Miss Isabella,
be gentry; the other for Heathcliff and myself, be of the
low order. will that please you, dear? or must I have a fire
light elsewhere? if so, give direction. Iwill run down and
secure my guest. Ibe afraid the joy be too great to be real!'
she be about to dart off again; but Edgar arrest she.
'you bid he step up,' he say, address I; 'and, Catherine, try
to be glad, without be absurd. the whole household need not
witness the sight of your welcome a runaway servant as a
brother.'
I descend, and find Heathcliff wait under the porch,
evidently anticipate an invitation to enter. he follow my
guidance without waste of word, and I usher he into the
presence of the master and mistress, whose flushed cheek betray
sign of warm talking. but the lady's glow with another feeling
when her friend appear at the door: she spring forward, take
both his hand, and lead he to Linton; and then she seize Linton's
reluctant finger and crush they into his. now, fully reveal
by the fire and candlelight, I be amazed, more than ever, to
behold the transformation of Heathcliff. he have grow a tall,
athletic, well-form man; beside whom my master seem quite
slender and youth-like. his upright carriage suggest the idea of
his have be in the army. his countenance be much old in
expression and decision of feature than Mr. Linton's; it look
intelligent, and retain no mark of former degradation. a half-
civilised ferocity lurk yet in the depressed brow and eye full
of black fire, but it be subdue; and his manner be even
dignified: quite divested of roughness, though stern for grace.
my master's surprise equal or exceed mine: he remain for a
minute at a loss how to address the ploughboy, as he have call
he. Heathcliff drop his slight hand, and stand look at he
coolly till he choose to speak.
'sit down, sir,' he say, at length. 'Mrs. Linton, recall old
time, would have I give you a cordial reception; and, of course,
I be gratify when anything occur to please she.'
'and I also,' answer Heathcliff, 'especially if it be anything in
which I have a part. I shall stay an hour or two willingly.'
he take a seat opposite Catherine, who keep her gaze fix on he
as if she fear he would vanish be she to remove it. he do not
raise his to she often: a quick glance now and then suffice; but
it flash back, each time more confidently, the undisguise
delight he drink from her. they be too much absorb in their
mutual joy to suffer embarrassment. not so Mr. Edgar: he grow
pale with pure annoyance: a feeling that reach its climax when
his lady rise, and step across the rug, seize Heathcliff's
hand again, and laugh like one beside herself.
'I shall think it a dream to-morrow!' she cry. 'I shall not be
able to believe that I have see, and touch, and speak to you
once more. and yet, cruel Heathcliff! you donot deserve this
welcome. to be absent and silent for three year, and never to
think of I!'
'a little more than you have think of I,' he murmur. 'I hear
of your marriage, Cathy, not long since; and, while wait in the
yard below, I meditate this plan - just to have one glimpse of
your face, a stare of surprise, perhaps, and pretend pleasure;
afterwards settle my score with Hindley; and then prevent the law
by do execution on myself. your welcome have put these idea out
of my mind; but beware of meet I with another aspect next time!
Nay, youwill not drive I off again. you be really sorry for I,
be you? well, there be cause. Ihave fight through a bitter
life since I last hear your voice; and you must forgive I, for I
struggle only for you!'
'Catherine, unless we be to have cold tea, please to come to the
table,' interrupt Linton, strive to preserve his ordinary tone,
and a due measure of politeness. 'Mr. Heathcliff will have a long
walk, wherever he may lodge to-night; and Ibe thirsty.'
she take her post before the urn; and Miss Isabella come, summon
by the bell; then, have hand their chair forward, I leave the
room. the meal hardly endure ten minute. Catherine's cup be
never fill: she could neither eat nor drink. Edgar have make a
slop in his saucer, and scarcely swallow a mouthful. their guest
do not protract his stay that evening above an hour long. I
ask, as he depart, if he go to Gimmerton?
'no, to Wuthering Heights,' he answer: 'Mr. Earnshaw invite I,
when I call this morning.'
Mr. Earnshaw invite HIM! and he call on Mr. Earnshaw! I
ponder this sentence painfully, after he be go. be he turn
out a bit of a hypocrite, and come into the country to work
mischief under a cloak? I muse: I have a presentiment in the
bottom of my heart that he have well have remain away.
about the middle of the night, I be waken from my first nap by
Mrs. Linton glide into my chamber, take a seat on my bedside,
and pull I by the hair to rouse I.
'I cannot rest, Ellen,' she say, by way of apology. 'and I want
some live creature to keep I company in my happiness! Edgar be
sulky, because Ibe glad of a thing that do not interest he: he
refuse to open his mouth, except to utter pettish, silly speech;
and he affirm I be cruel and selfish for wish to talk when he
be so sick and sleepy. he always contrive to be sick at the
least cross! I give a few sentence of commendation to Heathcliff,
and he, either for a headache or a pang of envy, begin to cry: so
I get up and leave he.'
'what use be it praise Heathcliff to he?' I answer. 'as lad
they have an aversion to each other, and Heathcliff would hate just
as much to hear he praise: itbe human nature. let Mr. Linton
alone about he, unless you would like an open quarrel between
they.'
'but do it not show great weakness?' pursue she. 'Ibe not
envious: I never feel hurt at the brightness of Isabella's yellow
hair and the whiteness of her skin, at her dainty elegance, and the
fondness all the family exhibit for she. even you, nelly, if we
have a dispute sometimes, you back Isabella at once; and I yield
like a foolish mother: I call she a darling, and flatter she into
a good temper. it please her brother to see we cordial, and that
please I. but they be very much alike: they be spoil
child, and fancy the world be make for their accommodation; and
though I humour both, I think a smart chastisement might improve
they all the same.'
'yoube mistaken, Mrs. Linton,' say I. 'they humour you: I know
what there would be to do if they do not. you can well afford to
indulge their pass whim as long as their business be to
anticipate all your desire. you may, however, fall out, at last,
over something of equal consequence to both side; and then those
you term weak be very capable of be as obstinate as you.'
'and then we shall fight to the death, sha'n't we, nelly?' she
return, laugh. 'no! I tell you, I have such faith in Linton's
love, that I believe I might kill he, and he wouldnot wish to
retaliate.'
I advise she to value he the more for his affection.
'I do,' she answer, 'but he neednot resort to whine for
trifle. it be childish and, instead of melt into tear because
I say that Heathcliff be now worthy of anyone's regard, and it
would honour the first gentleman in the country to be his friend,
he ought to have say it for I, and be delighted from sympathy.
he must get accustomed to he, and he may as well like he:
consider how Heathcliff have reason to object to he, Ibe sure he
behave excellently!'
'what do you think of his go to Wuthering Heights?' I inquire.
'he be reform in every respect, apparently: quite a Christian:
offer the right hand of fellowship to his enemy all around!'
'he explain it,' she reply. 'I wonder as much as you. he say
he call to gather information concern I from you, suppose
you reside there still; and Joseph tell Hindley, who come out and
fall to question he of what he have be do, and how he have
be live; and finally, desire he to walk in. there be some
person sit at card; Heathcliff join they; my brother lose
some money to he, and, find he plentifully supply, he
request that he would come again in the evening: to which he
consent. Hindley be too reckless to select his acquaintance
prudently: he donot trouble himself to reflect on the cause he
might have for mistrust one whom he have basely injure. but
Heathcliff affirm his principal reason for resume a connection
with his ancient persecutor be a wish to instal himself in quarter
at walk distance from the Grange, and an attachment to the house
where we live together; and likewise a hope that I shall have more
opportunity of see he there than I could have if he settle
in Gimmerton. he mean to offer liberal payment for permission to
lodge at the Heights; and doubtless my brother's covetousness will
prompt he to accept the term: he be always greedy; though what
he grasp with one hand he fling away with the other.'
'itbe a nice place for a young man to fix his dwelling in!' say I.
'have you no fear of the consequence, Mrs. Linton?'
'none for my friend,' she reply: 'his strong head will keep he
from danger; a little for Hindley: but he cannot be make morally
bad than he be; and I stand between he and bodily harm. the
event of this evening have reconcile I to God and humanity! I have
rise in angry rebellion against Providence. oh, Ihave endure
very, very bitter misery, nelly! if that creature know how bitter,
hewould be ashamed to cloud its removal with idle petulance. it be
kindness for he which induce I to bear it alone: have I
express the agony I frequently feel, he would have be teach to
long for its alleviation as ardently as I. however, itbe over, and
Iwill take no revenge on his folly; I can afford to suffer anything
hereafter! should the mean thing alive slap I on the cheek,
Iwould not only turn the other, but Iwould ask pardon for provoke it;
and, as a proof, Iwill go make my peace with Edgar instantly. Good-
night! Ibe an angel!'
in this self-complacent conviction she depart; and the success of
her fulfil resolution be obvious on the morrow: Mr. Linton have
not only abjure his peevishness (though his spirit seem still
subdue by Catherine's exuberance of vivacity), but he venture no
objection to she take Isabella with she to Wuthering Heights in
the afternoon; and she reward he with such a summer of sweetness
and affection in return as make the house a paradise for several
day; both master and servant profit from the perpetual
sunshine.
Heathcliff - Mr. Heathcliff I should say in future - use the
liberty of visit at Thrushcross Grange cautiously, at first: he
seem estimate how far its owner would bear his intrusion.
Catherine, also, deem it judicious to moderate her expression of
pleasure in receive he; and he gradually establish his right
to be expect. he retain a great deal of the reserve for which
his boyhood be remarkable; and that serve to repress all
startling demonstration of feeling. my master's uneasiness
experience a lull, and further circumstance divert it into
another channel for a space.
his new source of trouble spring from the not anticipate
misfortune of Isabella Linton evince a sudden and irresistible
attraction towards the tolerate guest. she be at that time a
charming young lady of eighteen; infantile in manner, though
possess of keen wit, keen feeling, and a keen temper, too, if
irritated. her brother, who love she tenderly, be appal at
this fantastic preference. leave aside the degradation of an
alliance with a nameless man, and the possible fact that his
property, in default of heirs male, might pass into such a one's
power, he have sense to comprehend Heathcliff's disposition: to
know that, though his exterior be alter, his mind be
unchangeable and unchanged. and he dread that mind: it revolt
he: he shrink forebodingly from the idea of commit Isabella
to its keeping. he would have recoil still more have he be
aware that her attachment rise unsolicited, and be bestow where
it awaken no reciprocation of sentiment; for the minute he
discover its existence he lay the blame on Heathcliff's
deliberate designing.
we have all remark, during some time, that Miss Linton fret and
pin over something. she grow cross and wearisome; snap at
and tease Catherine continually, at the imminent risk of
exhaust her limited patience. we excuse she, to a certain
extent, on the plea of ill-health: she be dwindle and fade
before our eye. but one day, when she have be peculiarly
wayward, reject her breakfast, complain that the servant do
not do what she tell they; that the mistress would allow she to be
nothing in the house, and Edgar neglect she; that she have catch
a cold with the door be leave open, and we let the parlour fire
go out on purpose to vex she, with a hundred yet more frivolous
accusation, Mrs. Linton peremptorily insist that she should get
to bed; and, have scold she heartily, threaten to send for
the doctor. Mention of Kenneth cause she to exclaim, instantly,
that her health be perfect, and it be only Catherine's harshness
which make her unhappy.
'how can you say I be harsh, you naughty fondle?' cry the
mistress, amazed at the unreasonable assertion. 'you be surely
lose your reason. when have I be hash, tell I?'
'yesterday,' sob Isabella, 'and now!'
'yesterday!' say her sister-in-law. 'on what occasion?'
'in our walk along the moor: you tell I to ramble where I
please, while you saunter on with Mr. Heathcliff?'
'and thatbe your notion of harshness?' say Catherine, laugh.
'it be no hint that your company be superfluous? we donot care
whether you keep with we or not; I merely think Heathcliff's talk
would have nothing entertaining for your ear.'
'oh, no,' weep the young lady; 'you wish I away, because you
know I like to be there!'
'be she sane?' ask Mrs. Linton, appeal to I. 'Iwill repeat
our conversation, word for word, Isabella; and you point out any
charm it could have have for you.'
'I donot mind the conversation,' she answer: 'I want to be
with - '
"well?' say Catherine, perceive her hesitate to complete the
sentence.
'with he: and I willnot be always send off!' she continue,
kindle up. 'you be a dog in the manger, Cathy, and desire no
one to be love but yourself!'
'you be an impertinent little monkey!' exclaim Mrs. Linton, in
surprise. 'but Iwill not believe this idiotcy! it be impossible
that you can covet the admiration of Heathcliff - that you consider
he an agreeable person! I hope I have misunderstood you,
Isabella?'
'no, you have not,' say the infatuated girl. 'I love he more
than ever you love Edgar, and he might love I, if you would let
he!'
'I wouldnot be you for a kingdom, then!' Catherine declare,
emphatically: and she seem to speak sincerely. 'nelly, help I
to convince she of her madness. tell she what Heathcliff be: an
unreclaimed creature, without refinement, without cultivation; an
arid wilderness of furze and whinstone. Iwould as soon put that
little canary into the park on a winter's day, as recommend you to
bestow your heart on he! it be deplorable ignorance of his
character, child, and nothing else, which make that dream enter
your head. pray, donot imagine that he conceal depth of
benevolence and affection beneath a stern exterior! hebe not a
rough diamond - a pearl-contain oyster of a rustic: hebe a
fierce, pitiless, wolfish man. I never say to he, "let this or
that enemy alone, because it would be ungenerous or cruel to harm
they;" I say, "let they alone, because I should hate they to be
wrong:" and hewould crush you like a sparrow's egg, Isabella, if he
find you a troublesome charge. I know he couldnot love a Linton;
and yet hewould be quite capable of marry your fortune and
expectation: avarice be grow with he a besetting sin.
therebe my picture: and Ibe his friend - so much so, that have he
think seriously to catch you, I should, perhaps, have hold my
tongue, and let you fall into his trap.'
Miss Linton regard her sister-in-law with indignation.
'for shame! for shame!' she repeat, angrily. 'you be bad than
twenty foe, you poisonous friend!'
'ah! you willnot believe I, then?' say Catherine. 'you think I
speak from wicked selfishness?'
'Ibe certain you do,' retort Isabella; 'and I shudder at you!'
'good!' cry the other. 'try for yourself, if that be your
spirit: I have do, and yield the argument to your saucy
insolence.' -
'and I must suffer for her egotism!' she sob, as Mrs. Linton
leave the room. 'all, all be against I: she have blight my
single consolation. but she utter falsehood, donot she? Mr.
Heathcliff be not a fiend: he have an honourable soul, and a true
one, or how could he remember she?'
'banish he from your thought, Miss,' I say. 'hebe a bird of bad
oman: no mate for you. Mrs. Linton speak strongly, and yet I
cannot contradict she. she be well acquaint with his heart than
I, or any one besides; and she never would represent he as bad
than he be. honest people donot hide their deed. how have he be
live? how have he get rich? why be he stay at Wuthering
Heights, the house of a man whom he abhor? they say Mr. Earnshaw
be bad and bad since he come. they sit up all night together
continually, and Hindley have be borrow money on his land, and
do nothing but play and drink: I hear only a week ago - it be
Joseph who tell I - I meet he at Gimmerton: "nelly," he say,
"webe hae a crowner's 'quest enow, at ahr folk'. one on them 's
a'most getten his finger cut off wi' hauding t' other fro' stickin'
hisseln loike a cawlf. that's maister, yeah knaw, 'at 's soa up o'
go tuh t' grand 'size. hebe noan fear o' t' bench o' judge,
norther Paul, nur Peter, nur John, nur Matthew, nor noan on them,
not he! he fair like - he lang to set his brazened face agean
them! and yon bonny lad Heathcliff, yah mind, hebe a rare 'un. he
can girn a laugh as well 's onybody at a raight divil's jest. do
he niver say nowt of his fine living amang we, when he go to t'
Grange? this be t' way on 't:- up at sun-down: dice, brandy,
cloise shutter, und can'le-light till next day at noon: then,
t'fooil gang ban und raving to his cham'er, makke dacent
fowk dig thur fingers I' thur lug fur varry shame; un' the knave,
why he can caint his brass, un' ate, un' sleep, un' off to his
neighbour's to gossip wi' t' wife. I' course, he tell Dame
Catherine how her fathur's goold run into his pocket, and her
fathur's son gallop down t' broad road, while he flee afore to
oppen t' pike!" now, Miss Linton, Joseph be an old rascal, but no
liar; and, if his account of Heathcliff's conduct be true, you
would never think of desire such a husband, would you?'
'you be league with the rest, Ellen!' she reply. 'Iwill not
listen to your slander. what malevolence you must have to wish to
convince I that there be no happiness in the world!'
whether she would have get over this fancy if leave to herself, or
persevere in nurse it perpetually, I cannot say: she have little
time to reflect. the day after, there be a justice-meeting at the
next town; my master be oblige to attend; and Mr. Heathcliff,
aware of his absence, call rather early than usual. Catherine
and Isabella be sit in the library, on hostile term, but
silent: the latter alarm at her recent indiscretion, and the
disclosure she have make of her secret feeling in a transient fit
of passion; the former, on mature consideration, really offend
with her companion; and, if she laugh again at her pertness,
inclined to make it no laugh matter to she. she do laugh as
she see Heathcliff pass the window. I be sweep the hearth, and
I notice a mischievous smile on her lip. Isabella, absorb in
her meditation, or a book, remain till the door open; and it
be too late to attempt an escape, which she would gladly have do
have it be practicable.
'come in, thatbe right!' exclaim the mistress, gaily, pull a
chair to the fire. 'here be two people sadly in need of a third
to thaw the ice between they; and you be the very one we should
both of we choose. Heathcliff, Ibe proud to show you, at last,
somebody that dot on you more than myself. I expect you to feel
flattered. Nay, itbe not nelly; donot look at she! my poor little
sister-in-law be break her heart by mere contemplation of your
physical and moral beauty. it lie in your own power to be Edgar's
brother! no, no, Isabella, you sha'n't run off,' she continue,
arresting, with feigned playfulness, the confound girl, who have
rise indignantly. 'we be quarrel like cat about you,
Heathcliff; and I be fairly beat in protestation of devotion
and admiration: and, moreover, I be inform that if I would but
have the manner to stand aside, my rival, as she will have herself
to be, would shoot a shaft into your soul that would fix you for
ever, and send my image into eternal oblivion!'
'Catherine!' say Isabella, call up her dignity, and disdain
to struggle from the tight grasp that hold she, 'Iwould thank you to
adhere to the truth and not slander I, even in joke! Mr.
Heathcliff, be kind enough to bid this friend of yours release I:
she forget that you and I be not intimate acquaintance; and what
amuse she be painful to I beyond expression.'
as the guest answer nothing, but take his seat, and look
thoroughly indifferent what sentiment she cherish concern
he, she turn and whisper an earnest appeal for liberty to her
tormentor.
'by no mean!' cry Mrs. Linton in answer. 'I willnot be name a
dog in the manger again. you shall stay: now then! Heathcliff,
why donot you evince satisfaction at my pleasant news? Isabella
swear that the love Edgar have for I be nothing to that she
entertain for you. Ibe sure she make some speech of the kind; do
she not, Ellen? and she have fast ever since the day before
yesterday's walk, from sorrow and rage that I despatch she out of
your society under the idea of its be unacceptable.'
'I think you belie she,' say Heathcliff, twist his chair to
face they. 'she wish to be out of my society now, at any rate!'
and he star hard at the object of discourse, as one might do at a
strange repulsive animal: a centipede from the Indies, for
instance, which curiosity lead one to examine in spite of the
aversion it raise. the poor thing couldnot bear that; she grow
white and red in rapid succession, and, while tear bead she
lash, bend the strength of her small finger to loosen the firm
clutch of Catherine; and perceive that as fast as she raise one
finger off her arm another close down, and she could not remove
the whole together, she begin to make use of her nail; and their
sharpness presently ornament the detainer's with crescent of
red.
'therebe a tigress!' exclaim Mrs. Linton, set she free, and
shake her hand with pain. 'begone, for God's sake, and hide your
vixen face! how foolish to reveal those talon to he. cannot you
fancy the conclusion hewill draw? look, Heathcliff! they be
instrument that will do execution - you must beware of your eye.'
'Iwould wrench they off her finger, if they ever menace I,' he
answer, brutally, when the door have close after she. 'but what
do you mean by tease the creature in that manner, Cathy? you
be not speak the truth, be you?'
'I assure you I be,' she return. 'she have be die for your
sake several week, and rave about you this morning, and pour
forth a deluge of abuse, because I represent your failing in a
plain light, for the purpose of mitigate her adoration. but
donot notice it far: I wish to punish her sauciness, thatbe
all. I like she too well, my dear Heathcliff, to let you
absolutely seize and devour she up.'
'and I like she too ill to attempt it,' say he, 'except in a very
ghoulish fashion. youwould hear of odd thing if I live alone with
that mawkish, waxen face: the most ordinary would be paint on
its white the colour of the rainbow, and turn the blue eye
black, every day or two: they detestably resemble Linton's.'
'Delectably!' observe Catherine. 'they be dove's eye -
angel's!'
'shebe her brother's heir, be she not?' he ask, after a brief
silence.
'I should be sorry to think so,' return his companion. 'half a
dozen nephew shall erase her title, please heaven! abstract your
mind from the subject at present: you be too prone to covet your
neighbour's good; remember this neighbour's good be mine.'
'if they be mine, they would be none the less that,' say
Heathcliff; 'but though Isabella Linton may be silly, she be
scarcely mad; and, in short, wewill dismiss the matter, as you
advise.'
from their tongue they do dismiss it; and Catherine, probably,
from her thought. the other, I feel certain, recall it often in
the course of the evening. I see he smile to himself - grin
rather - and lapse into ominous musing whenever Mrs. Linton have
occasion to be absent from the apartment.
I determine to watch his movement. my heart invariably cleave
to the master's, in preference to Catherine's side: with reason I
imagine, for he be kind, and trustful, and honourable; and she -
she could not be call opposite, yet she seem to allow herself
such wide latitude, that I have little faith in her principle, and
still less sympathy for her feeling. I want something to happen
which might have the effect of free both Wuthering Heights and
the Grange of Mr. Heathcliff quietly; leave we as we have be
prior to his advent. his visit be a continual nightmare to I;
and, I suspect, to my master also. his abode at the Heights be
an oppression past explain. I feel that God have forsake the
stray sheep there to its own wicked wandering, and an evil beast
prowl between it and the fold, wait his time to spring and
destroy.
CHAPTER XI
sometimes, while meditate on these thing in solitude, Ihave get
up in a sudden terror, and put on my bonnet to go see how all be
at the farm. Ihave persuade my conscience that it be a duty to
warn he how people talk regard his way; and then Ihave
recollect his confirm bad habit, and, hopeless of benefit
he, have flinch from re-enter the dismal house, doubt if I
could bear to be take at my word.
one time I pass the old gate, go out of my way, on a journey
to Gimmerton. it be about the period that my narrative have
reach: a bright frosty afternoon; the ground bare, and the road
hard and dry. I come to a stone where the highway branch off on
to the moor at your left hand; a rough sand-pillar, with the
letter W. H. cut on its north side, on the east, G., and on the
south-west, T. G. it serve as a guide-post to the Grange, the
Heights, and village. the sun shine yellow on its grey head,
remind I of summer; and I cannot say why, but all at once a
gush of child's sensation flow into my heart. Hindley and I
hold it a favourite spot twenty year before. I gaze long at the
weather-wear block; and, stoop down, perceive a hole near the
bottom still full of snail-shell and pebble, which we be fond
of store there with more perishable thing; and, as fresh as
reality, it appear that I behold my early playmate seat on the
wither turf: his dark, square head bend forward, and his little
hand scoop out the earth with a piece of slate. 'Poor Hindley!'
I exclaim, involuntarily. I start: my bodily eye be cheat
into a momentary belief that the child lift its face and star
straight into mine! it vanish in a twinkling; but immediately I
feel an irresistible yearning to be at the Heights. superstition
urge I to comply with this impulse: suppose he should be dead!
I think - or should die soon! - suppose it be a sign of
death! the nearer I get to the house the more agitated I grow; and
on catch sight of it I tremble in every limb. the apparition
have outstrip I: it stand look through the gate. that be
my first idea on observe an elf-locked, brown-eyed boy set
his ruddy countenance against the bar. further reflection
suggest this must be Hareton, MY Hareton, not alter greatly
since I leave he, ten month since.
'God bless thee, darling!' I cry, forget instantaneously my
foolish fear. 'Hareton, itbe nelly! nelly, thy nurse.'
he retreat out of arm's length, and pick up a large flint.
'I be come to see thy father, Hareton,' I add, guess from the
action that nelly, if she live in his memory at all, be not
recognise as one with I.
he raise his missile to hurl it; I commence a soothe speech,
but could not stay his hand: the stone strike my bonnet; and then
ensue, from the stammer lip of the little fellow, a string of
curse, which, whether he comprehend they or not, be deliver
with practised emphasis, and distort his baby feature into a
shocking expression of malignity. you may be certain this grieve
more than anger I. fit to cry, I take an orange from my pocket,
and offer it to propitiate he. he hesitate, and then snatch
it from my hold; as if he fancy I only intend to tempt and
disappoint he. I show another, keep it out of his reach.
'who have teach you those fine word, my bairn?' I inquire. 'the
curate?'
'damn the curate, and thee! gie I that,' he reply.
'tell we where you get your lesson, and you shall have it,' say
I. 'whobe your master?'
'devil daddy,' be his answer.
'and what do you learn from daddy?' I continue.
he jump at the fruit; I raise it higher. 'what do he teach
you?' I ask.
'naught,' say he, 'but to keep out of his gait. daddy cannot bide
I, because I swear at he.'
'ah! and the devil teach you to swear at daddy?' I observe.
'ay - nay,' he drawl.
'who, then?'
'Heathcliff.'
'I ask if he like Mr. Heathcliff.'
'ay!' he answer again.
desire to have his reason for like he, I could only gather
the sentence - 'I known't: he pay dad back what he gi to I -
he curse daddy for curse I. he say I mun do as I will.'
'and the curate do not teach you to read and write, then?' I
pursue.
'no, I be tell the curate should have his - tooth dash down his
- throat, if he step over the threshold - Heathcliff have
promise that!'
I put the orange in his hand, and bid he tell his father that a
woman call Nelly Dean be wait to speak with he, by the
garden gate. he go up the walk, and enter the house; but,
instead of Hindley, Heathcliff appear on the door-stone; and I
turn directly and run down the road as hard as ever I could race,
make no halt till I gain the guide-post, and feeling as scar
as if I have raise a goblin. this be not much connect with Miss
Isabella's affair: except that it urge I to resolve far on
mount vigilant guard, and do my utmost to cheek the spread of
such bad influence at the Grange: even though I should wake a
domestic storm, by thwart Mrs. Linton's pleasure.
the next time Heathcliff come my young lady chance to be feed
some pigeon in the court. she have never speak a word to her
sister-in-law for three day; but she have likewise drop she
fretful complaining, and we find it a great comfort. Heathcliff
have not the habit of bestow a single unnecessary civility on
Miss Linton, I know. now, as soon as he behold she, his first
precaution be to take a sweeping survey of the house-front. I be
stand by the kitchen-window, but I draw out of sight. he then
step across the pavement to she, and say something: she seem
embarrassed, and desirous of get away; to prevent it, he lay
his hand on her arm. she avert her face: he apparently put some
question which she have no mind to answer. there be another rapid
glance at the house, and suppose himself unseen, the scoundrel
have the impudence to embrace she.
'Judas! traitor!' I ejaculate. 'you be a hypocrite, too, be
you? a deliberate deceiver.'
'who be, nelly?' say Catherine's voice at my elbow: I have be
over-intent on watch the pair outside to mark her entrance.
'your worthless friend!' I answer, warmly: 'the sneak rascal
yonder. ah, he have catch a glimpse of we - he be come in! I
wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for make
love to Miss, when he tell you he hat she?'
Mrs. Linton see Isabella tear herself free, and run into the
garden; and a minute after, Heathcliff open the door. I couldnot
withhold give some loose to my indignation; but Catherine angrily
insist on silence, and threaten to order I out of the kitchen,
if I dare to be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue.
'to hear you, people might think you be the mistress!' she cry.
'you want set down in your right place! Heathcliff, what be
you about, raise this stir? I say you must let Isabella alone!
- I beg you will, unless you be tired of be receive here, and
wish Linton to draw the bolt against you!'
'God forbid that he should try!' answer the black villain. I
detest he just then. 'God keep he meek and patient! every day
I grow madder after send he to heaven!'
'hush!' say Catherine, shut the inner door! 'donot vex I.
why have you disregard my request? do she come across you on
purpose?'
'what be it to you?' he growl. 'I have a right to kiss she, if
she choose; and you have no right to object. I be not your
husband: you neednot be jealous of I!'
'Ibe not jealous of you,' reply the mistress; 'Ibe jealous for
you. clear your face: you sha'n't scowl at I! if you like
Isabella, you shall marry she. but do you like she? tell the
truth, Heathcliff! there, you willnot answer. Ibe certain you
donot.'
'and would Mr. Linton approve of his sister marry that man?' I
inquire.
'Mr. Linton should approve,' return my lady, decisively.
'he might spare himself the trouble,' say Heathcliff: 'I could do
as well without his approbation. and as to you, Catherine, I have
a mind to speak a few word now, while we be at it. I want you to
be aware that I know you have treat I infernally - infernally!
do you hear? and if you flatter yourself that I donot perceive it,
you be a fool; and if you think I can be console by sweet word,
you be an idiot: and if you fancy Iwill suffer unrevenged, Iwill
convince you of the contrary, in a very little while! meantime,
thank you for tell I your sister-in-law's secret: I swear Iwill
make the most of it. and stand you aside!'
'what new phase of his character be this?' exclaim Mrs. Linton,
in amazement. 'Ihave treat you infernally - and youwill take your
revenge! how will you take it, ungrateful brute? how have I
treat you infernally?'
'I seek no revenge on you,' reply Heathcliff, less vehemently.
'thatbe not the plan. the tyrant grind down his slave and they
donot turn against he; they crush those beneath they. you be
welcome to torture I to death for your amusement, only allow I to
amuse myself a little in the same style, and refrain from insult as
much as you be able. have level my palace, donot erect a
hovel and complacently admire your own charity in give I that
for a home. if I imagine you really wish I to marry Isabel,
Iwould cut my throat!'
'oh, the evil be that I be not jealous, be it?' cry Catherine.
'well, I willnot repeat my offer of a wife: it be as bad as offer
Satan a lost soul. your bliss lie, like his, in inflict
misery. you prove it. Edgar be restore from the ill-temper he
give way to at your coming; I begin to be secure and tranquil; and
you, restless to know we at peace, appear resolve on exciting a
quarrel. Quarrel with Edgar, if you please, Heathcliff, and
deceive his sister: youwill hit on exactly the most efficient
method of revenge yourself on I.'
the conversation cease. Mrs. Linton sit down by the fire, flushed
and gloomy. the spirit which serve she be grow intractable:
she could neither lay nor control it. he stand on the hearth with
fold arm, brood on his evil thought; and in this position I
leave they to seek the master, who be wonder what keep Catherine
below so long.
'Ellen,' say he, when I enter, 'have you see your mistress?'
'yes; shebe in the kitchen, sir,' I answer. 'shebe sadly put out
by Mr. Heathcliff's behaviour: and, indeed, I do think itbe time
to arrange his visit on another footing. there's harm in be
too soft, and now itbe come to this - .' and I relate the scene
in the court, and, as near as I dare, the whole subsequent
dispute. I fancy it could not be very prejudicial to Mrs.
Linton; unless she make it so afterwards, by assume the defensive
for her guest. Edgar Linton have difficulty in hear I to the
close. his first word reveal that he do not clear his wife of
blame.
'this be insufferable!' he exclaim. 'it be disgraceful that she
should own he for a friend, and force his company on I! call I
two man out of the hall, Ellen. Catherine shall linger no long
to argue with the low ruffian - I have humour she enough.'
he descend, and bid the servant wait in the passage, go,
follow by I, to the kitchen. its occupant have recommence
their angry discussion: Mrs. Linton, at least, be scold with
renew vigour; Heathcliff have move to the window, and hang his
head, somewhat cow by her violent rating apparently. he see the
master first, and make a hasty motion that she should be silent;
which she obey, abruptly, on discover the reason of his
intimation.
'how be this?' say Linton, address she; 'what notion of
propriety must you have to remain here, after the language which
have be hold to you by that blackguard? I suppose, because it be
his ordinary talk you think nothing of it: you be habituate to
his baseness, and, perhaps, imagine I can get use to it too!'
'have you be listen at the door, Edgar?' ask the mistress,
in a tone particularly calculate to provoke her husband, imply
both carelessness and contempt of his irritation. Heathcliff, who
have raise his eye at the former speech, give a sneer laugh at
the latter; on purpose, it seem, to draw Mr. Linton's attention
to he. he succeed; but Edgar do not mean to entertain he with
any high flight of passion.
'Ihave be so far forbear with you, sir,' he say quietly; 'not
that I be ignorant of your miserable, degraded character, but I
feel you be only partly responsible for that; and Catherine
wish to keep up your acquaintance, I acquiesce - foolishly.
your presence be a moral poison that would contaminate the most
virtuous: for that cause, and to prevent bad consequence, I
shall deny you hereafter admission into this house, and give notice
now that I require your instant departure. three minute' delay
will render it involuntary and ignominious.
Heathcliff measure the height and breadth of the speaker with an
eye full of derision.
'Cathy, this lamb of yours threaten like a bull!' he say. 'it be
in danger of split its skull against my knuckle. by God! Mr.
Linton, Ibe mortally sorry that you be not worth knock down!'
my master glance towards the passage, and sign I to fetch the
man: he have no intention of hazard a personal encounter. I
obey the hint; but Mrs. Linton, suspect something, follow;
and when I attempt to call they, she pull I back, slam the
door to, and lock it.
'Fair mean!' she say, in answer to her husband's look of angry
surprise. 'if you have not courage to attack he, make an apology,
or allow yourself to be beat. it will correct you of feign
more valour than you possess. no, Iwill swallow the key before you
shall get it! Ibe delightfully reward for my kindness to each!
after constant indulgence of one's weak nature, and the other's bad
one, I earn for thank two sample of blind ingratitude, stupid to
absurdity! Edgar, I be defend you and your; and I wish
Heathcliff may flog you sick, for dare to think an evil thought
of I!'
it do not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on
the master. he try to wrest the key from Catherine's grasp, and
for safety she fling it into the hot part of the fire;
whereupon Mr. Edgar be take with a nervous trembling, and his
countenance grow deadly pale. for his life he could not avert that
excess of emotion: mingle anguish and humiliation overcome he
completely. he leant on the back of a chair, and cover his face.
'oh, heaven! in old day this would win you knighthood!'
exclaim Mrs. Linton. 'we be vanquish! we be vanquish!
Heathcliff would as soon lift a finger at you as the king would
march his army against a colony of mouse. cheer up! you sha'n't be
hurt! your type be not a lamb, itbe a suck leveret.'
'I wish you joy of the milk-blooded coward, Cathy!' say she
friend. 'I compliment you on your taste. and that be the
slaver, shiver thing you prefer to I! I would not strike
he with my fist, but Iwould kick he with my foot, and experience
considerable satisfaction. be he weep, or be he go to faint
for fear?'
the fellow approach and give the chair on which Linton rest a
push. hewould well have keep his distance: my master quickly
spring erect, and strike he full on the throat a blow that would
have level a slighter man. it take his breath for a minute; and
while he choke, Mr. Linton walk out by the back door into the
yard, and from thence to the front entrance.
'there! youhave do with come here,' cry Catherine. 'get away,
now; hewill return with a brace of pistol and half-a-dozen
assistant. if he do overhear we, of course hewould never forgive
you. youhave play I an ill turn, Heathcliff! but go - make
haste! Iwould rather see Edgar at bay than you.'
'do you suppose Ibe go with that blow burn in my gullet?' he
thunder. 'by hell, no! Iwill crush his rib in like a rotten
hazel-nut before I cross the threshold! if I donot floor he now,
I shall murder he some time; so, as you value his existence, let
I get at he!'
'he be not come,' I interpose, frame a bit of a lie. 'therebe
the coachman and the two gardener; youwill surely not wait to be
thrust into the road by they! each have a bludgeon; and master
will, very likely, be watch from the parlour-window to see that
they fulfil his order.'
the gardener and coachman be there: but Linton be with they.
they have already enter the court. Heathcliff, on the second
thought, resolve to avoid a struggle against three underling:
he seize the poker, smash the lock from the inner door, and make
his escape as they tramp in.
Mrs. Linton, who be very much excited, bid I accompany her up-
stair. she do not know my share in contribute to the
disturbance, and I be anxious to keep she in ignorance.
'Ibe nearly distracted, nelly!' she exclaim, throw herself on
the sofa. 'a thousand smith' hammer be beat in my head!
tell Isabella to shun I; this uproar be owe to she; and should
she or any one else aggravate my anger at present, I shall get
wild. and, nelly, say to Edgar, if you see he again to-night,
that Ibe in danger of be seriously ill. I wish it may prove
true. he have startle and distress I shockingly! I want to
frighten he. besides, he might come and begin a string of abuse
or complaining; Ibe certain I should recriminate, and God know
where we should end! will you do so, my good nelly? you be aware
that I be no way blamable in this matter. what possess he to
turn listener? Heathcliff's talk be outrageous, after you leave
we; but I could soon have divert he from Isabella, and the rest
mean nothing. now all be dash wrong; by the fool's craving to
hear evil of self, that haunt some people like a demon! have Edgar
never gather our conversation, he would never have be the bad
for it. really, when he open on I in that unreasonable tone of
displeasure after I have scold Heathcliff till I be hoarse for
he, I do not care hardly what they do to each other; especially
as I feel that, however the scene close, we should all be drive
asunder for nobody know how long! well, if I cannot keep
Heathcliff for my friend - if Edgar will be mean and jealous, Iwill
try to break their heart by break my own. that will be a
prompt way of finish all, when I be push to extremity! but
itbe a deed to be reserve for a forlorn hope; Iwould not take Linton
by surprise with it. to this point he have be discreet in
dread to provoke I; you must represent the peril of quit
that policy, and remind he of my passionate temper, verging, when
kindle, on frenzy. I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of
that countenance, and look rather more anxious about I.'
the stolidity with which I receive these instruction be, no
doubt, rather exasperating: for they be deliver in perfect
sincerity; but I believe a person who could plan the turning of
her fit of passion to account, beforehand, might, by exert she
will, manage to control herself tolerably, even while under their
influence; and I do not wish to 'frighten' her husband, as she
say, and multiply his annoyance for the purpose of serve her
selfishness. therefore I say nothing when I meet the master come
towards the parlour; but I take the liberty of turn back to
listen whether they would resume their quarrel together. he begin
to speak first.
'remain where you be, Catherine,' he say; without any anger in
his voice, but with much sorrowful despondency. 'I shall not stay.
I be neither come to wrangle nor be reconcile; but I wish just to
learn whether, after this evening's event, you intend to continue
your intimacy with - '
'oh, for mercy's sake,' interrupt the mistress, stamp her
foot, 'for mercy's sake, let we hear no more of it now! your cold
blood cannot be work into a fever: your vein be full of ice-
water; but mine be boil, and the sight of such chillness make
they dance.'
'to get rid of I, answer my question,' persevered Mr. Linton.
'you must answer it; and that violence do not alarm I. I have
find that you can be as stoical as anyone, when you please. will
you give up Heathcliff hereafter, or will you give up I? it be
impossible for you to be MY friend and his at the same time; and I
absolutely require to know which you choose.'
'I require to be let alone?' exclaim Catherine, furiously. 'I
demand it! donot you see I can scarcely stand? Edgar, you - you
leave I!'
she ring the bell till it break with a twang; I enter leisurely.
it be enough to try the temper of a saint, such senseless, wicked
rage! there she lie dash her head against the arm of the sofa,
and grind her tooth, so that you might fancy she would crash
they to splinter! Mr. Linton stand look at she in sudden
compunction and fear. he tell I to fetch some water. she have no
breath for speak. I bring a glass full; and as she would not
drink, I sprinkle it on her face. in a few second she stretch
herself out stiff, and turn up her eye, while her cheek, at
once blanched and livid, assume the aspect of death. Linton
look terrified.
'there be nothing in the world the matter,' I whisper. I do not
want he to yield, though I could not help be afraid in my
heart.
'she have blood on her lip!' he say, shudder.
'never mind!' I answer, tartly. and I tell he how she have
resolve, previous to his coming, on exhibit a fit of frenzy. I
incautiously give the account aloud, and she hear I; for she
start up - her hair fly over her shoulder, her eye flash,
the muscle of her neck and arm stand out preternaturally. I
make up my mind for broken bone, at least; but she only glare
about she for an instant, and then rush from the room. the
master direct I to follow; I do, to her chamber-door: she
hinder I from go far by secure it against I.
as she never offer to descend to breakfast next morning, I go
to ask whether she would have some carry up. 'no!' she reply,
peremptorily. the same question be repeat at dinner and tea;
and again on the morrow after, and receive the same answer. Mr.
Linton, on his part, spend his time in the library, and do not
inquire concern his wife's occupation. Isabella and he have have
an hour's interview, during which he try to elicit from her some
sentiment of proper horror for Heathcliff's advance: but he could
make nothing of her evasive reply, and be oblige to close the
examination unsatisfactorily; add, however, a solemn warning,
that if she be so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor,
it would dissolve all bond of relationship between herself and
he.
CHAPTER XII
WHILE Miss Linton mop about the park and garden, always silent,
and almost always in tear; and her brother shut himself up among
book that he never open - wearying, I guess, with a continual
vague expectation that Catherine, repent her conduct, would come
of her own accord to ask pardon, and seek a reconciliation - and
she fast pertinaciously, under the idea, probably, that at every
meal Edgar be ready to choke for her absence, and pride alone hold
he from run to cast himself at her foot; I go about my
household duty, convince that the Grange have but one sensible
soul in its wall, and that lodge in my body. I waste no
condolence on Miss, nor any expostulation on my mistress; nor do
I pay much attention to the sigh of my master, who yearn to hear
his lady's name, since he might not hear her voice. I determine
they should come about as they please for I; and though it be a
tiresomely slow process, I begin to rejoice at length in a faint
dawn of its progress: as I think at first.
Mrs. Linton, on the third day, unbar her door, and have
finish the water in her pitcher and decanter, desire a renew
supply, and a basin of gruel, for she believe she be die. that
I set down as a speech mean for Edgar's ear; I believe no such
thing, so I keep it to myself and bring she some tea and dry
toast. she eat and drink eagerly, and sink back on her pillow
again, clench her hand and groaning. 'oh, I will die,' she
exclaim, 'since no one care anything about I. I wish I have not
take that.' then a good while after I hear she murmur, 'no, Iwill
not die - hewould be glad - he do not love I at all - he would
never miss I!'
'do you want anything, ma'am?' I inquire, still preserve my
external composure, in spite of her ghastly countenance and
strange, exaggerated manner.
'what be that apathetic be do?' she demand, push the
thick entangled lock from her waste face. 'has he fall into a
lethargy, or be he dead?'
'neither,' reply I; 'if you mean Mr. Linton. hebe tolerably
well, I think, though his study occupy he rather more than they
ought: he be continually among his book, since he have no other
society.'
I should not have speak so if I have know her true condition, but
I could not get rid of the notion that she act a part of her
disorder.
'among his book!' she cry, confound. 'and I die! I on the
brink of the grave! my God! do he know how Ibe alter?'
continue she, star at her reflection in a mirror hang
against the opposite wall. 'be that Catherine Linton? he
imagine I in a pet - in play, perhaps. cannot you inform he
that it be frightful earnest? nelly, if it be not too late, as
soon as I learn how he feel, Iwill choose between these two:
either to starve at once - that would be no punishment unless he
have a heart - or to recover, and leave the country. be you
speak the truth about he now? take care. be he actually so
utterly indifferent for my life?'
'why, ma'am,' I answer, 'the master have no idea of your being
derange; and of course he do not fear that you will let yourself
die of hunger.'
'you think not? cannot you tell he I will?' she return.
'persuade he! speak of your own mind: say you be certain I
will!'
'no, you forget, Mrs. Linton,' I suggest, 'that you have eat
some food with a relish this evening, and to-morrow you will
perceive its good effect.'
'if I be only sure it would kill he,' she interrupt, 'Iwould kill
myself directly! these three awful night Ihave never close my
lid - and oh, Ihave be torment! Ihave be haunt, nelly! but
I begin to fancy you donot like I. how strange! I think,
though everybody hat and despise each other, they could not
avoid love I. and they have all turn to enemy in a few
hour: they have, Ibe positive; the people here. how dreary to
meet death, surround by their cold face! Isabella, terrify
and repel, afraid to enter the room, it would be so dreadful to
watch Catherine go. and Edgar stand solemnly by to see it over;
then offer prayer of thank to God for restore peace to his
house, and go back to his book! what in the name of all that
feel have he to do with BOOKS, when I be die?'
she could not bear the notion which I have put into her head of Mr.
Linton's philosophical resignation. toss about, she increase
her feverish bewilderment to madness, and tear the pillow with her
tooth; then raise herself up all burn, desire that I would
open the window. we be in the middle of winter, the wind blow
strong from the north-east, and I object. both the expression
flitting over her face, and the change of her mood, begin to
alarm I terribly; and bring to my recollection her former
illness, and the doctor's injunction that she should not be
cross. a minute previously she be violent; now, support on
one arm, and not notice my refusal to obey she, she seem to
find childish diversion in pull the feather from the rent she
have just make, and range they on the sheet accord to their
different specie: her mind have stray to other association.
'thatbe a turkey's,' she murmur to herself; 'and this be a wild
duck's; and this be a pigeon's. ah, they put pigeon' feather in
the pillow - no wonder I couldnot die! let I take care to throw
it on the floor when I lie down. and here be a moor-cock's; and
this - I should know it among a thousand - itbe a lapwing's. Bonny
bird; wheel over our head in the middle of the moor. it want
to get to its nest, for the cloud have touch the swell, and it
feel rain come. this feather be pick up from the heath, the
bird be not shoot: we see its nest in the winter, full of little
skeleton. Heathcliff set a trap over it, and the old one dare
not come. I make he promise hewould never shoot a lapwing after
that, and he donot. yes, here be more! do he shoot my
lapwing, nelly? be they red, any of they? let I look.'
'give over with that baby-work!' I interrupt, drag the pillow
away, and turn the hole towards the mattress, for she be
remove its content by handful. 'lie down and shut your eye:
yoube wander. therebe a mess! the down be fly about like
snow.'
I go here and there collect it.
'I see in you, nelly,' she continue dreamily, 'an aged woman: you
have grey hair and bent shoulder. this bed be the fairy cave
under Penistone crag, and you be gather elf-bolt to hurt our
heifer; pretend, while I be near, that they be only lock of
wool. thatbe what youwill come to fifty year hence: I know you
be not so now. Ibe not wander: yoube mistaken, or else I
should believe you really be that wither hag, and I should
think I be under Penistone Crags; and Ibe conscious itbe night,
and there be two candle on the table make the black press shine
like jet.'
'the black press? where be that?' I ask. 'you be talk in
your sleep!'
'itbe against the wall, as it always be,' she reply. 'it do
appear odd - I see a face in it!'
'therebe no press in the room, and never be,' say I, resume my
seat, and loop up the curtain that I might watch she.
'donot you see that face?' she inquire, gaze earnestly at the
mirror.
and say what I could, I be incapable of make she comprehend it
to be her own; so I rise and cover it with a shawl.
'itbe behind there still!' she pursue, anxiously. 'and it
stir. who be it? I hope it will not come out when you be
go! oh! nelly, the room be haunt! Ibe afraid of be
alone!'
I take her hand in mine, and bid she be compose; for a succession
of shudder convulse her frame, and she would keep strain she
gaze towards the glass.
'therebe nobody here!' I insist. 'it be YOURSELF, Mrs. Linton:
you know it a while since.'
'Myself!' she gasp, 'and the clock be strike twelve! itbe
true, then! thatbe dreadful!'
her finger clutch the clothe, and gather they over her eye.
I attempt to steal to the door with an intention of call she
husband; but I be summon back by a pierce shriek - the shawl
have drop from the frame.
'why, what be the matter?' cry I. 'who be coward now? wake up!
that be the glass - the mirror, Mrs. Linton; and you see yourself
in it, and there be I too by your side.'
Trembling and bewildered, she hold I fast, but the horror
gradually pass from her countenance; its paleness give place to a
glow of shame.
'oh, dear! I think I be at home,' she sigh. 'I think I be
lie in my chamber at Wuthering Heights. because Ibe weak, my
brain get confuse, and I scream unconsciously. donot say
anything; but stay with I. I dread sleep: my dream appal
I.'
'a sound sleep would do you good, ma'am,' I answer: 'and I hope
this suffering will prevent your try starve again.'
'oh, if I be but in my own bed in the old house!' she go on
bitterly, wring her hand. 'and that wind sound in the fir
by the lattice. do let I feel it - it come straight down the
moor - do let I have one breath!' to pacify she I hold the
casement ajar a few second. a cold blast rush through; I close
it, and return to my post. she lie still now, her face bath in
tear. exhaustion of body have entirely subdue her spirit: our
fiery Catherine be no well than a wail child.
'how long be it since I shut myself in here?' she ask, suddenly
revive.
'it be Monday evening,' I reply, 'and this be Thursday night, or
rather Friday morning, at present.'
'what! of the same week?' she exclaim. 'only that brief time?'
'long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill-temper,'
observe I.
'well, it seem a weary number of hour,' she mutter doubtfully:
'it must be more. I remember be in the parlour after they have
quarrel, and Edgar be cruelly provoking, and I run into
this room desperate. as soon as ever I have bar the door, utter
blackness overwhelm I, and I fall on the floor. I couldnot
explain to Edgar how certain I feel of have a fit, or go
rag mad, if he persist in tease I! I have no command of
tongue, or brain, and he do not guess my agony, perhaps: it
barely leave I sense to try to escape from he and his voice.
before I recover sufficiently to see and hear, it begin to be
dawn, and, Nelly, Iwill tell you what I think, and what have keep
recur and recurring till I fear for my reason. I think as
I lay there, with my head against that table leg, and my eye dimly
discern the grey square of the window, that I be enclose in
the oak-panel bed at home; and my heart ache with some great
grief which, just wake, I could not recollect. I ponder, and
worry myself to discover what it could be, and, most strangely,
the whole last seven year of my life grow a blank! I do not
recall that they have be at all. I be a child; my father be
just bury, and my misery arise from the separation that Hindley
have order between I and Heathcliff. I be lay alone, for the
first time; and, rouse from a dismal doze after a night of
weeping, I lift my hand to push the panel aside: it strike the
table-top! I sweep it along the carpet, and then memory burst in:
my late anguish be swallow in a paroxysm of despair. I cannot
say why I feel so wildly wretched: it must have be temporary
derangement; for there be scarcely cause. but, suppose at twelve
year old I have be wrench from the Heights, and every early
association, and my all in all, as Heathcliff be at that time, and
be convert at a stroke into Mrs. Linton, the lady of
Thrushcross Grange, and the wife of a stranger: an exile, and
outcast, thenceforth, from what have be my world. you may fancy a
glimpse of the abyss where I grovel! shake your head as you
will, nelly, you have help to unsettle I! you should have
speak to Edgar, indeed you should, and compel he to leave I
quiet! oh, Ibe burn! I wish I be out of door! I wish I
be a girl again, half savage and hardy, and free; and laugh at
injury, not madden under they! why be I so change? why do
my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few word? Ibe sure I
should be myself be I once among the heather on those hill.
open the window again wide: fasten it open! quick, why donot you
move?'
'because I willnot give you your death of cold,' I answer.
'you willnot give I a chance of life, you mean,' she say, sullenly.
'however, Ibe not helpless yet; Iwill open it myself.'
and slide from the bed before I could hinder she, she cross the
room, walk very uncertainly, throw it back, and bent out,
careless of the frosty air that cut about her shoulder as keen as
a knife. I entreat, and finally attempt to force she to
retire. but I soon find she delirious strength much surpass
mine (she be delirious, I become convinced by her subsequent
action and raving). there be no moon, and everything beneath
lie in misty darkness: not a light gleam from any house, far or
near all have be extinguish long ago: and those at Wuthering
Heights be never visible - still she assert she catch their
shin.
'look!' she cry eagerly, 'thatbe my room with the candle in it,
and the tree sway before it; and the other candle be in
Joseph's garret. Joseph sit up late, donot he? hebe wait
till I come home that he may lock the gate. well, hewill wait a
while yet. itbe a rough journey, and a sad heart to travel it; and
we must pass by Gimmerton Kirk to go that journey! wehave brave
its ghost often together, and dare each other to stand among the
graf and ask they to come. but, Heathcliff, if I dare you now,
will you venture? if you do, Iwill keep you. Iwill not lie there by
myself: they may bury I twelve foot deep, and throw the church
down over I, but I willnot rest till you be with I. I never
will!'
she pause, and resume with a strange smile. 'hebe consider -
hewould rather Iwould come to he! find a way, then! not through that
kirkyard. you be slow! be content, you always follow I!'
perceive it vain to argue against her insanity, I be plan
how I could reach something to wrap about she, without quit my
hold of herself (for I could not trust she alone by the gap
lattice), when, to my consternation, I hear the rattle of the
door-handle, and Mr. Linton enter. he have only then come from
the library; and, in pass through the lobby, have notice our
talking and be attract by curiosity, or fear, to examine what
it signify, at that late hour.
'oh, sir!' I cry, check the exclamation rise to his lip at
the sight which meet he, and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber.
'my poor mistress be ill, and she quite master I: I cannot
manage she at all; pray, come and persuade she to go to bed.
forget your anger, for shebe hard to guide any way but her own.'
'Catherine ill?' he say, hasten to we. 'shut the window,
Ellen! Catherine! why - '
he be silent. the haggardness of Mrs. Linton's appearance smite
he speechless, and he could only glance from she to I in
horrified astonishment.
'shebe be fret here,' I continue, 'and eat scarcely
anything, and never complain: she would admit none of we till
this evening, and so we couldnot inform you of her state, as we
be not aware of it ourselves; but it be nothing.'
I feel I utter my explanation awkwardly; the master frown.
'it be nothing, be it, Ellen Dean?' he say sternly. 'you shall
account more clearly for keep I ignorant of this!' and he take
his wife in his arm, and look at she with anguish.
at first she give he no glance of recognition: he be invisible
to her abstract gaze. the delirium be not fix, however;
have wean her eye from contemplate the outer darkness, by
degree she centre her attention on he, and discover who it be
that hold she.
'ah! you be come, be you, Edgar Linton?' she say, with angry
animation. 'you be one of those thing that be ever find when
least want, and when you be want, never! I suppose we shall
have plenty of lamentation now - I see we shall - but they cannot
keep I from my narrow home out yonder: my resting-place, where
Ibe bind before spring be over! there it be: not among the
Lintons, mind, under the chapel-roof, but in the open air, with a
head-stone; and you may please yourself whether you go to they or
come to I!'
'Catherine, what have you do?' commence the master. 'be I
nothing to you any more? do you love that wretch heath - '
'hush!' cry Mrs. Linton. 'hush, this moment! you mention that
name and I end the matter instantly by a spring from the window!
what you touch at present you may have; but my soul will be on that
hill-top before you lay hand on I again. I donot want you,
Edgar: Ibe past want you. return to your book. Ibe glad you
possess a consolation, for all you have in I be go.'
'her mind wander, sir,' I interpose. 'she have be talk
nonsense the whole evening; but let she have quiet, and proper
attendance, and shewill rally. Hereafter, we must be cautious how
we vex she.'
'I desire no further advice from you,' answer Mr. Linton. 'you
know your mistress's nature, and you encourage I to harass she.
and not to give I one hint of how she have be these three day!
it be heartless! month of sickness could not cause such a
change!'
I begin to defend myself, think it too bad to be blame for
anotherbe wicked waywardness. 'I know Mrs. Linton's nature to be
headstrong and domineering,' cry I: 'but I donot know that you
wish to foster her fierce temper! I donot know that, to humour
she, I should wink at Mr. Heathcliff. I perform the duty of a
faithful servant in tell you, and I have get a faithful
servant's wage! well, it will teach I to be careful next time.
next time you may gather intelligence for yourself!'
'the next time you bring a tale to I you shall quit my service,
Ellen Dean,' he reply.
'youwould rather hear nothing about it, I suppose, then, Mr. Linton?'
say I. 'Heathcliff have your permission to come a-courting to
Miss, and to drop in at every opportunity your absence offer, on
purpose to poison the mistress against you?'
confuse as Catherine be, her wit be alert at apply our
conversation.
'ah! Nelly have play traitor,' she exclaim, passionately.
'nelly be my hidden enemy. you witch! so you do seek elf-bolt to
hurt we! let I go, and Iwill make her rue! Iwill make her howl a
recantation!'
a maniac's fury kindle under her brow; she struggle desperately
to disengage herself from Linton's arm. I feel no inclination to
tarry the event; and, resolve to seek medical aid on my own
responsibility, I quit the chamber.
in pass the garden to reach the road, at a place where a bridle
hook be drive into the wall, I see something white move
irregularly, evidently by another agent than the wind.
notwithstanding my hurry, I stay to examine it, lest ever after I
should have the conviction impress on my imagination that it be
a creature of the other world. my surprise and perplexity be
great on discover, by touch more than vision, Miss Isabella's
springer, Fanny, suspend by a handkerchief, and nearly at its
last gasp. I quickly release the animal, and lift it into the
garden. I have see it follow its mistress up-stair when she go
to bed; and wonder much how it could have get out there, and what
mischievous person have treat it so. while untie the knot round
the hook, it seem to I that I repeatedly catch the beat of
horse' foot gallop at some distance; but there be such a
number of thing to occupy my reflection that I hardly give the
circumstance a thought: though it be a strange sound, in that
place, at two o'clock in the morning.
Mr. Kenneth be fortunately just issue from his house to see a
patient in the village as I come up the street; and my account of
Catherine Linton's malady induce he to accompany I back
immediately. he be a plain rough man; and he make no scruple to
speak his doubt of she survive this second attack; unless she
be more submissive to his direction than she have show herself
before.
'Nelly Dean,' say he, 'I cannot help fancy therebe an extra
cause for this. what have there be to do at the Grange? wehave
odd report up here. a stout, hearty lass like Catherine do not
fall ill for a trifle; and that sort of people should not either.
itbe hard work bring they through fever, and such thing. how
do it begin?'
'the master will inform you,' I answer; 'but you be acquaint
with the Earnshaws' violent disposition, and Mrs. Linton cap they
all. I may say this; it commence in a quarrel. she be strike
during a tempest of passion with a kind of fit. thatbe her
account, at least: for she fly off in the height of it, and
lock herself up. afterwards, she refuse to eat, and now she
alternately rave and remain in a half dream; know those about
she, but have her mind fill with all sort of strange idea and
illusion.'
'Mr. Linton will be sorry?' observe Kenneth, interrogatively.
' sorry? hewill break his heart should anything happen!' I reply.
'donot alarm he more than necessary.'
'well, I tell he to beware,' say my companion; 'and he must bide
the consequence of neglect my warning! havenot he be intimate
with Mr. Heathcliff lately?'
'Heathcliff frequently visit at the Grange,' answer I, 'though
more on the strength of the mistress have know he when a boy,
than because the master like his company. at present hebe
discharge from the trouble of call; owe to some presumptuous
aspiration after Miss Linton which he manifest. I hardly think
hewill be take in again.'
'and do Miss Linton turn a cold shoulder on he?' be the
doctor's next question.
'Ibe not in her confidence,' return I, reluctant to continue the
subject.
'no, shebe a sly one,' he remark, shake his head. 'she keep
her own counsel! but shebe a real little fool. I have it from
good authority that last night (and a pretty night it be!) she and
Heathcliff be walk in the plantation at the back of your house
above two hour; and he press she not to go in again, but just
mount his horse and away with he! my informant say she could
only put he off by pledge her word of honour to be prepare on
their first meeting after that: when it be to be he donot hear;
but you urge Mr. Linton to look sharp!'
this news fill I with fresh fear; I outstrip Kenneth, and
run most of the way back. the little dog be yelp in the garden
yet. I spar a minute to open the gate for it, but instead of
go to the house door, it course up and down snuff the grass,
and would have escape to the road, have I not seize it and
convey it in with I. on ascend to Isabella's room, my
suspicion be confirm: it be empty. have I be a few hour
soon Mrs. Linton's illness might have arrest her rash step.
but what could be do now? there be a bare possibility of
overtake they if pursue instantly. I could not pursue they,
however; and I dare not rouse the family, and fill the place with
confusion; still less unfold the business to my master, absorb as
he be in his present calamity, and have no heart to spare for a
second grief! I see nothing for it but to hold my tongue, and
suffer matter to take their course; and Kenneth be arrive, I
go with a badly compose countenance to announce he. Catherine
lie in a troubled sleep: her husband have succeed in soothe the
excess of frenzy; he now hang over her pillow, watch every shade
and every change of her painfully expressive feature.
the doctor, on examine the case for himself, speak hopefully to
he of its have a favourable termination, if we could only
preserve around her perfect and constant tranquillity. to I, he
signify the threatening danger be not so much death, as
permanent alienation of intellect.
I do not close my eye that night, nor do Mr. Linton: indeed, we
never go to bed; and the servant be all up long before the
usual hour, move through the house with stealthy tread, and
exchange whisper as they encounter each other in their
vocation. every one be active but Miss Isabella; and they begin
to remark how sound she sleep: her brother, too, ask if she have
rise, and seem impatient for her presence, and hurt that she
show so little anxiety for her sister-in-law. I tremble lest he
should send I to call she; but I be spar the pain of be the
first proclaimant of her flight. one of the maid, a thoughtless
girl, who have be on an early errand to Gimmerton, come pant
up-stair, open-mouthed, and dash into the chamber, cry: 'oh,
dear, dear! what mun we have next? Master, master, our young lady
- '
'hold your noise!' cry, I hastily, enrage at her clamorous
manner.
'speak lower, Mary - what be the matter?' say Mr. Linton. 'what
ail your young lady?'
'shebe go, shebe go! Yon' Heathcliff's run off wi' she!'
gasp the girl.
'that be not true!' exclaim Linton, rise in agitation. 'it
cannot be: how have the idea enter your head? Ellen Dean, go and
seek she. it be incredible: it cannot be.'
as he speak he take the servant to the door, and then repeat his
demand to know her reason for such an assertion.
'why, I meet on the road a lad that fetch milk here,' she
stammer, 'and he ask whether we benot in trouble at the
Grange. I think he mean for missis's sickness, so I answer,
yes. then say he, "therebe somebody go after them, I guess?" I
star. he see I know nought about it, and he tell how a gentleman
and lady have stop to have a horse's shoe fasten at a
blacksmith's shop, two mile out of Gimmerton, not very long after
midnight! and how the blacksmith's lass have get up to spy who they
be: she know they both directly. and she notice the man -
Heathcliff it be, she feel certain: nob'dy could mistake he,
besides - put a sovereign in her father's hand for payment. the
lady have a cloak about her face; but have desire a sup of water,
while she drink it fall back, and she see she very plain.
Heathcliff hold both bridle as they ride on, and they set their
face from the village, and go as fast as the rough road would
let they. the lass say nothing to her father, but she tell it all
over Gimmerton this morning.'
I run and peep, for form's sake, into Isabella's room;
confirming, when I return, the servant's statement. Mr. Linton
have resume his seat by the bed; on my re-entrance, he raise his
eye, read the meaning of my blank aspect, and drop they without
give an order, or utter a word.
'be we to try any measure for overtake and bring she back,'
I inquire. 'how should we do?'
'she go of her own accord,' answer the master; 'she have a right
to go if she please. trouble I no more about she. Hereafter she
be only my sister in name: not because I disown she, but because
she have disown I.'
and that be all he say on the subject: he do not make single
inquiry far, or mention she in any way, except direct I to
send what property she have in the house to her fresh home, wherever
it be, when I know it.
CHAPTER XIII
for two month the fugitive remain absent; in those two month,
Mrs. Linton encounter and conquer the bad shock of what be
denominate a brain fever. no mother could have nurse an only
child more devotedly than Edgar tend she. day and night he be
watch, and patiently endure all the annoyance that irritable
nerve and a shake reason could inflict; and, though Kenneth
remark that what he save from the grave would only recompense
his care by form the source of constant future anxiety - in
fact, that his health and strength be be sacrifice to
preserve a mere ruin of humanity - he know no limit in gratitude
and joy when Catherine's life be declare out of danger; and hour
after hour he would sit beside she, trace the gradual return to
bodily health, and flatter his too sanguine hope with the
illusion that her mind would settle back to its right balance also,
and she would soon be entirely her former self.
the first time she leave her chamber be at the commencement of the
follow March. Mr. Linton have put on her pillow, in the morning,
a handful of golden crocus; her eye, long strange to any gleam
of pleasure, catch they in wake, and shone delight as she
gather they eagerly together.
'these be the early flower at the Heights,' she exclaim.
'they remind I of soft thaw wind, and warm sunshine, and nearly
melt snow. Edgar, be there not a south wind, and be not the snow
almost go?'
'the snow be quite go down here, darling,' reply her husband;
'and I only see two white spot on the whole range of moor: the
sky be blue, and the lark be sing, and the beck and brook
be all brim full. Catherine, last spring at this time, I be
long to have you under this roof; now, I wish you be a mile or
two up those hill: the air blow so sweetly, I feel that it would
cure you.'
'I shall never be there but once more,' say the invalid; 'and then
youwill leave I, and I shall remain for ever. next spring youwill
long again to have I under this roof, and youwill look back and
think you be happy to-day.'
Linton lavish on her the kind caress, and try to cheer she
by the fond word; but, vaguely regard the flower, she let
the tear collect on her lash and stream down her cheek
unheeding. we know she be really well, and, therefore, decide
that long confinement to a single place produce much of this
despondency, and it might be partially remove by a change of
scene. the master tell I to light a fire in the many-week'
desert parlour, and to set an easy-chair in the sunshine by the
window; and then he bring she down, and she sit a long while
enjoy the genial heat, and, as we expect, revive by the
object round she: which, though familiar, be free from the
dreary association invest her hat sick chamber. by evening
she seem greatly exhaust; yet no argument could persuade she
to return to that apartment, and I have to arrange the parlour sofa
for her bed, till another room could be prepare. to obviate the
fatigue of mount and descend the stair, we fit up this,
where you lie at present - on the same floor with the parlour; and
she be soon strong enough to move from one to the other, lean
on Edgar's arm. ah, I think myself, she might recover, so wait
on as she be. and there be double cause to desire it, for on her
existence depend that of another: we cherish the hope that in
a little while Mr. Linton's heart would be gladden, and his land
secure from a stranger's gripe, by the birth of an heir.
I should mention that Isabella send to her brother, some six week
from her departure, a short note, announce her marriage with
Heathcliff. it appear dry and cold; but at the bottom be dot
in with pencil an obscure apology, and an entreaty for kind
remembrance and reconciliation, if her proceeding have offend he:
assert that she could not help it then, and be do, she have
now no power to repeal it. Linton do not reply to this, I
believe; and, in a fortnight more, I get a long letter, which I
consider odd, come from the pen of a bride just out of the
honeymoon. Iwill read it: for I keep it yet. any relic of the
dead be precious, if they be value living.
DEAR ELLEN, it begin, - I come last night to Wuthering Heights,
and hear, for the first time, that Catherine have be, and be yet,
very ill. I must not write to she, I suppose, and my brother be
either too angry or too distressed to answer what I send he.
still, I must write to somebody, and the only choice leave I be
you.
inform Edgar that Iwould give the world to see his face again - that
my heart return to Thrushcross Grange in twenty-four hour after
I leave it, and be there at this moment, full of warm feeling for
he, and Catherine! I can't follow it THOUGH - (these word be
underline) - they need not expect I, and they may draw what
conclusion they please; take care, however, to lay nothing at
the door of my weak will or deficient affection.
the remainder of the letter be for yourself alone. I want to ask
you two question: the first be, - how do you contrive to
preserve the common sympathy of human nature when you reside
here? I cannot recognise any sentiment which those around share
with I.
the second question I have great interest in; it be this - be Mr.
Heathcliff a man? if so, be he mad? and if not, be he a devil? I
sha'n't tell my reason for make this inquiry; but I beseech you
to explain, if you can, what I have marry: that be, when you
call to see I; and you must call, Ellen, very soon. donot write,
but come, and bring I something from Edgar.
now, you shall hear how I have be receive in my new home, as I
be lead to imagine the Heights will be. it be to amuse myself that
I dwell on such subject as the lack of external comfort: they
never occupy my thought, except at the moment when I miss they. I
should laugh and dance for joy, if I find their absence be the
total of my misery, and the rest be an unnatural dream!
the sun set behind the Grange as we turn on to the moor; by
that, I judge it to be six o'clock; and my companion halt half
an hour, to inspect the park, and the garden, and, probably, the
place itself, as well as he could; so it be dark when we
dismount in the paved yard of the farm-house, and your old
fellow-servant, Joseph, issue out to receive we by the light of a
dip candle. he do it with a courtesy that redound to his
credit. his first act be to elevate his torch to a level with my
face, squint malignantly, project his under-lip, and turn away.
then he take the two horse, and lead they into the stable;
reappear for the purpose of lock the outer gate, as if we
live in an ancient castle.
Heathcliff stay to speak to he, and I enter the kitchen - a
dingy, untidy hole; I daresay you would not know it, it be so
change since it be in your charge. by the fire stand a ruffianly
child, strong in limb and dirty in garb, with a look of Catherine
in his eye and about his mouth.
'this be Edgar's legal nephew,' I reflect - 'mine in a manner; I
must shake hand, and - yes - I must kiss he. it be right to
establish a good understanding at the beginning.'
I approach, and, attempt to take his chubby fist, say - 'how
do you do, my dear?'
he reply in a jargon I do not comprehend.
'shall you and I be friend, Hareton?' be my next essay at
conversation.
an oath, and a threat to set Throttler on I if I do not 'frame
off' reward my perseverance.
'hey, Throttler, lad!' whisper the little wretch, rouse a half-
breed bull-dog from its lair in a corner. 'now, wilt thou be
gang?' he ask authoritatively.
love for my life urge a compliance; I step over the threshold
to wait till the other should enter. Mr. Heathcliff be nowhere
visible; and Joseph, whom I follow to the stable, and request
to accompany I in, after star and mutter to himself, screw
up his nose and reply - 'Mim! mim! mim! do iver christian body
hear aught like it? mince un' munching! how can I tell whet ye
say?'
'I say, I wish you to come with I into the house!' I cry,
think he deaf, yet highly disgusted at his rudeness.
'none o' I! I getten summut else to do,' he answer, and
continue his work; move his lantern jaw meanwhile, and
survey my dress and countenance (the former a great deal too
fine, but the latter, Ibe sure, as sad as he could desire) with
sovereign contempt.
I walk round the yard, and through a wicket, to another door, at
which I take the liberty of knock, in hope some more civil
servant might show himself. after a short suspense, it be open
by a tall, gaunt man, without neckerchief, and otherwise extremely
slovenly; his feature be lose in mass of shaggy hair that hung
on his shoulder; and his eye, too, be like a ghostly
Catherine's with all their beauty annihilate.
'whatbe your business here?' he demand, grimly. 'who be you?'
'my name be Isabella Linton,' I reply. 'youhave see I before,
sir. Ibe lately married to Mr. Heathcliff, and he have bring I
here - I suppose, by your permission.'
'be he come back, then?' ask the hermit, glare like a hungry
wolf.
'yes - we come just now,' I say; 'but he leave I by the kitchen
door; and when I would have go in, your little boy play
sentinel over the place, and frighten I off by the help of a
bull-dog.'
'itbe well the hellish villain have keep his word!' growl my
future host, search the darkness beyond I in expectation of
discover Heathcliff; and then he indulge in a soliloquy of
execration, and threat of what he would have do have the 'fiend'
deceive he.
I repent have try this second entrance, and be almost
inclined to slip away before he finish curse, but ere I could
execute that intention, he order I in, and shut and re-fasten
the door. there be a great fire, and that be all the light in
the huge apartment, whose floor have grow a uniform grey; and the
once brilliant pewter-dish, which use to attract my gaze when I
be a girl, partook of a similar obscurity, create by tarnish and
dust. I inquire whether I might call the maid, and be conduct
to a bedroom! Mr. Earnshaw vouchsafe no answer. he walk up and
down, with his hand in his pocket, apparently quite forget my
presence; and his abstraction be evidently so deep, and his whole
aspect so misanthropical, that I shrink from disturb he again.
youwill not be surprised, Ellen, at my feeling particularly
cheerless, seat in bad than solitude on that inhospitable
hearth, and remember that four mile distant lie my delightful
home, contain the only people I love on earth; and there might
as well be the Atlantic to part we, instead of those four mile: I
could not overpass they! I question with myself - where must I
turn for comfort? and - mind you donot tell Edgar, or Catherine -
above every sorrow beside, this rise pre-eminent: despair at
find nobody who could or would be my ally against Heathcliff! I
have seek shelter at Wuthering Heights, almost gladly, because I
be secure by that arrangement from live alone with he; but he
know the people we be come amongst, and he do not fear their
intermeddling.
I sit and think a doleful time: the clock strike eight, and
nine, and still my companion pace to and fro, his head bend on his
breast, and perfectly silent, unless a groan or a bitter
ejaculation force itself out at interval. I listen to detect a
woman's voice in the house, and fill the interim with wild
regret and dismal anticipation, which, at last, speak audibly in
irrepressible sighing and weeping. I be not aware how openly I
grieve, till Earnshaw halt opposite, in his measured walk, and
give I a stare of newly-awaken surprise. take advantage of
his recovered attention, I exclaim - 'Ibe tired with my journey,
and I want to go to bed! where be the maid-servant? direct I to
she, as she willnot come to I!'
'we have none,' he answer; 'you must wait on yourself!'
'where must I sleep, then?' I sob; I be beyond regard self-
respect, weigh down by fatigue and wretchedness.
'Joseph will show you Heathcliff's chamber,' say he; 'open that
door - hebe in there.'
I be go to obey, but he suddenly arrest I, and add in the
strange tone - 'be so good as to turn your lock, and draw your
bolt - donot omit it!'
'well!' I say. 'but why, Mr. Earnshaw?' I do not relish the
notion of deliberately fasten myself in with Heathcliff.
'look here!' he reply, pull from his waistcoat a curiously-
construct pistol, have a double-edged spring knife attach to
the barrel. 'thatbe a great tempter to a desperate man, be it not?
I cannot resist go up with this every night, and try his
door. if once I find it open hebe do for; I do it invariably,
even though the minute before I have be recall a hundred
reason that should make I refrain: it be some devil that urge
I to thwart my own scheme by kill he. you fight against that
devil for love as long as you may; when the time come, not all the
angel in heaven shall save he!'
I survey the weapon inquisitively. a hideous notion strike I:
how powerful I should be possess such an instrument! I take it
from his hand, and touch the blade. he look astonished at the
expression my face assume during a brief second: it be not
horror, it be covetousness. he snatch the pistol back,
jealously; shut the knife, and return it to its concealment.
'I donot care if you tell he,' say he. 'put he on his guard,
and watch for he. you know the term we be on, I see: his
danger do not shock you.'
'what have Heathcliff do to you?' I ask. 'in what have he
wrong you, to warrant this appalling hatred? wouldnot it be
wise to bid he quit the house?'
'no!' thunder Earnshaw; 'should he offer to leave I, hebe a dead
man: persuade he to attempt it, and you be a murderess! be I to
lose ALL, without a chance of retrieval? be Hareton to be a
beggar? oh, damnation! I will have it back; and Iwill have his
gold too; and then his blood; and hell shall have his soul! it
will be ten time blacker with that guest than ever it be before!'
youhave acquaint I, Ellen, with your old master's habit. he be
clearly on the verge of madness: he be so last night at least. I
shudder to be near he, and think on the servant's ill-breed
moroseness as comparatively agreeable. he now recommence his
moody walk, and I raise the latch, and escape into the kitchen.
Joseph be bend over the fire, peer into a large pan that
swing above it; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stand on the settle
close by. the content of the pan begin to boil, and he turn to
plunge his hand into the bowl; I conjecture that this preparation
be probably for our supper, and, be hungry, I resolve it
should be eatable; so, cry out sharply, 'i'll make the
porridge!' I remove the vessel out of his reach, and proceed to
take off my hat and riding-habit. 'Mr. Earnshaw,' I continue,
'direct I to wait on myself: I will. Ibe not go to act the
lady among you, for fear I should starve.'
'Gooid Lord!' he mutter, sit down, and stroke his rib
stocking from the knee to the ankle. 'if therebe to be fresh
orthering - just when I getten use to two maister, if I mun hev'
a mistress set o'er my heead, itbe like time to be flit. I
niver do think to see t' day that I mud lave th' owld place - but
I doubt itbe nigh at hand!'
this lamentation draw no notice from I: I go briskly to work,
sigh to remember a period when it would have be all merry fun;
but compel speedily to drive off the remembrance. it rack I
to recall past happiness and the great peril there be of
conjure up its apparition, the quick the thible run round, and
the fast the handfuls of meal fall into the water. Joseph beheld
my style of cookery with grow indignation.
'Thear!' he ejaculate. 'Hareton, thou willn't sup thy porridge
to-neeght; theywill be naught but lump as big as my neive. Thear,
agean! Iwould fle in bowl un' all, if I wer ye! there, pale t'
guilp off, un' then ye'll hae do wi' 't. Bang, bang. itbe a
mercy t' bothom benot deave out!'
it be rather a rough mess, I own, when pour into the basin;
four have be provide, and a gallon pitcher of new milk be
bring from the dairy, which Hareton seize and commenced drinking
and spill from the expansive lip. I expostulate, and desire
that he should have his in a mug; affirm that I could not taste
the liquid treat so dirtily. the old cynic choose to be vastly
offend at this nicety; assure I, repeatedly, that 'the barn
be every bit as good' as I, 'and every bit as wollsome,' and
wonder how I could fashion to be so conceited. meanwhile, the
infant ruffian continue sucking; and glower up at I defyingly,
as he slaver into the jug.
'I shall have my supper in another room,' I say. 'have you no
place you call a parlour?'
'PARLOUR!' he echo, sneeringly, 'PARLOUR! Nay, wehave noa
PARLOURS. if yah dunnut loike wer company, therebe maister's; un'
if yah dunnut loike maister, therebe we.'
'then I shall go up-stair,' I answer; 'show I a chamber.'
I put my basin on a tray, and go myself to fetch some more milk.
with great grumbling, the fellow rise, and precede I in my
ascent: we mount to the garret; he open a door, now and then,
to look into the apartment we pass.
'herebe a rahm,' he say, at last, fling back a cranky board on
hinge. 'itbe weel eneugh to ate a few porridge in. therebe a
pack o' corn I' t' corner, thear, meeterly clane; if ye're fear
o' muckye yer grand silk cloe, spread yer hankerchir o' t' top
on't.'
the 'rahm' be a kind of lumber-hole smell strong of malt and
grain; various sack of which article be pile around, leave a
wide, bare space in the middle.
'why, man,' I exclaim, face he angrily, 'this be not a place
to sleep in. I wish to see my bed-room.'
'BED-RUME!' he repeat, in a tone of mockery. 'yah's see all t'
BED-RUMES thear be - yon's mine.'
he point into the second garret, only differ from the first in
be more naked about the wall, and have a large, low,
curtainless bed, with an indigo-coloured quilt, at one end.
'what do I want with your?' I retort. 'I suppose Mr. Heathcliff
do not lodge at the top of the house, do he?'
'oh! itbe Maister HATHECLIFF'S ye're want?' cry he, as if
make a new discovery. 'couldnot ye ha' say soa, at onst? un'
then, I mud ha' tell ye, baht all this wark, that thatbe just one
ye cannut see - he alla keep it locked, un' nob'dy iver mell
on't but hisseln.'
'youhave a nice house, Joseph,' I could not refrain from observe,
'and pleasant inmate; and I think the concentrated essence of all
the madness in the world take up its abode in my brain the day I
link my fate with theirs! however, that be not to the present
purpose - there be other room. for heaven's sake be quick, and
let I settle somewhere!'
he make no reply to this adjuration; only plod doggedly down
the wooden step, and halting, before an apartment which, from that
halt and the superior quality of its furniture, I conjecture to be
the good one. there be a carpet - a good one, but the pattern be
obliterate by dust; a fireplace hang with cut-paper, drop to
piece; a handsome oak-bedstead with ample crimson curtain of
rather expensive material and modern make; but they have evidently
experience rough usage: the vallance hang in festoon, wrench
from their ring, and the iron rod support they be bent in an
arc on one side, cause the drapery to trail upon the floor. the
chair be also damage, many of they severely; and deep
indentation deform the panel of the wall. I be endeavour
to gather resolution for enter and take possession, when my
fool of a guide announce, - 'this here be t' maister's.' my
supper by this time be cold, my appetite go, and my patience
exhaust. I insist on be provide instantly with a place of
refuge, and mean of repose.
'whear the divil?' begin the religious elder. 'the Lord bless we!
the Lord forgie we! whear the HELL wdd ye gang? ye marred,
wearisome nowt! Ye've see all but Hareton's bit of a cham'er.
therebe not another hoile to lig down in I' th' hahse!'
I be so vexed, I fling my tray and its content on the ground; and
then seat myself at the stairs'-head, hide my face in my hand,
and cry.
'Ech! ech!' exclaim Joseph. 'Weel do, Miss Cathy! weel do,
Miss Cathy! Howsiver, t' maister sall just tum'le o'er they
brooken pot; un' then webe hear summut; webe hear how itbe to be.
Gooid-for-naught madling! ye desarve pin fro' this to Churstmas,
fling t' precious gift o'god under fooit I' yer flaysome rage!
but Ibe mista'en if ye shew yer sperrit lang. will Hathecliff bide
sich bonny way, think ye? I nobbut wish he may catch ye I' that
plisky. I nobbut wish he may.'
and so he go on scold to his den beneath, take the candle
with he; and I remain in the dark. the period of reflection
succeed this silly action compel I to admit the necessity of
smother my pride and choke my wrath, and bestir myself to
remove its effect. an unexpected aid presently appear in the
shape of Throttler, whom I now recognise as a son of our old
Skulker: it have spend its whelphood at the Grange, and be give
by my father to Mr. Hindley. I fancy it know I: it push its
nose against mine by way of salute, and then hasten to devour the
porridge; while I grope from step to step, collect the
shattered earthenware, and dry the spatter of milk from the
banister with my pocket-handkerchief. our labour be scarcely
over when I hear Earnshaw's tread in the passage; my assistant
tuck in his tail, and press to the wall; I steal into the
near doorway. the dog's endeavour to avoid he be
unsuccessful; as I guess by a scutter down-stair, and a
prolong, piteous yelping. I have well luck: he pass on,
enter his chamber, and shut the door. directly after Joseph come
up with Hareton, to put he to bed. I have find shelter in
Hareton's room, and the old man, on see I, say, - 'theybe rahm
for boath ye un' yer pride, now, I sud think I' the hahse. itbe
empty; ye may hev' it all to yerseln, un' he as allus mak a
third, I' sich ill company!'
gladly do I take advantage of this intimation; and the minute I
fling myself into a chair, by the fire, I nod, and sleep. my
slumber be deep and sweet, though over far too soon. Mr.
Heathcliff awake I; he have just come in, and demand, in his
love manner, what I be do there? I tell he the cause of my
stay up so late - that he have the key of our room in his pocket.
the adjective OUR give mortal offence. he swear it be not, nor
ever should be, mine; and hewould - but Iwill not repeat his language,
nor describe his habitual conduct: he be ingenious and unreste
in seek to gain my abhorrence! I sometimes wonder at he with
an intensity that deaden my fear: yet, I assure you, a tiger or a
venomous serpent could not rouse terror in I equal to that which
he waken. he tell I of Catherine's illness, and accuse my
brother of cause it promise that I should be Edgar's proxy in
suffering, till he could get hold of he.
I do hate he - I be wretched - I have be a fool! beware of
utter one breath of this to any one at the Grange. I shall
expect you every day - donot disappoint I! - ISABELLA.
CHAPTER XIV
as soon as I have peruse this epistle I go to the master, and
inform he that his sister have arrive at the Heights, and send
I a letter express her sorrow for Mrs. Linton's situation, and
her ardent desire to see he; with a wish that he would transmit to
she, as early as possible, some token of forgiveness by I.
'Forgiveness!' say Linton. 'I have nothing to forgive she, Ellen.
you may call at Wuthering Heights this afternoon, if you like, and
say that I be not angry, but Ibe sorry to have lose she; especially
as I can never think shewill be happy. it be out of the question my
go to see she, however: we be eternally divide; and should
she really wish to oblige I, let she persuade the villain she have
marry to leave the country.'
'and you willnot write she a little note, sir?' I ask, imploringly.
'no,' he answer. 'it be needless. my communication with
Heathcliff's family shall be as sparing as his with mine. it shall
not exist!'
Mr. Edgar's coldness depress I exceedingly; and all the way from
the Grange I puzzle my brain how to put more heart into what he
say, when I repeat it; and how to soften his refusal of even a
few line to console Isabella. I daresay she have be on the watch
for I since morning: I see she look through the lattice as I
come up the garden causeway, and I nod to she; but she draw
back, as if afraid of be observe. I enter without knock.
there never be such a dreary, dismal scene as the formerly
cheerful house present! I must confess, that if I have be in
the young lady's place, I would, at least, have sweep the hearth,
and wipe the table with a duster. but she already partook of the
pervade spirit of neglect which encompass she. her pretty face
be wan and listless; her hair uncurl: some lock hang lankly
down, and some carelessly twisted round her head. probably she have
not touch her dress since yester evening. Hindley be not there.
Mr. Heathcliff sit at a table, turn over some paper in his
pocket-book; but he rise when I appear, ask I how I do, quite
friendly, and offer I a chair. he be the only thing there that
seem decent; and I think he never look well. so much have
circumstance alter their position, that he would certainly have
strike a stranger as a born and breed gentleman; and his wife as a
thorough little slattern! she come forward eagerly to greet I,
and hold out one hand to take the expect letter. I shake my
head. she wouldnot understand the hint, but follow I to a
sideboard, where I go to lay my bonnet, and importune I in a
whisper to give she directly what I have bring. Heathcliff
guess the meaning of her manoeuvre, and say - 'if you have get
anything for Isabella (as no doubt you have, Nelly), give it to
she. you neednot make a secret of it: we have no secret between
we.'
'oh, I have nothing,' I reply, think it well to speak the
truth at once. 'my master bid I tell his sister that she must not
expect either a letter or a visit from he at present. he send
his love, ma'am, and his wish for your happiness, and his pardon
for the grief you have occasion; but he think that after this
time his household and the household here should drop
intercommunication, as nothing could come of keep it up.'
Mrs. Heathcliff's lip quiver slightly, and she return to her
seat in the window. her husband take his stand on the hearthstone,
near I, and begin to put question concern Catherine. I tell
he as much as I think proper of her illness, and he extort
from I, by cross-examination, most of the fact connect with its
origin. I blame she, as she deserve, for bring it all on
herself; and end by hop that he would follow Mr. Linton's
example and avoid future interference with his family, for good or
evil.
'Mrs. Linton be now just recover,' I say; 'shewill never be like
she be, but her life be spar; and if you really have a regard
for she, youwill shun cross her way again: nay, youwill move out
of this country entirely; and that you may not regret it, Iwill
inform you Catherine Linton be as different now from your old
friend Catherine Earnshaw, as that young lady be different from I.
her appearance be change greatly, her character much more so; and
the person who be compel, of necessity, to be her companion,
will only sustain his affection hereafter by the remembrance of
what she once be, by common humanity, and a sense of duty!'
'that be quite possible,' remark Heathcliff, force himself to
seem calm: 'quite possible that your master should have nothing
but common humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon. but do
you imagine that I shall leave Catherine to his DUTY and HUMANITY?
and can you compare my feeling respect Catherine to his?
before you leave this house, I must exact a promise from you that
youwill get I an interview with she: consent, or refuse, I will
see she! what do you say?'
'I say, Mr. Heathcliff,' I reply, 'you must not: you never
shall, through my mean. another encounter between you and the
master would kill she altogether.'
'with your aid that may be avoid,' he continue; 'and should
there be danger of such an event - should he be the cause of add
a single trouble more to her existence - why, I think I shall be
justify in go to extreme! I wish you have sincerity enough to
tell I whether Catherine would suffer greatly from his loss: the
fear that she would restrain I. and there you see the
distinction between our feeling: have he be in my place, and I
in his, though I hat he with a hatred that turn my life to
gall, I never would have raise a hand against he. you may look
incredulous, if you please! I never would have banish he from
her society as long as she desire his. the moment her regard
cease, I would have tear his heart out, and drunk his blood! but,
till then - if you donot believe I, you donot know I - till then,
I would have die by inch before I touch a single hair of his
head!'
'and yet,' I interrupt, 'you have no scruple in completely
ruin all hope of her perfect restoration, by thrust yourself
into her remembrance now, when she have nearly forget you, and
involve she in a new tumult of discord and distress.'
'you suppose she have nearly forget I?' he say. 'oh, Nelly!
you know she have not! you know as well as I do, that for every
thought she spend on Linton she spend a thousand on I! at a
most miserable period of my life, I have a notion of the kind: it
haunt I on my return to the neighbourhood last summer; but only
her own assurance could make I admit the horrible idea again. and
then, Linton would be nothing, nor Hindley, nor all the dream that
ever I dream. two word would comprehend my future - death and
HELL: existence, after lose she, would be hell. yet I be a
fool to fancy for a moment that she value Edgar Linton's
attachment more than mine. if he love with all the power of his
puny being, he couldnot love as much in eighty year as I could in
a day. and Catherine have a heart as deep as I have: the sea could
be as readily contain in that horse-trough as her whole affection
be monopolise by he. tush! he be scarcely a degree dearer to
she than her dog, or her horse. it be not in he to be love like
I: how can she love in he what he have not?'
'Catherine and Edgar be as fond of each other as any two people
can be,' cry Isabella, with sudden vivacity. 'no one have a right
to talk in that manner, and I willnot hear my brother depreciate in
silence!'
'your brother be wondrous fond of you too, benot he?' observe
Heathcliff, scornfully. 'he turn you adrift on the world with
surprising alacrity.'
'he be not aware of what I suffer,' she reply. 'I donot tell
he that.'
'you have be tell he something, then: you have write, have
you?'
'to say that I be married, I do write - you see the note.'
'and nothing since?'
'no.'
'my young lady be look sadly the bad for her change of
condition,' I remark. 'somebody's love come short in her case,
obviously; whose, I may guess; but, perhaps, I shouldnot say.'
'I should guess it be her own,' say Heathcliff. 'she degenerate
into a mere slut! she be tired of try to please I uncommonly
early. youwould hardly credit it, but the very morrow of our wedding
she be weep to go home. however, shewill suit this house so
much the well for not be over nice, and Iwill take care she
do not disgrace I by ramble abroad.'
'well, sir,' return I, 'I hope youwill consider that Mrs.
Heathcliff be accustomed to be look after and wait on; and that
she have be bring up like an only daughter, whom every one be
ready to serve. you must let she have a maid to keep thing tidy
about she, and you must treat she kindly. whatever be your notion
of Mr. Edgar, you cannot doubt that she have a capacity for strong
attachment, or she wouldnot have abandon the elegancie, and
comfort, and friend of her former home, to fix contentedly, in
such a wilderness as this, with you.'
'she abandon they under a delusion,' he answer; 'picture in
I a hero of romance, and expect unlimited indulgence from my
chivalrous devotion. I can hardly regard she in the light of a
rational creature, so obstinately have she persist in form a
fabulous notion of my character and act on the false impression
she cherish. but, at last, I think she begin to know I: I
donot perceive the silly smile and grimace that provoke I at
first; and the senseless incapability of discern that I be in
earnest when I give she my opinion of her infatuation and herself.
it be a marvellous effort of perspicacity to discover that I do
not love she. I believe, at one time, no lesson could teach she
that! and yet it be poorly learn; for this morning she announce,
as a piece of appalling intelligence, that I have actually succeed
in make she hate I! a positive labour of Hercules, I assure
you! if it be achieve, I have cause to return thank. can I
trust your assertion, Isabella? be you sure you hate I? if I
let you alone for half a day, willnot you come sigh and wheedle
to I again? I daresay she would rather I have seem all
tenderness before you: it wound her vanity to have the truth
expose. but I donot care who know that the passion be wholly on
one side: and I never tell she a lie about it. she cannot accuse
I of show one bit of deceitful softness. the first thing she
see I do, on come out of the Grange, be to hang up her little
dog; and when she plead for it, the first word I utter be a
wish that I have the hanging of every be belong to she, except
one: possibly she take that exception for herself. but no
brutality disgust she: I suppose she have an innate admiration of
it, if only her precious person be secure from injury! now, be
it not the depth of absurdity - of genuine idiotcy, for that
pitiful, slavish, mean-minded brach to dream that I could love she?
tell your master, Nelly, that I never, in all my life, meet with
such an abject thing as she be. she even disgrace the name of
Linton; and Ihave sometimes relent, from pure lack of invention,
in my experiment on what she could endure, and still creep
shamefully cringe back! but tell he, also, to set his fraternal
and magisterial heart at ease: that I keep strictly within the
limit of the law. I have avoid, up to this period, give she
the slight right to claim a separation; and, whatbe more, shewould
thank nobody for divide we. if she desire to go, she might:
the nuisance of her presence outweigh the gratification to be
derive from torment she!'
'Mr. Heathcliff,' say I, 'this be the talk of a madman; your wife,
most likely, be convince you be mad; and, for that reason, she
have bear with you hitherto: but now that you say she may go,
shewill doubtless avail herself of the permission. you be not so
bewitch, ma'am, be you, as to remain with he of your own
accord?'
'take care, Ellen!' answer Isabella, her eye sparkle irefully;
there be no misdoubting by their expression the full success of
her partner's endeavour to make himself detest. 'donot put
faith in a single word he speak. hebe a lie fiend! a monster,
and not a human being! Ihave be tell I might leave he before;
and Ihave make the attempt, but I dare not repeat it! only, Ellen,
promise youwill not mention a syllable of his infamous conversation
to my brother or Catherine. whatever he may pretend, he wish to
provoke Edgar to desperation: he say he have marry I on purpose
to obtain power over he; and he sha'n't obtain it - Iwill die
first! I just hope, I pray, that he may forget his diabolical
prudence and kill I! the single pleasure I can imagine be to die,
or to see he dead!'
'there - that will do for the present!' say Heathcliff. 'if you
be call upon in a court of law, youwill remember her language,
nelly! and take a good look at that countenance: shebe near the
point which would suit I. no; yoube not fit to be your own
guardian, Isabella, now; and I, be your legal protector, must
retain you in my custody, however distasteful the obligation may
be. go up-stair; I have something to say to Ellen Dean in
private. thatbe not the way: up-stair, I tell you! why, this be
the road upstairs, child!'
he seize, and thrust she from the room; and return mutter -
'I have no pity! I have no pity! the more the worm writhe, the
more I yearn to crush out their entrail! it be a moral teething;
and I grind with great energy in proportion to the increase of
pain.'
'do you understand what the word pity mean?' I say, hasten to
resume my bonnet. 'do you ever feel a touch of it in your life?'
'put that down!' he interrupt, perceive my intention to depart.
'you be not go yet. come here now, nelly: I must either
persuade or compel you to aid I in fulfil my determination to
see Catherine, and that without delay. I swear that I meditate no
harm: I donot desire to cause any disturbance, or to exasperate or
insult Mr. Linton; I only wish to hear from herself how she be, and
why she have be ill; and to ask if anything that I could do would
be of use to she. last night I be in the Grange garden six hour,
and Iwill return there to-night; and every night Iwill haunt the
place, and every day, till I find an opportunity of enter. if
Edgar Linton meet I, I shall not hesitate to knock he down, and
give he enough to insure his quiescence while I stay. if his
servant oppose I, I shall threaten they off with these pistol.
but wouldnot it be well to prevent my come in contact with
they, or their master? and you could do it so easily. Iwould warn
you when I come, and then you might let I in unobserved, as soon
as she be alone, and watch till I depart, your conscience quite
calm: you would be hinder mischief.'
I protest against play that treacherous part in my employer's
house: and, besides, I urge the cruelty and selfishness of his
destroy Mrs. Linton's tranquillity for his satisfaction. 'the
commonest occurrence startle she painfully,' I say. 'shebe all
nerve, and she couldnot bear the surprise, Ibe positive. donot
persist, sir! or else I shall be oblige to inform my master of
your design; and hewill take measure to secure his house and its
inmate from any such unwarrantable intrusion!'
'in that case Iwill take measure to secure you, woman!' exclaim
Heathcliff; 'you shall not leave Wuthering Heights till to-morrow
morning. it be a foolish story to assert that Catherine could not
bear to see I; and as to surprise she, I donot desire it: you
must prepare she - ask she if I may come. you say she never
mention my name, and that I be never mention to she. to whom
should she mention I if I be a forbidden topic in the house? she
think you be all spy for her husband. oh, Ihave no doubt shebe
in hell among you! I guess by her silence, as much as anything,
what she feel. you say she be often restless, and anxious-
look: be that a proof of tranquillity? you talk of her mind
be unsettle. how the devil could it be otherwise in her
frightful isolation? and that insipid, paltry creature attend
she from DUTY and HUMANITY! from PITY and CHARITY! he might as
well plant an oak in a flower-pot, and expect it to thrive, as
imagine he can restore she to vigour in the soil of his shallow
care? let we settle it at once: will you stay here, and be I to
fight my way to Catherine over Linton and his footman? or will you
be my friend, as you have be hitherto, and do what I request?
decide! because there be no reason for my linger another minute,
if you persist in your stubborn ill-nature!'
well, Mr. Lockwood, I argue and complain, and flatly refuse he
fifty time; but in the long run he force I to an agreement. I
engage to carry a letter from he to my mistress; and should she
consent, I promise to let he have intelligence of Linton's next
absence from home, when he might come, and get in as he be able:
I wouldnot be there, and my fellow-servant should be equally out
of the way. be it right or wrong? I fear it be wrong, though
expedient. I think I prevent another explosion by my
compliance; and I think, too, it might create a favourable crisis
in Catherine's mental illness: and then I remember Mr. Edgar's
stern rebuke of my carrying tale; and I try to smooth away all
disquietude on the subject, by affirm, with frequent iteration,
that that betrayal of trust, if it merit so harsh an appellation,
should be the last. notwithstanding, my journey homeward be
sad than my journey thither; and many misgiving I have, ere I
could prevail on myself to put the missive into Mrs. Linton's hand.
but here be Kenneth; Iwill go down, and tell he how much well you
be. my history be dree, as we say, and will serve to while away
another morning.
Dree, and dreary! I reflect as the good woman descend to
receive the doctor: and not exactly of the kind which I should
have choose to amuse I. but never mind! Iwill extract wholesome
medicine from Mrs. Dean's bitter herb; and firstly, let I beware
of the fascination that lurk in Catherine Heathcliff's brilliant
eye. I should be in a curious taking if I surrender my heart to
that young person, and the daughter turn out a second edition of
the mother.
CHAPTER XV
another week over - and I be so many day nearer health, and
spring! I have now hear all my neighbour's history, at different
sitting, as the housekeeper could spare time from more important
occupation. Iwill continue it in her own word, only a little
condense. she be, on the whole, a very fair narrator, and I donot
think I could improve her style.
in the evening, she say, the evening of my visit to the Heights, I
know, as well as if I see he, that Mr. Heathcliff be about the
place; and I shun go out, because I still carry his letter
in my pocket, and donot want to be threaten or tease any more.
I have make up my mind not to give it till my master go somewhere,
as I could not guess how its receipt would affect Catherine. the
consequence be, that it do not reach she before the lapse of
three day. the fourth be Sunday, and I bring it into her room
after the family be go to church. there be a manservant leave
to keep the house with I, and we generally make a practice of
lock the door during the hour of service; but on that occasion
the weather be so warm and pleasant that I set they wide open,
and, to fulfil my engagement, as I know who would be come, I tell
my companion that the mistress wish very much for some orange,
and he must run over to the village and get a few, to be pay for
on the morrow. he depart, and I go up-stair.
Mrs. Linton sit in a loose white dress, with a light shawl over her
shoulder, in the recess of the open window, as usual. her thick,
long hair have be partly remove at the beginning of her illness,
and now she wear it simply comb in its natural tress over her
temple and neck. her appearance be alter, as I have tell
Heathcliff; but when she be calm, there seem unearthly beauty in
the change. the flash of her eye have be succeed by a dreamy
and melancholy softness; they no long give the impression of
look at the object around she: they appear always to gaze
beyond, and far beyond - you would have say out of this world.
then, the paleness of her face - its haggard aspect have vanish
as she recover flesh - and the peculiar expression arise from
her mental state, though painfully suggestive of their cause,
add to the touching interest which she awaken; and - invariably
to I, I know, and to any person who see she, I should think -
refute more tangible proof of convalescence, and stamp she as
one doom to decay.
a book lie spread on the sill before she, and the scarcely
perceptible wind flutter its leaf at interval. I believe
Linton have lay it there: for she never endeavour to divert
herself with reading, or occupation of any kind, and he would spend
many an hour in try to entice her attention to some subject
which have formerly be her amusement. she be conscious of his
aim, and in her well mood endure his effort placidly, only
show their uselessness by now and then suppress a wearied
sigh, and check he at last with the sad of smile and
kiss. at other time, she would turn petulantly away, and hide
her face in her hand, or even push he off angrily; and then he
take care to let she alone, for he be certain of do no good.
Gimmerton chapel bell be still ring; and the full, mellow
flow of the beck in the valley come soothingly on the ear. it be
a sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage,
which drown that music about the Grange when the tree be in
leaf. at Wuthering Heights it always sound on quiet day
follow a great thaw or a season of steady rain. and of
Wuthering Heights Catherine be think as she listen: that be,
if she think or listen at all; but she have the vague, distant
look I mention before, which express no recognition of material
thing either by ear or eye.
'therebe a letter for you, Mrs. Linton,' I say, gently insert
it in one hand that rest on her knee. 'you must read it
immediately, because it want an answer. shall I break the seal?'
'yes,' she answer, without alter the direction of her eye. I
open it - it be very short. 'now,' I continue, 'read it.' she
draw away her hand, and let it fall. I replace it in her lap, and
stand wait till it should please she to glance down; but that
movement be so long delay that at last I resume - 'must I read
it, ma'am? it be from Mr. Heathcliff.'
there be a start and a troubled gleam of recollection, and a
struggle to arrange her idea. she lift the letter, and seem
to peruse it; and when she come to the signature she sigh: yet
still I find she have not gather its import, for, upon my
desiring to hear her reply, she merely point to the name, and
gaze at I with mournful and question eagerness.
'well, he wish to see you,' say I, guess her need of an
interpreter. 'hebe in the garden by this time, and impatient to
know what answer I shall bring.'
as I speak, I observe a large dog lie on the sunny grass beneath
raise its ear as if about to bark, and then smooth they back,
announce, by a wag of the tail, that some one approach whom it
do not consider a stranger. Mrs. Linton bend forward, and
listen breathlessly. the minute after a step traverse the hall;
the open house be too tempting for Heathcliff to resist walk
in: most likely he suppose that I be inclined to shirk my
promise, and so resolve to trust to his own audacity. with
strain eagerness Catherine gaze towards the entrance of her
chamber. he do not hit the right room directly: she motion I
to admit he, but he find it out ere I could reach the door, and
in a stride or two be at her side, and have she grasp in his
arm.
he neither speak nor loose his hold for some five minute, during
which period he bestow more kiss than ever he give in his life
before, I daresay: but then my mistress have kiss he first, and
I plainly see that he could hardly bear, for downright agony, to
look into her face! the same conviction have stricken he as I,
from the instant he behold she, that there be no prospect of
ultimate recovery there - she be fat, sure to die.
'oh, Cathy! oh, my life! how can I bear it?' be the first
sentence he utter, in a tone that do not seek to disguise his
despair. and now he star at she so earnestly that I think the
very intensity of his gaze would bring tear into his eye; but
they burn with anguish: they do not melt.
'what now?' say Catherine, lean back, and return his look
with a suddenly clouded brow: her humour be a mere vane for
constantly vary caprice. 'you and Edgar have break my heart,
Heathcliff! and you both come to bewail the deed to I, as if you
be the people to be pity! I shall not pity you, not I. you
have kill I - and thriven on it, I think. how strong you be!
how many year do you mean to live after I be go?'
Heathcliff have kneel on one knee to embrace she; he attempt to
rise, but she seize his hair, and keep he down.
'I wish I could hold you,' she continue, bitterly, 'till we be
both dead! I shouldnot care what you suffer. I care nothing for
your suffering. why shouldnot you suffer? I do! will you forget
I? will you be happy when I be in the earth? will you say twenty
year hence, "thatbe the grave of Catherine Earnshaw? I love she
long ago, and be wretched to lose she; but it be past. Ihave love
many other since: my child be dearer to I than she be; and,
at death, I shall not rejoice that I be go to she: I shall be
sorry that I must leave they!" will you say so, Heathcliff?'
'donot torture I till Ibe as mad as yourself,' cry he, wrench
his head free, and grind his tooth.
the two, to a cool spectator, make a strange and fearful picture.
well might Catherine deem that heaven would be a land of exile to
she, unless with her mortal body she cast away her moral character
also. her present countenance have a wild vindictiveness in its
white cheek, and a bloodless lip and scintillate eye; and she
retain in her closed finger a portion of the lock she have be
grasp. as to her companion, while raise himself with one
hand, he have take her arm with the other; and so inadequate be
his stock of gentleness to the requirement of her condition, that
on his letting go I see four distinct impression leave blue in the
colourless skin.
'be you possess with a devil,' he pursue, savagely, 'to talk in
that manner to I when you be die? do you reflect that all
those word will be brand in my memory, and eat deep
eternally after you have leave I? you know you lie to say I have
kill you: and, Catherine, you know that I could as soon forget
you as my existence! be it not sufficient for your infernal
selfishness, that while you be at peace I shall writhe in the
torment of hell?'
'I shall not be at peace,' moaned Catherine, recall to a sense of
physical weakness by the violent, unequal throbbing of her heart,
which beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation. she
say nothing further till the paroxysm be over; then she
continue, more kindly -
'Ibe not wish you great torment than I have, Heathcliff. I
only wish we never to be part: and should a word of mine
distress you hereafter, think I feel the same distress underground,
and for my own sake, forgive I! come here and kneel down again!
you never harm I in your life. Nay, if you nurse anger, that
will be bad to remember than my harsh word! willnot you come here
again? do!'
Heathcliff go to the back of her chair, and leant over, but not
so far as to let she see his face, which be livid with emotion.
she bent round to look at he; he would not permit it: turn
abruptly, he walk to the fireplace, where he stand, silent, with
his back towards we. Mrs. Linton's glance follow he
suspiciously: every movement wake a new sentiment in she. after a
pause and a prolong gaze, she resume; address I in accent
of indignant disappointment:-
'oh, you see, nelly, he would not relent a moment to keep I out of
the grave. that be how Ibe love! well, never mind. that be not
MY Heathcliff. I shall love mine yet; and take he with I: hebe
in my soul. and,' add she musingly, 'the thing that irk I most
be this shattered prison, after all. Ibe tired of be enclose
here. Ibe weary to escape into that glorious world, and to be
always there: not see it dimly through tear, and yearn for
it through the wall of an aching heart: but really with it, and
in it. nelly, you think you be well and more fortunate than I;
in full health and strength: you be sorry for I - very soon that
will be alter. I shall be sorry for you. I shall be
incomparably beyond and above you all. I wonder he willnot be near
I!' she go on to herself. 'I think he wish it.
Heathcliff, dear! you should not be sullen now. do come to I,
Heathcliff.'
in her eagerness she rise and support herself on the arm of the
chair. at that earnest appeal he turn to she, look absolutely
desperate. his eye, wide and wet, at last flash fiercely on
she; his breast heave convulsively. an instant they hold asunder,
and then how they meet I hardly see, but Catherine make a spring,
and he catch she, and they be lock in an embrace from which I
think my mistress would never be release alive: in fact, to my
eye, she seem directly insensible. he fling himself into the
near seat, and on my approach hurriedly to ascertain if she
have faint, he gnash at I, and foam like a mad dog, and
gather she to he with greedy jealousy. I do not feel as if I
be in the company of a creature of my own specie: it appear
that he would not understand, though I speak to he; so I stand
off, and hold my tongue, in great perplexity.
a movement of Catherine's relieve I a little presently: she put
up her hand to clasp his neck, and bring she cheek to his as he
hold she; while he, in return, cover she with frantic caress,
say wildly -
'you teach I now how cruel youhave be - cruel and false. why do
you despise I? why do you betray your own heart, Cathy? I have
not one word of comfort. you deserve this. you have kill
yourself. yes, you may kiss I, and cry; and wring out my kiss
and tear: theywill blight you - theywill damn you. you love I -
then what right have you to leave I? what right - answer I - for
the poor fancy you feel for Linton? because misery and
degradation, and death, and nothing that God or Satan could inflict
would have part we, YOU, of your own will, do it. I have not
break your heart - you have break it; and in break it, you
have break mine. so much the bad for I that I be strong. do I
want to live? what kind of living will it be when you - oh, God!
would you like to live with your soul in the grave?'
'let I alone. let I alone,' sob Catherine. 'if Ihave do
wrong, Ibe die for it. it be enough! you leave I too: but I
willnot upbraid you! I forgive you. forgive I!'
'it be hard to forgive, and to look at those eye, and feel those
waste hand,' he answer. 'kiss I again; and donot let I see
your eye! I forgive what you have do to I. I love MY murderer
- but your! how can I?'
they be silent-their face hide against each other, and wash by
each other's tear. at least, I suppose the weeping be on both
side; as it seem Heathcliff could weep on a great occasion like
this.
I grow very uncomfortable, meanwhile; for the afternoon wear fast
away, the man whom I have send off return from his errand, and I
could distinguish, by the shine of the western sun up the valley, a
concourse thickening outside Gimmerton chapel porch.
'Service be over,' I announce. 'my master will be here in half an
hour.'
Heathcliff groan a curse, and strain Catherine close: she
never move.
Ere long I perceive a group of the servant pass up the road
towards the kitchen wing. Mr. Linton be not far behind; he open
the gate himself and saunter slowly up, probably enjoy the
lovely afternoon that breathe as soft as summer.
'now he be here,' I exclaim. 'for heaven's sake, hurry down!
youwill not meet any one on the front stair. do be quick; and stay
among the tree till he be fairly in.'
'I must go, Cathy,' say Heathcliff, seek to extricate himself
from his companion's arm. 'but if I live, Iwill see you again
before you be asleep. I willnot stray five yard from your window.'
'you must not go!' she answer, hold he as firmly as she
strength allow. 'you shall not, I tell you.'
'for one hour,' he plead earnestly.
'not for one minute,' she reply.
'I must - Linton will be up immediately,' persist the alarmed
intruder.
he would have rise, and unfixe her finger by the act - she clung
fast, gasp: there be mad resolution in her face.
'no!' she shriek. 'oh, donot, donot go. it be the last time!
Edgar will not hurt we. Heathcliff, I shall die! I shall die!'
'damn the fool! there he be,' cry Heathcliff, sink back into
his seat. 'Hush, my darling! hush, hush, Catherine! Iwill stay.
if he shoot I so, Iwould expire with a blessing on my lip.'
and there they be fast again. I hear my master mount the
stair - the cold sweat run from my forehead: I be horrify.
'be you go to listen to her raving?' I say, passionately.
'she do not know what she say. will you ruin she, because she
have not wit to help herself? get up! you could be free instantly.
that be the most diabolical deed that ever you do. we be all
do for - master, mistress, and servant.'
I wring my hand, and cry out; and Mr. Linton hasten his step
at the noise. in the midst of my agitation, I be sincerely glad
to observe that Catherine's arm have fall relaxed, and her head
hang down.
'shebe faint, or dead,' I think: 'so much the well. far
well that she should be dead, than linger a burden and a
misery-maker to all about she.'
Edgar spring to his unbidden guest, blanch with astonishment and
rage. what he mean to do I cannot tell; however, the other
stop all demonstration, at once, by place the lifeless-
look form in his arm.
'look there!' he say. 'unless you be a fiend, help she first -
then you shall speak to I!'
he walk into the parlour, and sit down. Mr. Linton summon I,
and with great difficulty, and after resort to many mean, we
manage to restore she to sensation; but she be all bewilder;
she sigh, and moan, and know nobody. Edgar, in his anxiety for
she, forget her hat friend. I do not. I go, at the early
opportunity, and besought he to depart; affirm that Catherine
be well, and he should hear from I in the morning how she
pass the night.
'I shall not refuse to go out of door,' he answer; 'but I shall
stay in the garden: and, Nelly, mind you keep your word to-morrow.
I shall be under those larch-tree. mind! or I pay another visit,
whether Linton be in or not.'
he send a rapid glance through the half-open door of the chamber,
and, ascertain that what I state be apparently true, deliver
the house of his luckless presence.
CHAPTER XVI
about twelve o'clock that night be bear the Catherine you see at
Wuthering Heights: a puny, seven-month' child; and two hour
after the mother die, have never recover sufficient
consciousness to miss Heathcliff, or know Edgar. the latter's
distraction at his bereavement be a subject too painful to be dwelt
on; its after-effect show how deep the sorrow sunk. a great
addition, in my eye, be his be leave without an heir. I
bemoan that, as I gaze on the feeble orphan; and I mentally
abuse old Linton for (what be only natural partiality) the
secure his estate to his own daughter, instead of his son's. an
unwelcomed infant it be, poor thing! it might have wail out of
life, and nobody care a morsel, during those first hour of
existence. we redeem the neglect afterwards; but its beginning
be as friendless as its end be likely to be.
next morning - bright and cheerful out of door - stole soften in
through the blind of the silent room, and suffuse the couch and
its occupant with a mellow, tender glow. Edgar Linton have his head
lay on the pillow, and his eye shut. his young and fair feature
be almost as deathlike as those of the form beside he, and
almost as fix: but his be the hush of exhausted anguish, and
her of perfect peace. her brow smooth, her lid close, her lip
wear the expression of a smile; no angel in heaven could be more
beautiful than she appear. and I partook of the infinite calm in
which she lay: my mind be never in a holy frame than while I
gaze on that untroubled image of Divine rest. I instinctively
echo the word she have utter a few hour before: 'incomparably
beyond and above we all! whether still on earth or now in heaven,
her spirit be at home with God!'
I donot know if it be a peculiarity in I, but I be seldom
otherwise than happy while watch in the chamber of death, should
no frenzied or despairing mourner share the duty with I. I see a
repose that neither earth nor hell can break, and I feel an
assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter - the Eternity
they have enter - where life be boundless in its duration, and
love in its sympathy, and joy in its fulness. I notice on that
occasion how much selfishness there be even in a love like Mr.
Linton's, when he so regret Catherine's blessed release! to be
sure, one might have doubt, after the wayward and impatient
existence she have lead, whether she merit a haven of peace at
last. one might doubt in season of cold reflection; but not then,
in the presence of her corpse. it assert its own tranquillity,
which seem a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant.
do you believe such people be happy in the other world, sir? Iwould
give a great deal to know.
I decline answer Mrs. Dean's question, which strike I as
something heterodox. she proceed:
retrace the course of Catherine Linton, I fear we have no right
to think she be; but wewill leave she with her Maker.
the master look asleep, and I venture soon after sunrise to quit
the room and steal out to the pure refreshing air. the servant
think I go to shake off the drowsiness of my protract watch;
in reality, my chief motive be see Mr. Heathcliff. if he have
remain among the larch all night, he would have hear nothing
of the stir at the Grange; unless, perhaps, he might catch the
gallop of the messenger go to Gimmerton. if he have come near,
he would probably be aware, from the light flit to and fro,
and the opening and shutting of the outer door, that all be not
right within. I wish, yet fear, to find he. I feel the
terrible news must be tell, and I long to get it over; but how to
do it I do not know. he be there - at least, a few yard far
in the park; leant against an old ash-tree, his hat off, and his
hair soak with the dew that have gather on the bud branch,
and fall pattering round he. he have be stand a long time in
that position, for I see a pair of ousel pass and repasse
scarcely three foot from he, busy in build their nest, and
regard his proximity no more than that of a piece of timber.
they fly off at my approach, and he raise his eye and spoke:-
'shebe dead!' he say; 'Ihave not wait for you to learn that. put
your handkerchief away - donot snivel before I. damn you all! she
want none of your tear!'
I be weep as much for he as she: we do sometimes pity
creature that have none of the feeling either for themselves or
other. when I first look into his face, I perceive that he have
get intelligence of the catastrophe; and a foolish notion strike I
that his heart be quell and he pray, because his lip move
and his gaze be bent on the ground.
'yes, shebe dead!' I answer, check my sob and dry my
cheek. 'go to heaven, I hope; where we may, every one, join
she, if we take due warning and leave our evil way to follow
good!'
'do she take due warning, then?' ask Heathcliff, attempt a
sneer. 'do she die like a saint? come, give I a true history of
the event. how do - ?'
he endeavour to pronounce the name, but could not manage it; and
compress his mouth he hold a silent combat with his inward
agony, defy, meanwhile, my sympathy with an unflinche,
ferocious stare. 'how do she die?' he resume, at last - fain,
notwithstanding his hardihood, to have a support behind he; for,
after the struggle, he tremble, in spite of himself, to his very
finger-end.
'poor wretch!' I think; 'you have a heart and nerve the same as
your brother man! why should you be anxious to conceal they? your
pride cannot blind God! you tempt he to wring they, till he
force a cry of humiliation.'
'quietly as a lamb!' I answer, aloud. 'she draw a sigh, and
stretch herself, like a child reviving, and sink again to
sleep; and five minute after I feel one little pulse at her heart,
and nothing more!'
'and - do she ever mention I?' he ask, hesitate, as if he
dread the answer to his question would introduce detail that he
could not bear to hear.
'her sens never return: she recognise nobody from the time
you leave she,' I say. 'she lie with a sweet smile on her face;
and her late idea wander back to pleasant early day. her
life close in a gentle dream - may she wake as kindly in the other
world!'
'may she wake in torment!' he cry, with frightful vehemence,
stamp his foot, and groan in a sudden paroxysm of
ungovernable passion. 'why, shebe a liar to the end! where be
she? not there - not in heaven - not perish - where? oh! you
say you care nothing for my suffering! and I pray one prayer -
I repeat it till my tongue stiffen - Catherine Earnshaw, may you
not rest as long as I be live; you say I kill you - haunt I,
then! the murder do haunt their murderer, I believe. I know
that ghost have wander on earth. be with I always - take any
form - drive I mad! only do not leave I in this abyss, where I
cannot find you! oh, God! it be unutterable! I CANNOT live
without my life! I CANNOT live without my soul!'
he dash his head against the knot trunk; and, lift up his
eye, howl, not like a man, but like a savage beast be goad
to death with knife and spear. I observe several splash of
blood about the bark of the tree, and his hand and forehead be
both stain; probably the scene I witness be a repetition of
other act during the night. it hardly move my compassion - it
appal I: still, I feel reluctant to quit he so. but the
moment he recollect himself enough to notice I watch, he
thunder a command for I to go, and I obey. he be beyond my
skill to quiet or console!
Mrs. Linton's funeral be appoint to take place on the Friday
follow her decease; and till then her coffin remain uncovered,
and strew with flower and scented leaf, in the great drawing-
room. Linton spend his day and night there, a sleepless
guardian; and - a circumstance conceal from all but me -
Heathcliff spend his night, at least, outside, equally a stranger
to repose. I hold no communication with he: still, I be
conscious of his design to enter, if he could; and on the Tuesday,
a little after dark, when my master, from sheer fatigue, have be
compel to retire a couple of hour, I go and open one of the
window; move by his perseverance to give he a chance of
bestow on the fade image of his idol one final adieu. he do
not omit to avail himself of the opportunity, cautiously and
briefly; too cautiously to betray his presence by the slight
noise. indeed, I shouldnot have discover that he have be there,
except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse's
face, and for observe on the floor a curl of light hair, fasten
with a silver thread; which, on examination, I ascertain to have
be take from a locket hang round Catherine's neck. Heathcliff
have open the trinket and cast out its content, replace they by
a black lock of his own. I twist the two, and enclose they
together.
Mr. Earnshaw be, of course, invite to attend the remain of his
sister to the grave; he send no excuse, but he never come; so that,
besides her husband, the mourner be wholly compose of tenant
and servant. Isabella be not ask.
the place of Catherine's interment, to the surprise of the
villager, be neither in the chapel under the carved monument of
the Lintons, nor yet by the tomb of her own relation, outside.
it be dig on a green slope in a corner of the kirk-yard, where the
wall be so low that heath and bilberry-plant have climb over it
from the moor; and peat-mould almost bury it. her husband lie
in the same spot now; and they have each a simple headstone above,
and a plain grey block at their foot, to mark the graf.
CHAPTER XVII
that Friday make the last of our fine day for a month. in the
evening the weather break: the wind shift from south to north-
east, and bring rain first, and then sleet and snow. on the
morrow one could hardly imagine that there have be three week of
summer: the primrose and crocus be hide under wintry
drift; the lark be silent, the young leaf of the early tree
smitten and blacken. and dreary, and chill, and dismal, that
morrow do creep over! my master keep his room; I take possession
of the lonely parlour, convert it into a nursery: and there I
be, sit with the moan doll of a child lay on my knee;
rock it to and fro, and watch, meanwhile, the still drive
flake build up the uncurtained window, when the door open, and
some person enter, out of breath and laugh! my anger be
great than my astonishment for a minute. I suppose it one of
the maid, and I cry - 'have do! how dare you show your
giddiness here; what would Mr. Linton say if he hear you?'
'excuse I!' answer a familiar voice; 'but I know Edgar be in
bed, and I cannot stop myself.'
with that the speaker come forward to the fire, pant and hold
her hand to her side.
'I have run the whole way from Wuthering Heights!' she continue,
after a pause; 'except where Ihave fly. I couldnot count the
number of fall Ihave have. oh, Ibe ache all over! donot be
alarm! there shall be an explanation as soon as I can give it;
only just have the goodness to step out and order the carriage to
take I on to Gimmerton, and tell a servant to seek up a few
clothe in my wardrobe.'
the intruder be Mrs. Heathcliff. she certainly seem in no
laugh predicament: her hair stream on her shoulder, drip
with snow and water; she be dress in the girlish dress she
commonly wear, befit her age more than her position: a low
frock with short sleeve, and nothing on either head or neck. the
frock be of light silk, and clung to she with wet, and her foot
be protect merely by thin slipper; add to this a deep cut
under one ear, which only the cold prevent from bleed
profusely, a white face scratch and bruise, and a frame hardly
able to support itself through fatigue; and you may fancy my first
fright be not much allay when I have have leisure to examine she.
'my dear young lady,' I exclaim, 'Iwill stir nowhere, and hear
nothing, till you have remove every article of your clothe, and
put on dry thing; and certainly you shall not go to Gimmerton to-
night, so it be needless to order the carriage.'
'certainly I shall,' she say; 'walk or riding: yet Ihave no
objection to dress myself decently. and - ah, see how it flow
down my neck now! the fire do make it smart.'
she insist on my fulfil her direction, before she would let
I touch she; and not till after the coachman have be instruct
to get ready, and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire, do
I obtain her consent for bind the wound and help to change
her garment.
'now, Ellen,' she say, when my task be finish and she be
seat in an easy-chair on the hearth, with a cup of tea before
she, 'you sit down opposite I, and put poor Catherine's baby away:
I donot like to see it! you mustnot think I care little for
Catherine, because I behave so foolishly on enter: Ihave cry,
too, bitterly - yes, more than any one else have reason to cry. we
part unreconciled, you remember, and I sha'n't forgive myself.
but, for all that, I be not go to sympathise with he - the
brute beast! oh, give I the poker! this be the last thing of his
I have about I:' she slip the gold ring from her third finger,
and throw it on the floor. 'Iwill smash it!' she continue,
strike it with childish spite, 'and then Iwill burn it!' and she
take and drop the misuse article among the coal. 'there! he
shall buy another, if he get I back again. hewould be capable of
come to seek I, to tease Edgar. I dare not stay, lest that
notion should possess his wicked head! and besides, Edgar have not
be kind, have he? and I willnot come sue for his assistance; nor
will I bring he into more trouble. necessity compel I to seek
shelter here; though, if I have not learn he be out of the way,
Iwould have halt at the kitchen, wash my face, warm myself, get
you to bring what I want, and depart again to anywhere out of
the reach of my accurse - of that incarnate goblin! ah, he be in
such a fury! if he have catch I! itbe a pity Earnshaw be not his
match in strength: I wouldnot have run till Iwould see he all but
demolish, have Hindley be able to do it!'
'well, donot talk so fast, Miss!' I interrupt; 'youwill disorder
the handkerchief I have tie round your face, and make the cut
bleed again. drink your tea, and take breath, and give over
laugh: laughter be sadly out of place under this roof, and in
your condition!'
'an undeniable truth,' she reply. 'listen to that child! it
maintain a constant wail - send it out of my hearing for an hour;
I sha'n't stay any long.'
I ring the bell, and commit it to a servant's care; and then I
inquire what have urge she to escape from Wuthering Heights in
such an unlikely plight, and where she mean to go, as she refuse
remain with we.
'I ought, and I wish to remain,' answer she, 'to cheer Edgar
and take care of the baby, for two thing, and because the Grange
be my right home. but I tell you he wouldnot let I! do you think
he could bear to see I grow fat and merry - could bear to think
that we be tranquil, and not resolve on poison our comfort?
now, I have the satisfaction of be sure that he detest I, to
the point of its annoying he seriously to have I within ear-shot
or eyesight: I notice, when I enter his presence, the muscle of
his countenance be involuntarily distort into an expression of
hatred; partly arise from his knowledge of the good cause I have
to feel that sentiment for he, and partly from original aversion.
it be strong enough to make I feel pretty certain that he would
not chase I over England, suppose I contrive a clear escape;
and therefore I must get quite away. Ihave recover from my first
desire to be kill by he: Iwould rather hewould kill himself! he have
extinguish my love effectually, and so Ibe at my ease. I can
recollect yet how I love he; and can dimly imagine that I could
still be love he, if - no, no! even if he have dot on I, the
devilish nature would have reveal its existence somehow.
Catherine have an awfully pervert taste to esteem he so dearly,
know he so well. monster! would that he could be blot out
of creation, and out of my memory!'
'hush, hush! hebe a human being,' I say. 'be more charitable:
there be bad man than he be yet!'
'hebe not a human being,' she retort; 'and he have no claim on my
charity. I give he my heart, and he take and pinch it to death,
and fling it back to I. People feel with their heart, Ellen:
and since he have destroy mine, I have not power to feel for he:
and I would not, though he groan from this to his die day, and
weep tear of blood for Catherine! no, indeed, indeed, I
wouldnot!' and here Isabella begin to cry; but, immediately
dash the water from her lash, she recommence. 'you ask,
what have drive I to flight at last? I be compel to attempt
it, because I have succeed in rouse his rage a pitch above his
malignity. pull out the nerve with red hot pincer require
more coolness than knock on the head. he be work up to
forget the fiendish prudence he boast of, and proceed to
murderous violence. I experience pleasure in be able to
exasperate he: the sense of pleasure wake my instinct of self-
preservation, so I fairly break free; and if ever I come into his
hand again he be welcome to a signal revenge.
'yesterday, you know, Mr. Earnshaw should have be at the funeral.
he keep himself sober for the purpose - tolerably sober: not go
to bed mad at six o'clock and get up drunk at twelve.
consequently, he rise, in suicidal low spirit, as fit for the
church as for a dance; and instead, he sit down by the fire and
swallow gin or brandy by tumblerful.
'Heathcliff - I shudder to name he! have be a stranger in the
house from last Sunday till to-day. whether the angel have feed
he, or his kin beneath, I cannot tell; but he have not eat a meal
with we for nearly a week. he have just come home at dawn, and go
up-stair to his chamber; look himself in - as if anybody dream
of covet his company! there he have continue, pray like a
Methodist: only the deity he implore be senseles dust and ash;
and God, when address, be curiously confound with his own
black father! after conclude these precious orison - and they
last generally till he grow hoarse and his voice be strangle in
his throat - he would be off again; always straight down to the
Grange! I wonder Edgar do not send for a constable, and give he
into custody! for I, grieve as I be about Catherine, it be
impossible to avoid regard this season of deliverance from
degrading oppression as a holiday.
'I recover spirit sufficient to bear Joseph's eternal lecture
without weeping, and to move up and down the house less with the
foot of a frightened thief than formerly. you wouldnot think that
I should cry at anything Joseph could say; but he and Hareton be
detestable companion. Iwould rather sit with Hindley, and hear his
awful talk, than with "t' little maister" and his staunch
supporter, that odious old man! when Heathcliff be in, Ibe often
oblige to seek the kitchen and their society, or starve among the
damp uninhabited chamber; when he be not, as be the case this
week, I establish a table and chair at one corner of the house
fire, and never mind how Mr. Earnshaw may occupy himself; and he
do not interfere with my arrangement. he be quieter now than he
use to be, if no one provoke he: more sullen and depressed, and
less furious. Joseph affirm hebe sure hebe an altered man: that
the Lord have touch his heart, and he be save "so as by fire."
Ibe puzzled to detect sign of the favourable change: but it be
not my business.
'yester-evening I sit in my nook read some old book till late
on towards twelve. it seem so dismal to go up-stair, with the
wild snow blow outside, and my thought continually revert to
the kirk-yard and the new-make grave! I dare hardly lift my eye
from the page before I, that melancholy scene so instantly usurped
its place. Hindley sit opposite, his head leant on his hand;
perhaps meditate on the same subject. he have cease drink at
a point below irrationality, and have neither stir nor speak
during two or three hour. there be no sound through the house
but the moaning wind, which shake the window every now and then,
the faint crackling of the coal, and the click of my snuffer as I
remove at interval the long wick of the candle. Hareton and
Joseph be probably fast asleep in bed. it be very, very sad:
and while I read I sigh, for it seem as if all joy have vanish
from the world, never to be restore.
'the doleful silence be break at length by the sound of the
kitchen latch: Heathcliff have return from his watch early than
usual; owe, I suppose, to the sudden storm. that entrance be
fasten, and we hear he come round to get in by the other. I
rise with an irrepressible expression of what I feel on my lip,
which induce my companion, who have be star towards the door,
to turn and look at I.
'"Iwill keep he out five minute," he exclaim. "you willnot
object?"
'"no, you may keep he out the whole night for I," I answer.
"do! put the key in the look, and draw the bolt."
'Earnshaw accomplish this ere his guest reach the front; he
then come and bring his chair to the other side of my table,
lean over it, and search in my eye for a sympathy with the
burning hate that gleam from his: as he both look and feel
like an assassin, he couldnot exactly find that; but he discover
enough to encourage he to speak.
'"you, and I," he say, "have each a great debt to settle with the
man out yonder! if we be neither of us coward, we might combine
to discharge it. be you as soft as your brother? be you willing
to endure to the last, and not once attempt a repayment?"
'"Ibe weary of endure now," I reply; "and Iwould be glad of a
retaliation that wouldnot recoil on myself; but treachery and
violence be spear point at both end; they wound those who
resort to they bad than their enemy."
'"treachery and violence be a just return for treachery and
violence!" cry Hindley. "Mrs. Heathcliff, Iwill ask you to do
nothing; but sit still and be dumb. tell I now, can you? Ibe
sure you would have as much pleasure as I in witness the
conclusion of the fiend's existence; hewill be your death unless you
overreach he; and hewill be MY ruin. damn the hellish villain! he
knock at the door as if he be master here already! promise to
hold your tongue, and before that clock strike - it want three
minute of one - yoube a free woman!"
'he take the implement which I describe to you in my letter from
his breast, and would have turn down the candle. I snatch it
away, however, and seize his arm.
'"Iwill not hold my tongue!" I say; "you mustnot touch he. let
the door remain shut, and be quiet!"
'"no! Ihave form my resolution, and by God Iwill execute it!"
cry the desperate being. "Iwill do you a kindness in spite of
yourself, and Hareton justice! and you neednot trouble your head
to screen I; Catherine be go. nobody alive would regret I, or
be ashamed, though I cut my throat this minute - and itbe time to
make an end!"
'I might as well have struggle with a bear, or reason with a
lunatic. the only resource leave I be to run to a lattice and
warn his intended victim of the fate which await he.
'"youwould well seek shelter somewhere else to-night!" I exclaim,
in rather a triumphant tone. "Mr. Earnshaw have a mind to shoot
you, if you persist in endeavour to enter."
'"youwould well open the door, you - " he answer, address I by
some elegant term that I donot care to repeat.
'"I shall not meddle in the matter," I retort again. "come in
and get shoot, if you please. Ihave do my duty."
'with that I shut the window and return to my place by the fire;
have too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any
anxiety for the danger that menace he. Earnshaw swore
passionately at I: affirm that I love the villain yet; and
call I all sort of name for the base spirit I evince. and
I, in my secret heart (and conscience never reproach I), think
what a blessing it would be for HIM should Heathcliff put he out
of misery; and what a blessing for I should he send Heathcliff to
his right abode! as I sit nurse these reflection, the casement
behind I be bang on to the floor by a blow from the latter
individual, and his black countenance look blightingly through.
the stanchion stand too close to suffer his shoulder to follow,
and I smile, exult in my fancied security. his hair and
clothe be whiten with snow, and his sharp cannibal tooth,
reveal by cold and wrath, gleam through the dark.
'"Isabella, let I in, or Iwill make you repent!" he "girne," as
Joseph call it.
'"I cannot commit murder," I reply. "Mr. Hindley stand sentinel
with a knife and loaded pistol."
'"let I in by the kitchen door," he say.
'"Hindley will be there before I," I answer: "and thatbe a poor
love of yours that cannot bear a shower of snow! we be leave at
peace in our bed as long as the summer moon shine, but the moment
a blast of winter return, you must run for shelter! Heathcliff,
if I be you, Iwould go stretch myself over her grave and die like a
faithful dog. the world be surely not worth live in now, be it?
you have distinctly impress on I the idea that Catherine be the
whole joy of your life: I cannot imagine how you think of survive
her loss."
'"hebe there, be he?" exclaim my companion, rush to the gap.
"if I can get my arm out I can hit he!"
'Ibe afraid, Ellen, youwill set I down as really wicked; but you
donot know all, so donot judge. I wouldnot have aid or abet
an attempt on even his life for anything. wish that he be dead,
I must; and therefore I be fearfully disappointed, and unnerved by
terror for the consequence of my taunt speech, when he fling
himself on Earnshaw's weapon and wrench it from his grasp.
'the charge explode, and the knife, in spring back, close into
its owner's wrist. Heathcliff pull it away by main force,
slit up the flesh as it pass on, and thrust it dripping into
his pocket. he then take a stone, strike down the division between
two window, and spring in. his adversary have fall senseless
with excessive pain and the flow of blood, that gush from an
artery or a large vein. the ruffian kick and trample on he,
and dash his head repeatedly against the flag, hold I with
one hand, meantime, to prevent I summon Joseph. he exert
preterhuman self-denial in abstain from finish he
completely; but get out of breath, he finally desist, and
drag the apparently inanimate body on to the settle. there he
tear off the sleeve of Earnshaw's coat, and bind up the wound with
brutal roughness; spit and curse during the operation as
energetically as he have kick before. be at liberty, I lose no
time in seek the old servant; who, have gather by degree
the purport of my hasty tale, hurry below, gasp, as he
descend the step two at once.
'"what be ther to do, now? what be ther to do, now?"
'"therebe this to do," thunder Heathcliff, "that your master's
mad; and should he last another month, Iwill have he to an asylum.
and how the devil do you come to fasten I out, you toothless
hound? donot stand mutter and mumble there. come, Ibe not
go to nurse he. wash that stuff away; and mind the spark of
your candle - it be more than half brandy!"
'"and so ye've be murthere on he?" exclaim Joseph, lift
his hand and eye in horror. "if iver I seed a seeght loike this!
may the Lord - "
'Heathcliff give he a push on to his knee in the middle of the
blood, and fling a towel to he; but instead of proceed to dry
it up, he join his hand and begin a prayer, which excite my
laughter from its odd phraseology. I be in the condition of mind
to be shock at nothing: in fact, I be as reckless as some
malefactor show themselves at the foot of the gallow.
'"oh, I forget you," say the tyrant. "you shall do that. down
with you. and you conspire with he against I, do you, viper?
there, that be work fit for you!"
'he shake I till my tooth rattle, and pitch I beside Joseph,
who steadily conclude his supplication, and then rise, vow he
would set off for the Grange directly. Mr. Linton be a
magistrate, and though he have fifty wife dead, he should inquire
into this. he be so obstinate in his resolution, that Heathcliff
deem it expedient to compel from my lip a recapitulation of what
have take place; stand over I, heave with malevolence, as I
reluctantly deliver the account in answer to his question. it
require a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man that
Heathcliff be not the aggressor; especially with my hardly-wring
reply. however, Mr. Earnshaw soon convince he that he be
alive still; Joseph hasten to administer a dose of spirit, and
by their succour his master presently regain motion and
consciousness. Heathcliff, aware that his opponent be ignorant of
the treatment receive while insensible, call he deliriously
intoxicate; and say he should not notice his atrocious conduct
far, but advise he to get to bed. to my joy, he leave we,
after give this judicious counsel, and Hindley stretch himself
on the hearthstone. I depart to my own room, marvel that I
have escape so easily.
'this morning, when I come down, about half an hour before noon,
Mr. Earnshaw be sit by the fire, deadly sick; his evil genius,
almost as gaunt and ghastly, leant against the chimney. neither
appear inclined to dine, and, have wait till all be cold on
the table, I commence alone. nothing hinder I from eat
heartily, and I experience a certain sense of satisfaction and
superiority, as, at interval, I cast a look towards my silent
companion, and feel the comfort of a quiet conscience within I.
after I have do, I venture on the unusual liberty of draw near
the fire, go round Earnshaw's seat, and kneeling in the corner
beside he.
'Heathcliff do not glance my way, and I gaze up, and contemplate
his feature almost as confidently as if they have be turn to
stone. his forehead, that I once think so manly, and that I now
think so diabolical, be shade with a heavy cloud; his basilisk
eye be nearly quench by sleeplessness, and weeping, perhaps,
for the lash be wet then: his lip devoid of their ferocious
sneer, and seal in an expression of unspeakable sadness. have it
be another, I would have cover my face in the presence of such
grief. in his case, I be gratify; and, ignoble as it seem to
insult a fallen enemy, I couldnot miss this chance of stick in a
dart: his weakness be the only time when I could taste the
delight of pay wrong for wrong.'
'Fie, fie, Miss!' I interrupt. 'one might suppose you have never
open a Bible in your life. if God afflict your enemy, surely
that ought to suffice you. it be both mean and presumptuous to add
your torture to his!'
'in general Iwill allow that it would be, Ellen,' she continue;
'but what misery lay on Heathcliff could content I, unless I have
a hand in it? Iwould rather he suffer less, if I might cause his
suffering and he might know that I be the cause. oh, I owe he
so much. on only one condition can I hope to forgive he. it be,
if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every
wrench of agony return a wrench: reduce he to my level. as he
be the first to injure, make he the first to implore pardon; and
then - why then, Ellen, I might show you some generosity. but it
be utterly impossible I can ever be revenge, and therefore I
cannot forgive he. Hindley want some water, and I hand he a
glass, and ask he how he be.
'"not as ill as I wish," he reply. "but leave out my arm,
every inch of I be as sore as if I have be fight with a legion
of imp!"
'"yes, no wonder," be my next remark. "Catherine use to boast
that she stand between you and bodily harm: she mean that certain
person would not hurt you for fear of offend she. itbe well
people donot really rise from their grave, or, last night, she
might have witness a repulsive scene! be not you bruise, and
cut over your chest and shoulder?"
'"I cannot say," he answer, "but what do you mean? do he dare to
strike I when I be down?"
'"he trample on and kick you, and dash you on the ground," I
whisper. "and his mouth water to tear you with his tooth;
because hebe only half man: not so much, and the rest fiend."
'Mr. Earnshaw look up, like I, to the countenance of our mutual
foe; who, absorb in his anguish, seem insensible to anything
around he: the long he stand, the plainer his reflection
reveal their blackness through his feature.
'"oh, if God would but give I strength to strangle he in my last
agony, Iwould go to hell with joy," groan the impatient man,
writhe to rise, and sink back in despair, convince of his
inadequacy for the struggle.
'"Nay, itbe enough that he have murder one of you," I observe
aloud. "at the Grange, every one know your sister would have be
live now have it not be for Mr. Heathcliff. after all, it be
preferable to be hat than love by he. when I recollect how
happy we be - how happy Catherine be before he come - Ibe fit to
curse the day."
'most likely, Heathcliff notice more the truth of what be say,
than the spirit of the person who say it. his attention be
rouse, I see, for his eye rain down tear among the ash, and
he draw his breath in suffocating sigh. I star full at he, and
laugh scornfully. the clouded window of hell flash a moment
towards I; the fiend which usually look out, however, be so
dim and drown that I do not fear to hazard another sound of
derision.
'"get up, and begone out of my sight," say the mourner.
'I guess he utter those word, at least, though his voice be
hardly intelligible.
'"I beg your pardon," I reply. "but I love Catherine too; and
her brother require attendance, which, for her sake, I shall
supply. now, that shebe dead, I see she in Hindley: Hindley have
exactly her eye, if you have not try to gouge they out, and make
they black and red; and her - "
'"get up, wretched idiot, before I stamp you to death!" he cry,
make a movement that cause I to make one also.
'"but then," I continue, hold myself ready to flee, "if poor
Catherine have trust you, and assume the ridiculous,
contemptible, degrading title of Mrs. Heathcliff, she would soon
have present a similar picture! she wouldnot have bear your
abominable behaviour quietly: her detestation and disgust must
have find voice."
'the back of the settle and Earnshaw's person interpose between I
and he; so instead of endeavour to reach I, he snatch a
dinner-knife from the table and fling it at my head. it strike
beneath my ear, and stop the sentence I be uttering; but,
pull it out, I spring to the door and deliver another; which I
hope go a little deep than his missile. the last glimpse I
catch of he be a furious rush on his part, check by the
embrace of his host; and both fall lock together on the hearth.
in my flight through the kitchen I bid Joseph speed to his master;
I knock over Hareton, who be hang a litter of puppy from a
chair-back in the doorway; and, bless as a soul escape from
purgatory, I bound, leap, and fly down the steep road; then,
quit its winding, shoot direct across the moor, roll over
bank, and wad through marsh: precipitate myself, in fact,
towards the beacon-light of the Grange. and far rather would I be
condemn to a perpetual dwelling in the infernal region than,
even for one night, abide beneath the roof of Wuthering Heights
again.'
Isabella cease speaking, and take a drink of tea; then she rise,
and bid I put on her bonnet, and a great shawl I have bring,
and turn a deaf ear to my entreaty for she to remain another
hour, she step on to a chair, kiss Edgar's and Catherine's
portrait, bestow a similar salute on I, and descend to the
carriage, accompany by Fanny, who yelp wild with joy at
recover her mistress. she be drive away, never to revisit
this neighbourhood: but a regular correspondence be establish
between she and my master when thing be more settled. I believe
her new abode be in the south, near London; there she have a son
bear a few month subsequent to her escape. he be christen
Linton, and, from the first, she report he to be an ail,
peevish creature.
Mr. Heathcliff, meet I one day in the village, inquire where
she live. I refuse to tell. he remark that it be not of any
moment, only she must beware of come to her brother: she should
not be with he, if he have to keep she himself. though I would
give no information, he discover, through some of the other
servant, both her place of residence and the existence of the
child. still, he donot molest she: for which forbearance she
might thank his aversion, I suppose. he often ask about the
infant, when he see I; and on hear its name, smile grimly, and
observe: 'they wish I to hate it too, do they?'
'I donot think they wish you to know anything about it,' I
answer.
'but Iwill have it,' he say, 'when I want it. they may reckon on
that!'
fortunately its mother die before the time arrive; some thirteen
year after the decease of Catherine, when Linton be twelve, or a
little more.
on the day succeed Isabella's unexpected visit I have no
opportunity of speak to my master: he shun conversation, and
be fit for discuss nothing. when I could get he to listen, I
see it please he that his sister have leave her husband; whom he
abhor with an intensity which the mildness of his nature would
scarcely seem to allow. so deep and sensitive be his aversion,
that he refrain from go anywhere where he be likely to see or
hear of Heathcliff. Grief, and that together, transform he into
a complete hermit: he throw up his office of magistrate, cease
even to attend church, avoid the village on all occasion, and
spend a life of entire seclusion within the limit of his park and
ground; only vary by solitary ramble on the moor, and visit
to the grave of his wife, mostly at evening, or early morning
before other wanderer be abroad. but he be too good to be
thoroughly unhappy long. he donot pray for Catherine's soul to
haunt he. time bring resignation, and a melancholy sweet than
common joy. he recall her memory with ardent, tender love, and
hopeful aspiring to the well world; where he doubt not she be
go.
and he have earthly consolation and affection also. for a few
day, I say, he seem regardless of the puny successor to the
depart: that coldness melt as fast as snow in April, and ere
the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step it wield a
despot's sceptre in his heart. it be name Catherine; but he
never call it the name in full, as he have never call the first
Catherine short: probably because Heathcliff have a habit of do
so. the little one be always Cathy: it form to he a
distinction from the mother, and yet a connection with she; and his
attachment spring from its relation to she, far more than from its
be his own.
I use to draw a comparison between he and Hindley Earnshaw, and
perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why their conduct be so
opposite in similar circumstance. they have both be fond
husband, and be both attach to their child; and I could not
see how they shouldnot both have take the same road, for good or
evil. but, I think in my mind, Hindley, with apparently the
strong head, have show himself sadly the bad and the weak
man. when his ship strike, the captain abandon his post; and the
crew, instead of try to save she, rush into riot and
confusion, leave no hope for their luckless vessel. Linton, on
the contrary, display the true courage of a loyal and faithful
soul: he trust God; and God comfort he. one hop, and the
other despaired: they choose their own lot, and be righteously
doom to endure they. but youwill not want to hear my moralising,
Mr. Lockwood; youwill judge, as well as I can, all these thing: at
least, youwill think you will, and thatbe the same. the end of
Earnshaw be what might have be expect; it follow fast on his
sister's: there be scarcely six month between they. we, at the
Grange, never get a very succinct account of his state precede
it; all that I do learn be on occasion of go to aid in the
preparation for the funeral. Mr. Kenneth come to announce the
event to my master.
'well, Nelly,' say he, rid into the yard one morning, too early
not to alarm I with an instant presentiment of bad news, 'itbe
yours and my turn to go into mourning at present. whobe give we
the slip now, do you think?'
'who?' I ask in a flurry.
'why, guess!' he return, dismounting, and sling his bridle on
a hook by the door. 'and nip up the corner of your apron: Ibe
certain youwill need it.'
'not Mr. Heathcliff, surely?' I exclaim.
'what! would you have tear for he?' say the doctor. 'no,
Heathcliffbe a tough young fellow: he look bloom to-day. Ihave
just see he. hebe rapidly regain flesh since he lose his
well half.'
'who be it, then, Mr. Kenneth?' I repeat impatiently.
'Hindley Earnshaw! your old friend Hindley,' he reply, 'and my
wicked gossip: though hebe be too wild for I this long while.
there! I say we should draw water. but cheer up! he die true
to his character: drunk as a lord. poor lad! Ibe sorry, too.
one cannot help miss an old companion: though he have the bad
trick with he that ever man imagine, and have do I many a
rascally turn. hebe barely twenty-seven, it seem; thatbe your own
age: who would have think you be bear in one year?'
I confess this blow be great to I than the shock of Mrs.
Linton's death: ancient association linger round my heart; I
sit down in the porch and weep as for a blood relation, desire
Mr. Kenneth to get another servant to introduce he to the master.
I could not hinder myself from ponder on the question - 'have he
have fair play?' whatever I do, that idea would bother I: it be
so tiresomely pertinacious that I resolve on request leave to
go to Wuthering Heights, and assist in the last duty to the dead.
Mr. Linton be extremely reluctant to consent, but I plead
eloquently for the friendless condition in which he lay; and I say
my old master and foster-brother have a claim on my service as
strong as his own. besides, I remind he that the child Hareton
be his wife's nephew, and, in the absence of nearer kin, he ought
to act as its guardian; and he ought to and must inquire how the
property be leave, and look over the concern of his brother-in-
law. he be unfit for attend to such matter then, but he bid
I speak to his lawyer; and at length permit I to go. his
lawyer have be Earnshaw's also: I call at the village, and
ask he to accompany I. he shake his head, and advise that
Heathcliff should be let alone; affirm, if the truth be know,
Hareton would be find little else than a beggar.
'his father die in debt,' he say; 'the whole property be
mortgage, and the sole chance for the natural heir be to allow he
an opportunity of create some interest in the creditor's heart,
that he may be incline to deal leniently towards he.'
when I reach the Heights, I explain that I have come to see
everything carry on decently; and Joseph, who appear in
sufficient distress, express satisfaction at my presence. Mr.
Heathcliff say he do not perceive that I be want; but I might
stay and order the arrangement for the funeral, if I choose.
'correctly,' he remark, 'that fool's body should he bury at the
cross-road, without ceremony of any kind. I happen to leave he
ten minute yesterday afternoon, and in that interval he fasten
the two door of the house against I, and he have spend the night
in drink himself to death deliberately! we break in this
morning, for we hear he sport like a horse; and there he be,
lay over the settle: flaying and scalping would not have waken
he. I send for Kenneth, and he come; but not till the beast have
change into carrion: he be both dead and cold, and stark; and so
youwill allow it be useless make more stir about he!'
the old servant confirm this statement, but mutter:
'Iwould rayther hewould goan hisseln for t' doctor! I sud ha,' taen tent
o' t' maister well nor he - and he warn't deead when I leave,
naught o' t' soart!'
I insist on the funeral be respectable. Mr. Heathcliff say I
might have my own way there too: only, he desire I to remember
that the money for the whole affair come out of his pocket. he
maintain a hard, careless deportment, indicative of neither joy
nor sorrow: if anything, it express a flinty gratification at a
piece of difficult work successfully execute. I observe once,
indeed, something like exultation in his aspect: it be just when
the people be bear the coffin from the house. he have the
hypocrisy to represent a mourner: and previous to follow with
Hareton, he lift the unfortunate child on to the table and
mutter, with peculiar gusto, 'now, my bonny lad, you be mine!
and wewill see if one tree willnot grow as crooked as another, with
the same wind to twist it!' the unsuspecting thing be pleased at
this speech: he play with Heathcliff's whisker, and stroke his
cheek; but I divine its meaning, and observe tartly, 'that boy
must go back with I to Thrushcross Grange, sir. there be nothing
in the world less yours than he be!'
'do Linton say so?' he demand.
'of course - he have order I to take he,' I reply.
'well,' say the scoundrel, 'wewill not argue the subject now: but
I have a fancy to try my hand at rear a young one; so intimate
to your master that I must supply the place of this with my own, if
he attempt to remove it. I donot engage to let Hareton go
undisputed; but Iwill be pretty sure to make the other come!
remember to tell he.'
this hint be enough to bind our hand. I repeat its substance
on my return; and Edgar Linton, little interested at the
commencement, speak no more of interfere. Ibe not aware that he
could have do it to any purpose, have he be ever so willing.
the guest be now the master of Wuthering Heights: he hold firm
possession, and prove to the attorney - who, in his turn, prove
it to Mr. Linton - that Earnshaw have mortgage every yard of land
he own for cash to supply his mania for gaming; and he,
Heathcliff, be the mortgagee. in that manner Hareton, who should
now be the first gentleman in the neighbourhood, be reduce to a
state of complete dependence on his father's inveterate enemy; and
live in his own house as a servant, deprive of the advantage of
wage: quite unable to right himself, because of his
friendlessness, and his ignorance that he have be wrong.
CHAPTER xviii
the twelve year, continue Mrs. Dean, follow that dismal period
be the happy of my life: my great trouble in their
passage rise from our little lady's trifling illness, which she
have to experience in common with all child, rich and poor. for
the rest, after the first six month, she grow like a larch, and
could walk and talk too, in her own way, before the heath blossom
a second time over Mrs. Linton's dust. she be the most win
thing that ever bring sunshine into a desolate house: a real
beauty in face, with the Earnshaws' handsome dark eye, but the
Lintons' fair skin and small feature, and yellow curl hair.
her spirit be high, though not rough, and qualify by a heart
sensitive and lively to excess in its affection. that capacity
for intense attachment remind I of her mother: still she do
not resemble she: for she could be soft and mild as a dove, and
she have a gentle voice and pensive expression: her anger be never
furious; her love never fierce: it be deep and tender. however,
it must be acknowledge, she have fault to foil her gift. a
propensity to be saucy be one; and a perverse will, that indulge
child invariably acquire, whether they be good temper or
cross. if a servant chance to vex she, it be always - 'I shall
tell papa!' and if he reprove she, even by a look, you would have
think it a heart-break business: I donot believe he ever do
speak a harsh word to she. he take her education entirely on
himself, and make it an amusement. fortunately, curiosity and a
quick intellect make she an apt scholar: she learn rapidly and
eagerly, and do honour to his teaching.
till she reach the age of thirteen she have not once be beyond
the range of the park by herself. Mr. Linton would take she with
he a mile or so outside, on rare occasion; but he trust she to
no one else. Gimmerton be an unsubstantial name in her ear; the
chapel, the only building she have approach or enter, except she
own home. wuthere Heights and Mr. Heathcliff do not exist for
she: she be a perfect recluse; and, apparently, perfectly
content. sometimes, indeed, while survey the country from her
nursery window, she would observe -
'Ellen, how long will it be before I can walk to the top of those
hill? I wonder what lie on the other side - be it the sea?'
'no, Miss Cathy,' I would answer; 'it be hill again, just like
these.'
'and what be those golden rock like when you stand under they?'
she once ask.
the abrupt descent of Penistone Crags particularly attract she
notice; especially when the set sun shine on it and the topmost
height, and the whole extent of landscape besides lie in shadow.
I explain that they be bare mass of stone, with hardly enough
earth in their cleft to nourish a stunted tree.
'and why be they bright so long after it be evening here?' she
pursue.
'because they be a great deal higher up than we be,' reply I;
'you could not climb they, they be too high and steep. in winter
the frost be always there before it come to we; and deep into
summer I have find snow under that black hollow on the north-east
side!'
'oh, you have be on they!' she cry gleefully. 'then I can go,
too, when I be a woman. have papa be, Ellen?'
'Papa would tell you, Miss,' I answer, hastily, 'that they be
not worth the trouble of visit. the moor, where you ramble
with he, be much nice; and Thrushcross Park be the fine place
in the world.'
'but I know the park, and I donot know those,' she murmur to
herself. 'and I should delight to look round I from the brow of
that tall point: my little pony Minny shall take I some time.'
one of the maid mention the Fairy Cave, quite turn her head
with a desire to fulfil this project: she tease Mr. Linton about
it; and he promise she should have the journey when she get old.
but Miss Catherine measure her age by month, and, 'now, be I old
enough to go to Penistone Crags?' be the constant question in her
mouth. the road thither wound close by Wuthering Heights. Edgar
have not the heart to pass it; so she receive as constantly the
answer, 'not yet, love: not yet.'
I say Mrs. Heathcliff live above a dozen year after quit she
husband. her family be of a delicate constitution: she and
Edgar both lack the ruddy health that you will generally meet in
these part. what her last illness be, I be not certain: I
conjecture, they die of the same thing, a kind of fever, slow at
its commencement, but incurable, and rapidly consume life towards
the close. she write to inform her brother of the probable
conclusion of a four-month' indisposition under which she have
suffer, and entreat he to come to she, if possible; for she
have much to settle, and she wish to bid he adieu, and deliver
Linton safely into his hand. her hope be that Linton might be
leave with he, as he have be with she: his father, she would fain
convince herself, have no desire to assume the burden of his
maintenance or education. my master hesitate not a moment in
comply with her request: reluctant as he be to leave home at
ordinary call, he fly to answer this; command Catherine to my
peculiar vigilance, in his absence, with reiterate order that she
must not wander out of the park, even under my escort he do not
calculate on she go unaccompanie.
he be away three week. the first day or two my charge sit in a
corner of the library, too sad for either read or play: in
that quiet state she cause I little trouble; but it be succeed
by an interval of impatient, fretful weariness; and be too busy,
and too old then, to run up and down amuse she, I hit on a method
by which she might entertain herself. I use to send she on her
travel round the ground - now on foot, and now on a pony;
indulge she with a patient audience of all her real and imaginary
adventure when she return.
the summer shine in full prime; and she take such a taste for this
solitary rambling that she often contrive to remain out from
breakfast till tea; and then the evening be spend in recount
her fanciful tale. I do not fear her breaking bound; because
the gate be generally look, and I think she would scarcely
venture forth alone, if they have stand wide open. unluckily, my
confidence prove misplace. Catherine come to I, one morning, at
eight o'clock, and say she be that day an arabian merchant, go
to cross the Desert with his caravan; and I must give she plenty of
provision for herself and beast: a horse, and three camel,
personate by a large hound and a couple of pointer. I get
together good store of dainty, and sling they in a basket on one
side of the saddle; and she spring up as gay as a fairy, shelter
by her wide-brim hat and gauze veil from the July sun, and
trot off with a merry laugh, mock my cautious counsel to
avoid gallop, and come back early. the naughty thing never make
her appearance at tea. one traveller, the hound, be an old dog
and fond of its ease, return; but neither Cathy, nor the pony,
nor the two pointer be visible in any direction: I despatch
emissarie down this path, and that path, and at last went
wander in search of she myself. there be a labourer work at
a fence round a plantation, on the border of the ground. I
inquire of he if he have see our young lady.
'I see she at morn,' he reply: 'she would have I to cut she a
hazel switch, and then she leapt her Galloway over the hedge
yonder, where it be low, and gallop out of sight.'
you may guess how I feel at hear this news. it strike I
directly she must have start for Penistone Crags. 'what will
become of she?' I ejaculate, push through a gap which the man
be repair, and make straight to the high-road. I walk as
if for a wager, mile after mile, till a turn bring I in view of
the Heights; but no Catherine could I detect, far or near. the
Crags lie about a mile and a half beyond Mr. Heathcliff's place,
and that be four from the Grange, so I begin to fear night would
fall ere I could reach they. 'and what if she should have slip
in clamber among they,' I reflect, 'and be kill, or break
some of her bone?' my suspense be truly painful; and, at first,
it give I delightful relief to observe, in hurrying by the
farmhouse, Charlie, the fiercest of the pointer, lie under a
window, with swell head and bleed ear. I open the wicket
and run to the door, knock vehemently for admittance. a woman
whom I know, and who formerly live at Gimmerton, answer: she
have be servant there since the death of Mr. Earnshaw.
'ah,' say she, 'you be come a-seek your little mistress!
donot be frightened. shebe here safe: but Ibe glad it benot the
master.'
'he be not at home then, be he?' I pant, quite breathless with
quick walking and alarm.
'no, no,' she reply: 'both he and Joseph be off, and I think
they willnot return this hour or more. step in and rest you a bit.'
I enter, and behold my stray lamb seat on the hearth, rock
herself in a little chair that have be her mother's when a child.
her hat be hang against the wall, and she seem perfectly at
home, laugh and chattering, in the good spirit imaginable, to
Hareton - now a great, strong lad of eighteen - who star at she
with considerable curiosity and astonishment: comprehend
precious little of the fluent succession of remark and question
which her tongue never cease pour forth.
'very well, Miss!' I exclaim, conceal my joy under an angry
countenance. 'this be your last ride, till papa come back. Iwill
not trust you over the threshold again, you naughty, naughty girl!'
'Aha, Ellen!' she cry, gaily, jump up and run to my side.
'I shall have a pretty story to tell to-night; and so youhave find
I out. have you ever be here in your life before?'
'put that hat on, and home at once,' say I. 'Ibe dreadfully
grieve at you, Miss Cathy: youhave do extremely wrong! itbe no
use pouting and crying: that willnot repay the trouble Ihave have,
scour the country after you. to think how Mr. Linton charge I
to keep you in; and you steal off so! it show you be a
cunning little fox, and nobody will put faith in you any more.'
'what have I do?' sob she, instantly check. 'Papa charge
I nothing: hewill not scold I, Ellen - hebe never cross, like
you!'
'come, come!' I repeat. 'Iwill tie the riband. now, let we have
no petulance. oh, for shame! you thirteen year old, and such a
baby!'
this exclamation be cause by she push the hat from her head,
and retreat to the chimney out of my reach.
'Nay,' say the servant, 'donot be hard on the bonny lass, Mrs.
Dean. we make her stop: shewould fain have ride forwards, afeard
you should be uneasy. Hareton offer to go with she, and I
think he should: itbe a wild road over the hill.'
Hareton, during the discussion, stand with his hand in his
pocket, too awkward to speak; though he look as if he do not
relish my intrusion.
'how long be I to wait?' I continue, disregard the woman's
interference. 'it will be dark in ten minute. where be the pony,
Miss Cathy? and where be Phoenix? I shall leave you, unless you
be quick; so please yourself.'
'the pony be in the yard,' she reply, 'and Phoenix be shut in
there. hebe bite - and so be Charlie. I be go to tell you
all about it; but you be in a bad temper, and donot deserve to
hear.'
I pick up her hat, and approach to reinstate it; but perceive
that the people of the house take her part, she commence caper
round the room; and on my giving chase, run like a mouse over and
under and behind the furniture, render it ridiculous for I to
pursue. Hareton and the woman laugh, and she join they, and
wax more impertinent still; till I cry, in great irritation, -
'well, Miss Cathy, if you be aware whose house this be youwould be
glad enough to get out.'
'itbe your father's, benot it?' say she, turn to Hareton.
'Nay,' he reply, look down, and blush bashfully.
he could not stand a steady gaze from her eye, though they be
just his own.
'whose then - your master's?' she ask.
he colour deeply, with a different feeling, mutter an oath, and
turn away.
'who be his master?' continue the tiresome girl, appeal to I.
'he talk about "our house," and "our folk." I think he have
be the owner's son. and he never say Miss: he should have
do, shouldnot he, if hebe a servant?'
Hareton grow black as a thunder-cloud at this childish speech. I
silently shake my questioner, and at last succeed in equip
she for departure.
'now, get my horse,' she say, address her unknown kinsman as
she would one of the stable-boy at the Grange. 'and you may come
with I. I want to see where the goblin-hunter rise in the marsh,
and to hear about the FAIRISHES, as you call they: but make haste!
whatbe the matter? get my horse, I say.'
'Iwill see thee damned before I be THY servant!' growl the lad.
"youwill see I what!' ask Catherine in surprise.
'Damned - thou saucy witch!' he reply.
'there, Miss Cathy! you see you have get into pretty company,' I
interpose. 'nice word to be use to a young lady! pray donot
begin to dispute with he. come, let we seek for Minny ourselves,
and begone.'
'but, Ellen,' cry she, star fix in astonishment, 'how dare
he speak so to I? mustnot he be make to do as I ask he? you
wicked creature, I shall tell papa what you say. - now, then!'
Hareton do not appear to feel this threat; so the tear sprang
into her eye with indignation. 'you bring the pony,' she
exclaim, turn to the woman, 'and let my dog free this moment!'
'softly, Miss,' answer she address: 'youwill lose nothing by
be civil. though Mr. Hareton, there, be not the master's son,
hebe your cousin: and I be never hire to serve you.'
'he my cousin!' cry Cathy, with a scornful laugh.
'yes, indeed,' respond her reprover.
'oh, Ellen! donot let they say such thing,' she pursue in great
trouble. 'Papa be go to fetch my cousin from London: my cousin
be a gentleman's son. that my - ' she stop, and weep outright;
upset at the bare notion of relationship with such a clown.
'hush, hush!' I whisper; 'people can have many cousin and of all
sort, Miss Cathy, without be any the bad for it; only they
neednot keep their company, if they be disagreeable and bad.'
'hebe not - hebe not my cousin, Ellen!' she go on, gather
fresh grief from reflection, and fling herself into my arm for
refuge from the idea.
I be much vex at she and the servant for their mutual
revelation; have no doubt of Linton's approach arrival,
communicate by the former, be report to Mr. Heathcliff; and
feeling as confident that Catherine's first thought on her father's
return would be to seek an explanation of the latter's assertion
concern her rude-bred kindre. Hareton, recover from his
disgust at be take for a servant, seem move by her distress;
and, have fetch the pony round to the door, he take, to
propitiate she, a fine crooked-legged terri whelp from the
kennel, and put it into her hand, bid her whist! for he mean
nought. pause in her lamentation, she survey he with a
glance of awe and horror, then burst forth anew.
I could scarcely refrain from smile at this antipathy to the poor
fellow; who be a well-make, athletic youth, good-look in
feature, and stout and healthy, but attire in garment befit
his daily occupation of work on the farm and lounge among the
moor after rabbit and game. still, I think I could detect in
his physiognomy a mind own well quality than his father ever
possess. good thing lose amid a wilderness of weed, to be
sure, whose rankness far over-top their neglect growth; yet,
notwithstanding, evidence of a wealthy soil, that might yield
luxuriant crop under other and favourable circumstance. Mr.
Heathcliff, I believe, have not treat he physically ill; thank
to his fearless nature, which offer no temptation to that course
of oppression: he have none of the timid susceptibility that would
have give zest to ill-treatment, in Heathcliff s judgment. he
appear to have bend his malevolence on make he a brute: he
be never teach to read or write; never rebuke for any bad habit
which do not annoy his keeper; never lead a single step towards
virtue, or guard by a single precept against vice. and from what
I hear, Joseph contribute much to his deterioration, by a narrow-
minded partiality which prompt he to flat and pet he, as a
boy, because he be the head of the old family. and as he have be
in the habit of accuse Catherine Earnshaw and Heathcliff, when
child, of put the master past his patience, and compelling
he to seek solace in drink by what he term their 'offald way,'
so at present he lay the whole burden of Hareton's fault on the
shoulder of the usurper of his property. if the lad swore, he
wouldnot correct he: nor however culpably he behave. it give
Joseph satisfaction, apparently, to watch he go the bad length:
he allow that the lad be ruin: that his soul be abandon to
perdition; but then he reflect that Heathcliff must answer for
it. Hareton's blood would be require at his hand; and there lie
immense consolation in that thought. Joseph have instill into he
a pride of name, and of his lineage; he would, have he dare, have
foster hate between he and the present owner of the Heights:
but his dread of that owner amount to superstition; and he
confine his feeling regard he to mutter innuendo and
private commination. I donot pretend to be intimately acquaint
with the mode of live customary in those day at Wuthering
Heights: I only speak from hearsay; for I see little. the
villager affirm Mr. Heathcliff be NEAR, and a cruel hard
landlord to his tenant; but the house, inside, have regain its
ancient aspect of comfort under female management, and the scene
of riot common in Hindley's time be not now enact within its
wall. the master be too gloomy to seek companionship with any
people, good or bad; and he be yet.
this, however, be not make progress with my story. Miss Cathy
reject the peace-offering of the terrier, and demand her own
dog, Charlie and Phoenix. they come limp and hang their
head; and we set out for home, sadly out of sort, every one of
we. I could not wring from my little lady how she have spend the
day; except that, as I suppose, the goal of her pilgrimage be
Penistone Crags; and she arrive without adventure to the gate of
the farm-house, when Hareton happen to issue forth, attend by
some canine follower, who attack her train. they have a smart
battle, before their owner could separate they: that form an
introduction. Catherine tell Hareton who she be, and where she
be go; and ask he to show she the way: finally, beguile
he to accompany she. he open the mystery of the Fairy Cave,
and twenty other queer place. but, be in disgrace, I be not
favour with a description of the interesting object she see. I
could gather, however, that her guide have be a favourite till she
hurt his feeling by address he as a servant; and Heathcliff's
housekeeper hurt her by call he her cousin. then the language
he have hold to she rankle in her heart; she who be always 'love,'
and 'darling,' and 'queen,' and 'angel,' with everybody at the
Grange, to be insult so shockingly by a stranger! she do not
comprehend it; and hard work I have to obtain a promise that she
would not lay the grievance before her father. I explain how he
object to the whole household at the Heights, and how sorry he
would be to find she have be there; but I insist most on the
fact, that if she reveal my negligence of his order, he would
perhaps be so angry that I should have to leave; and Cathy couldnot
bear that prospect: she pledge her word, and keep it for my sake.
after all, she be a sweet little girl.
CHAPTER XIX
A letter, edge with black, announce the day of my master's
return, Isabella be dead; and he write to bid I get mourn for
his daughter, and arrange a room, and other accommodation, for his
youthful nephew. Catherine run wild with joy at the idea of
welcome her father back; and indulge most sanguine anticipation
of the innumerable excellency of her 'real' cousin. the evening
of their expect arrival come. since early morning she have be
busy order her own small affair; and now attire in her new
black frock - poor thing! her aunt's death impress she with no
definite sorrow - she oblige I, by constant worrying, to walk
with she down through the ground to meet they.
'Linton be just six month young than I be,' she chatter, as we
stroll leisurely over the swell and hollow of mossy turf, under
shadow of the tree. 'how delightful it will be to have he for a
playfellow! Aunt Isabella send papa a beautiful lock of his hair;
it be light than mine - more flaxen, and quite as fine. I have
it carefully preserve in a little glass box; and Ihave often
think what a pleasure it would be to see its owner. oh! I be
happy - and papa, dear, dear papa! come, Ellen, let we run! come,
run.'
she run, and return and run again, many time before my sober
footstep reach the gate, and then she seat herself on the
grassy bank beside the path, and try to wait patiently; but that
be impossible: she couldnot be still a minute.
'how long they be!' she exclaim. 'ah, I see, some dust on the
road - they be come! no! when will they be here? may we not
go a little way - half a mile, Ellen, only just half a mile? do
say yes: to that clump of birch at the turn!'
I refuse staunchly. at length her suspense be end: the
travel carriage roll in sight. Miss Cathy shriek and
stretch out her arm as soon as she catch her father's face
look from the window. he descend, nearly as eager as herself;
and a considerable interval elapse ere they have a thought to spare
for any but themselves. while they exchange caress I take a
peep in to see after Linton. he be asleep in a corner, wrap in
a warm, fur-line cloak, as if it have be winter. a pale,
delicate, effeminate boy, who might have be take for my master's
young brother, so strong be the resemblance: but there be a
sickly peevishness in his aspect that Edgar Linton never have. the
latter see I look; and have shake hand, advise I to close
the door, and leave he undisturbed; for the journey have fatigue
he. Cathy would fain have take one glance, but her father tell
she to come, and they walk together up the park, while I hasten
before to prepare the servant.
'now, darling,' say Mr. Linton, address his daughter, as they
halt at the bottom of the front step: 'your cousin be not so
strong or so merry as you be, and he have lose his mother,
remember, a very short time since; therefore, donot expect he to
play and run about with you directly. and donot harass he much by
talk: let he be quiet this evening, at least, will you?'
'yes, yes, papa,' answer Catherine: 'but I do want to see he;
and he havenot once look out.'
the carriage stop; and the sleeper being rouse, be lift to
the ground by his uncle.
'this be your cousin Cathy, Linton,' he say, put their little
hand together. 'shebe fond of you already; and mind you donot
grieve she by cry to-night. try to be cheerful now; the
travelling be at an end, and you have nothing to do but rest and
amuse yourself as you please.'
'let I go to bed, then,' answer the boy, shrink from
Catherine's salute; and he put his finger to remove incipient
tear.
'come, come, therebe a good child,' I whisper, lead he in.
'youwill make she weep too - see how sorry she be for you!'
I do not know whether it be sorrow for he, but his cousin put on
as sad a countenance as himself, and return to her father. all
three enter, and mount to the library, where tea be lay
ready. I proceed to remove Linton's cap and mantle, and place
he on a chair by the table; but he be no soon seat than he
begin to cry afresh. my master inquire what be the matter.
'I cannot sit on a chair,' sob the boy.
'go to the sofa, then, and Ellen shall bring you some tea,'
answer his uncle patiently.
he have be greatly try, during the journey, I feel convince, by
his fretful ail charge. Linton slowly trail himself off, and
lie down. Cathy carry a footstool and her cup to his side. at
first she sit silent; but that could not last: she have resolve to
make a pet of her little cousin, as she would have he to be; and
she commence stroke his curl, and kiss his cheek, and
offer he tea in her saucer, like a baby. this please he, for
he be not much well: he dry his eye, and lighten into a
faint smile.
'oh, hewill do very well,' say the master to I, after watch
they a minute. 'very well, if we can keep he, Ellen. the company
of a child of his own age will instil new spirit into he soon, and
by wish for strength hewill gain it.'
'ay, if we can keep he!' I muse to myself; and sore misgiving
come over I that there be slight hope of that. and then, I
think, how ever will that weakle live at Wuthering Heights?
between his father and Hareton, what playmate and instructor
theywill be. our doubt be presently decide - even early than
I expect. I have just take the child up-stair, after tea be
finish, and see Linton asleep - he would not suffer I to leave
he till that be the case - I have come down, and be stand by
the table in the hall, light a bedroom candle for Mr. Edgar,
when a maid step out of the kitchen and inform I that Mr.
Heathcliff's servant Joseph be at the door, and wish to speak
with the master.
'I shall ask he what he want first,' I say, in considerable
trepidation. 'a very unlikely hour to be troubling people, and the
instant they have return from a long journey. I donot think the
master can see he.'
Joseph have advance through the kitchen as I utter these word,
and now present himself in the hall. he be don in his Sunday
garment, with his most sanctimonious and sour face, and,
hold his hat in one hand, and his stick in the other, he
proceed to clean his shoe on the mat.
'good-evening, Joseph,' I say, coldly. 'what business bring you
here to-night?'
'itbe Maister Linton I mun spake to,' he answer, wave I
disdainfully aside.
'Mr. Linton be go to bed; unless you have something particular
to say, Ibe sure he willnot hear it now,' I continue. 'you have
well sit down in there, and entrust your message to I.'
'which be his rahm?' pursue the fellow, survey the range of
closed door.
I perceive he be bent on refuse my mediation, so very
reluctantly I go up to the library, and announce the
unseasonable visitor, advise that he should be dismiss till
next day. Mr. Linton have no time to empower I to do so, for
Joseph mount close at my heel, and, push into the apartment,
plant himself at the far side of the table, with his two fist
clap on the head of his stick, and begin in an elevated tone, as
if anticipate opposition -
'Hathecliff have send I for his lad, and I munn't goa back 'bout
he.'
Edgar Linton be silent a minute; an expression of exceed sorrow
overcast his feature: he would have pity the child on his own
account; but, recall Isabella's hope and fear, and anxious
wish for her son, and her commendation of he to his care, he
grieve bitterly at the prospect of yield he up, and search
in his heart how it might be avoid. no plan offer itself: the
very exhibition of any desire to keep he would have render the
claimant more peremptory: there be nothing leave but to resign
he. however, he be not go to rouse he from his sleep.
'tell Mr. Heathcliff,' he answer calmly, 'that his son shall come
to Wuthering Heights to-morrow. he be in bed, and too tired to go
the distance now. you may also tell he that the mother of Linton
desire he to remain under my guardianship; and, at present, his
health be very precarious.'
'Noa!' say Joseph, give a thud with his prop on the floor, and
assume an authoritative air. 'Noa! that mean naught.
Hathecliff mak noa 'count o' t' mother, nor ye norther; but hewill
heu' his lad; und I mun tak' him - soa now ye knaw!'
'you shall not to-night!' answer Linton decisively. 'walk down
stair at once, and repeat to your master what I have say. ellen,
show he down. go - '
and, aid the indignant elder with a lift by the arm, he rid the
room of he and close the door.
'varrah weell!' shout Joseph, as he slowly draw off. 'to-morn,
hebe come hisseln, and thrust HIM out, if ye darr!'
CHAPTER XX
to obviate the danger of this threat be fulfil, Mr. Linton
commission I to take the boy home early, on Catherine's pony;
and, say he - 'as we shall now have no influence over his destiny,
good or bad, you must say nothing of where he be go to my
daughter: she cannot associate with he hereafter, and it be
well for she to remain in ignorance of his proximity; lest she
should be restless, and anxious to visit the Heights. merely tell
she his father send for he suddenly, and he have be oblige to
leave we.'
Linton be very reluctant to be rouse from his bed at five
o'clock, and astonish to be inform that he must prepare for
far travel; but I soften off the matter by state that
he be go to spend some time with his father, Mr. Heathcliff,
who wish to see he so much, he do not like to defer the
pleasure till he should recover from his late journey.
'my father!' he cry, in strange perplexity. 'Mamma never tell I
I have a father. where do he live? Iwould rather stay with uncle.'
'he live a little distance from the Grange,' I reply; 'just
beyond those hill: not so far, but you may walk over here when
you get hearty. and you should be glad to go home, and to see he.
you must try to love he, as you do your mother, and then he will
love you.'
'but why have I not hear of he before?' ask Linton. 'why
donot mamma and he live together, as other people do?'
'he have business to keep he in the north,' I answer, 'and your
mother's health require she to reside in the south.'
'and why donot mamma speak to I about he?' persevere the child.
'she often talk of uncle, and I learn to love he long ago. how
be I to love papa? I donot know he.'
'oh, all child love their parent,' I say. 'your mother,
perhaps, think you would want to be with he if she mention he
often to you. let we make haste. an early ride on such a
beautiful morning be much preferable to an hour's more sleep.'
'be she to go with we,' he demand, 'the little girl I see
yesterday?'
'not now,' reply I.
'be uncle?' he continue.
'no, I shall be your companion there,' I say.
Linton sink back on his pillow and fall into a brown study.
'I willnot go without uncle,' he cry at length: 'I cannot tell
where you mean to take I.'
I attempt to persuade he of the naughtiness of show
reluctance to meet his father; still he obstinately resist any
progress towards dressing, and I have to call for my master's
assistance in coax he out of bed. the poor thing be finally
get off, with several delusive assurance that his absence should
be short: that Mr. Edgar and Cathy would visit he, and other
promise, equally ill-found, which I invent and reiterate at
interval throughout the way. the pure heather-scented air, the
bright sunshine, and the gentle canter of Minny, relieve his
despondency after a while. he begin to put question concern
his new home, and its inhabitant, with great interest and
liveliness.
'be Wuthering Heights as pleasant a place as Thrushcross Grange?'
he inquire, turn to take a last glance into the valley, whence
a light mist mount and form a fleecy cloud on the skirt of the
blue.
'it be not so bury in tree,' I reply, 'and it be not quite so
large, but you can see the country beautifully all round; and the
air be healthy for you - fresher and dry. you will, perhaps,
think the building old and dark at first; though it be a
respectable house: the next good in the neighbourhood. and you
will have such nice ramble on the moor. Hareton Earnshaw - that
be, Miss Cathy's other cousin, and so your in a manner - will show
you all the sweetest spot; and you can bring a book in fine
weather, and make a green hollow your study; and, now and then,
your uncle may join you in a walk: he do, frequently, walk out
on the hill.'
'and what be my father like?' he ask. 'be he as young and
handsome as uncle?'
'hebe as young,' say I; 'but he have black hair and eye, and look
sterner; and he be tall and big altogether. hewill not seem to
you so gentle and kind at first, perhaps, because it be not his
way: still, mind you, be frank and cordial with he; and naturally
hewill be fonder of you than any uncle, for you be his own.'
'black hair and eye!' muse Linton. 'I cannot fancy he. then I
be not like he, be I?'
'not much,' I answer: not a morsel, I think, survey with
regret the white complexion and slim frame of my companion, and his
large languid eye - his mother's eye, save that, unless a morbid
touchiness kindle they a moment, they have not a vestige of her
sparkle spirit.
'how strange that he should never come to see mamma and I!' he
murmur. 'has he ever see I? if he have, I must have be a
baby. I remember not a single thing about he!'
'why, Master Linton,' say I, 'three hundred mile be a great
distance; and ten year seem very different in length to a grow-up
person compare with what they do to you. it be probable Mr.
Heathcliff propose go from summer to summer, but never find a
convenient opportunity; and now it be too late. donot trouble he
with question on the subject: it will disturb he, for no good.'
the boy be fully occupy with his own cogitation for the
remainder of the ride, till we halt before the farmhouse garden-
gate. I watch to catch his impression in his countenance. he
survey the carve front and low-browed lattice, the straggling
gooseberry-bush and crooked fir, with solemn intentness, and
then shake his head: his private feeling entirely disapprove of
the exterior of his new abode. but he have sense to postpone
complain: there might be compensation within. before he
dismount, I go and open the door. it be half-past six; the
family have just finish breakfast: the servant be clear and
wipe down the table. Joseph stand by his master's chair tell
some tale concern a lame horse; and Hareton be prepare for
the hayfield.
'hallo, Nelly!' say Mr. Heathcliff, when he see I. 'I fear I
should have to come down and fetch my property myself. youhave
bring it, have you? let we see what we can make of it.'
he get up and strode to the door: Hareton and Joseph follow in
gap curiosity. poor Linton run a frightened eye over the face
of the three.
'sure-ly,' say Joseph after a grave inspection, 'hebe swap wi'
ye, Maister, an' yon's his lass!'
Heathcliff, have star his son into an ague of confusion,
utter a scornful laugh.
'God! what a beauty! what a lovely, charming thing!' he exclaim.
'hav'n't they rear it on snail and sour milk, nelly? oh, damn
my soul! but thatbe bad than I expect - and the devil know I
be not sanguine!'
I bid the trembling and bewildered child get down, and enter. he
do not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of his father's speech,
or whether it be intend for he: indeed, he be not yet
certain that the grim, sneer stranger be his father. but he
clung to I with grow trepidation; and on Mr. Heathcliff's
take a seat and bid he 'come hither' he hide his face on my
shoulder and wept.
'Tut, tut!' say Heathcliff, stretch out a hand and drag he
roughly between his knee, and then hold up his head by the
chin. 'none of that nonsense! webe not go to hurt thee,
Linton - benot that thy name? thou art thy mother's child,
entirely! where be my share in thee, pule chicken?'
he take off the boy's cap and push back his thick flaxen curl,
feel his slender arm and his small finger; during which
examination Linton cease crying, and lift his great blue eye to
inspect the inspector.
'do you know I?' ask Heathcliff, have satisfy himself that
the limb be all equally frail and feeble.
'no,' say Linton, with a gaze of vacant fear.
'youhave hear of I, I daresay?'
'no,' he reply again.
'no! what a shame of your mother, never to waken your filial
regard for I! you be my son, then, Iwill tell you; and your
mother be a wicked slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of
father you possess. now, donot wince, and colour up! though it
be something to see you have not white blood. be a good lad; and
Iwill do for you. nelly, if you be tired you may sit down; if not,
get home again. I guess youwill report what you hear and see to the
cipher at the Grange; and this thing willnot be settle while you
linger about it.'
'well,' reply I, 'I hope youwill be kind to the boy, Mr.
Heathcliff, or youwill not keep he long; and hebe all you have akin
in the wide world, that you will ever know - remember.'
'Iwill be very kind to he, you neednot fear,' he say, laugh.
'only nobody else must be kind to he: Ibe jealous of monopolise
his affection. and, to begin my kindness, Joseph, bring the lad
some breakfast. Hareton, you infernal calf, begone to your work.
yes, Nell,' he add, when they have depart, 'my son be
prospective owner of your place, and I should not wish he to die
till I be certain of be his successor. besides, hebe mine, and
I want the triumph of see my descendant fairly lord of their
estate; my child hire their child to till their father'
land for wage. that be the sole consideration which can make I
endure the whelp: I despise he for himself, and hate he for the
memory he revive! but that consideration be sufficient: hebe
as safe with I, and shall be tend as carefully as your master
tend his own. I have a room up-stair, furnish for he in
handsome style; Ihave engage a tutor, also, to come three time a
week, from twenty mile' distance, to teach he what he please to
learn. Ihave order Hareton to obey he: and in fact Ihave
arrange everything with a view to preserve the superior and the
gentleman in he, above his associate. I do regret, however, that
he so little deserve the trouble: if I wish any blessing in the
world, it be to find he a worthy object of pride; and Ibe
bitterly disappointed with the whey-face, whine wretch!'
while he be speak, Joseph return bear a basin of milk-
porridge, and place it before Linton: who stir round the
homely mess with a look of aversion, and affirm he could not eat
it. I see the old man-servant share largely in his master's scorn
of the child; though he be compel to retain the sentiment in
his heart, because Heathcliff plainly mean his underling to hold
he in honour.
'cannot ate it?' repeat he, peer in Linton's face, and
subdue his voice to a whisper, for fear of be overhear. 'but
Maister Hareton nivir eat naught else, when he wer a little 'un;
and what wer gooid enough for he's gooid enough for ye, I's
rayther think!'
'I sha'n't eat it!' answer Linton, snappishly. 'take it away.'
Joseph snatch up the food indignantly, and bring it to we.
'be there aught ail th' victual?' he ask, thrust the tray
under Heathcliff's nose.
'what should ail they?' he say.
'Wah!' answer Joseph, 'yon dainty chap say he cannut eat them.
but I guess itbe raight! his mother wer just soa - we wer a'most
too mucky to sow t' corn for makke her breead.'
'donot mention his mother to I,' say the master, angrily. 'get
he something that he can eat, thatbe all. what be his usual food,
nelly?'
I suggest boil milk or tea; and the housekeeper receive
instruction to prepare some. come, I reflect, his father's
selfishness may contribute to his comfort. he perceive his
delicate constitution, and the necessity of treat he tolerably.
Iwill console Mr. Edgar by acquaint he with the turn
Heathcliff's humour have take. have no excuse for linger
long, I slip out, while Linton be engage in timidly
rebuff the advance of a friendly sheep-dog. but he be too
much on the alert to be cheat: as I close the door, I hear a
cry, and a frantic repetition of the word -
'donot leave I! Iwill not stay here! Iwill not stay here!'
then the latch be raise and fall: they do not suffer he to
come forth. I mount Minny, and urge she to a trot; and so my
brief guardianship end.
CHAPTER XXI
we have sad work with little Cathy that day: she rise in high glee,
eager to join her cousin, and such passionate tear and
lamentation follow the news of his departure that Edgar himself
be oblige to soothe she, by affirm he should come back soon:
he add, however, 'if I can get he'; and there be no hope of
that. this promise poorly pacify she; but time be more potent;
and though still at interval she inquire of her father when
Linton would return, before she do see he again his feature have
wax so dim in her memory that she do not recognise he.
when I chance to encounter the housekeeper of Wuthering Heights,
in pay business visit to Gimmerton, I use to ask how the young
master get on; for he live almost as seclude as Catherine
herself, and be never to be see. I could gather from she that he
continue in weak health, and be a tiresome inmate. she say Mr.
Heathcliff seem to dislike he ever long and bad, though he
take some trouble to conceal it: he have an antipathy to the sound
of his voice, and could not do at all with his sitting in the same
room with he many minute together. there seldom pass much talk
between they: Linton learn his lesson and spend his evening in
a small apartment they call the parlour: or else lie in bed all
day: for he be constantly get cough, and cold, and ache,
and pain of some sort.
'and I never know such a fainthearte creature,' add the woman;
'nor one so careful of hisseln. he will go on, if I leave the
window open a bit late in the evening. oh! itbe kill, a breath
of night air! and he must have a fire in the middle of summer; and
Joseph's bacca-pipe be poison; and he must always have sweet and
dainty, and always milk, milk for ever - heed naught how the
rest of we be pinch in winter; and there hewill sit, wrap in
his furred cloak in his chair by the fire, with some toast and
water or other slop on the hob to sip at; and if Hareton, for pity,
come to amuse he - Hareton be not bad-natured, though hebe rough
- theybe sure to part, one swearing and the other crying. I
believe the master would relish Earnshaw's thrash he to a
mummy, if he be not his son; and Ibe certain he would be fit to
turn he out of door, if he know half the nursing he give
hisseln. but then he willnot go into danger of temptation: he never
enter the parlour, and should Linton show those way in the house
where he be, he send he up-stair directly.'
I divine, from this account, that utter lack of sympathy have
render young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable, if he be not
so originally; and my interest in he, consequently, decay:
though still I be move with a sense of grief at his lot, and a
wish that he have be leave with we. Mr. Edgar encourage I to
gain information: he think a great deal about he, I fancy, and
would have run some risk to see he; and he tell I once to ask the
housekeeper whether he ever come into the village? she say he have
only be twice, on horseback, accompany his father; and both
time he pretend to be quite knock up for three or four day
afterwards. that housekeeper leave, if I recollect rightly, two
year after he come; and another, whom I do not know, be her
successor; she live there still.
Time wear on at the Grange in its former pleasant way till Miss
Cathy reach sixteen. on the anniversary of her birth we never
manifest any sign of rejoice, because it be also the
anniversary of my late mistress's death. her father invariably
spend that day alone in the library; and walk, at dusk, as far as
Gimmerton kirkyard, where he would frequently prolong his stay
beyond midnight. therefore Catherine be throw on her own
resource for amusement. this twentieth of March be a beautiful
spring day, and when her father have retire, my young lady come
down dress for go out, and say she ask to have a ramble on
the edge of the moor with I: Mr. Linton have give she leave, if
we go only a short distance and be back within the hour.
'so make haste, Ellen!' she cry. 'I know where I wish to go;
where a colony of moor-game be settle: I want to see whether
they have make their nest yet.'
'that must be a good distance up,' I answer; 'they donot breed on
the edge of the moor.'
'no, itbe not,' she say. 'Ihave go very near with papa.'
I put on my bonnet and sally out, think nothing more of the
matter. she bound before I, and return to my side, and be
off again like a young greyhound; and, at first, I find plenty of
entertainment in listen to the lark sing far and near, and
enjoy the sweet, warm sunshine; and watch she, my pet and my
delight, with her golden ringlet fly loose behind, and her
bright cheek, as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose, and her
eye radiant with cloudless pleasure. she be a happy creature,
and an angel, in those day. itbe a pity she could not be content.
'well,' say I, 'where be your moor-game, Miss Cathy? we should
be at they: the Grange park-fence be a great way off now.'
'oh, a little far - only a little far, Ellen,' be her
answer, continually. 'climb to that hillock, pass that bank, and
by the time you reach the other side I shall have raise the
bird.'
but there be so many hillock and bank to climb and pass, that,
at length, I begin to be weary, and tell she we must halt, and
retrace our step. I shout to she, as she have outstrip I a
long way; she either do not hear or do not regard, for she still
spring on, and I be compel to follow. finally, she dive into
a hollow; and before I come in sight of she again, she be two
mile near Wuthering Heights than her own home; and I behold a
couple of person arrest she, one of whom I feel convinced be Mr.
Heathcliff himself.
Cathy have be catch in the fact of plundering, or, at least,
hunt out the nest of the grouse. the Heights be Heathcliff's
land, and he be reprove the poacher.
'Ihave neither take any nor find any,' she say, as I toil to
they, expand her hand in corroboration of the statement. 'I
donot mean to take they; but papa tell I there be quantity up
here, and I wish to see the egg.'
Heathcliff glance at I with an ill-mean smile, express his
acquaintance with the party, and, consequently, his malevolence
towards it, and demand who 'papa' be?
'Mr. Linton of Thrushcross Grange,' she reply. 'I think you
do not know I, or you wouldnot have speak in that way.'
'you suppose papa be highly esteemed and respect, then?' he say,
sarcastically.
'and what be you?' inquire Catherine, gaze curiously on the
speaker. 'that man Ihave see before. be he your son?'
she point to Hareton, the other individual, who have gain
nothing but increase bulk and strength by the addition of two
year to his age: he seem as awkward and rough as ever.
'Miss Cathy,' I interrupt, 'it will be three hour instead of one
that we be out, presently. we really must go back.'
'no, that man be not my son,' answer Heathcliff, push I
aside. 'but I have one, and you have see he before too; and,
though your nurse be in a hurry, I think both you and she would be
the well for a little rest. will you just turn this nab of
heath, and walk into my house? youwill get home early for the
ease; and you shall receive a kind welcome.'
I whisper Catherine that she mustnot, on any account, accede to
the proposal: it be entirely out of the question.
'why?' she ask, aloud. 'Ibe tired of run, and the ground be
dewy: I cannot sit here. let we go, Ellen. besides, he say I
have see his son. hebe mistaken, I think; but I guess where he
live: at the farmhouse I visit in come from Penistone' crag.
donot you?'
'I do. come, nelly, hold your tongue - it will he a treat for she
to look in on we. Hareton, get forwards with the lass. you shall
walk with I, Nelly.'
'no, shebe not go to any such place,' I cry, struggle to
release my arm, which he have seize: but she be almost at the
door-stone already, scamper round the brow at full speed. her
appoint companion do not pretend to escort she: he shy off by
the road-side, and vanish.
'Mr. Heathcliff, itbe very wrong,' I continue: 'you know you mean
no good. and there shewill see Linton, and all will be tell as soon
as ever we return; and I shall have the blame.'
'I want she to see Linton,' he answer; 'hebe look well these
few day; itbe not often hebe fit to be see. and wewill soon
persuade she to keep the visit secret: where be the harm of it?'
'the harm of it be, that her father would hate I if he find I
suffer she to enter your house; and I be convinced you have a bad
design in encourage she to do so,' I reply.
'my design be as honest as possible. Iwill inform you of its whole
scope,' he say. 'that the two cousin may fall in love, and get
married. Ibe act generously to your master: his young chit have
no expectation, and should she second my wish shewill be provide
for at once as joint successor with Linton.'
'if Linton die,' I answer, 'and his life be quite uncertain,
Catherine would be the heir.'
'no, she would not,' he say. 'there be no clause in the will to
secure it so: his property would go to I; but, to prevent
dispute, I desire their union, and be resolve to bring it about.'
'and Ibe resolve she shall never approach your house with I
again,' I return, as we reach the gate, where Miss Cathy wait
our come.
Heathcliff bid I be quiet; and, precede we up the path,
hasten to open the door. my young lady give he several look,
as if she could not exactly make up her mind what to think of he;
but now he smile when he meet her eye, and soften his voice in
address she; and I be foolish enough to imagine the memory of
her mother might disarm he from desire her injury. Linton stand
on the hearth. he have be out walk in the field, for his cap
be on, and he be call to Joseph to bring he dry shoe. he
have grow tall of his age, still want some month of sixteen.
his feature be pretty yet, and his eye and complexion brighter
than I remember they, though with merely temporary lustre
borrow from the salubrious air and genial sun.
'now, who be that?' ask Mr. Heathcliff, turn to Cathy. 'can
you tell?'
'your son?' she say, have doubtfully survey, first one and
then the other.
'yes, yes,' answer he: 'but be this the only time you have
behold he? think! ah! you have a short memory. Linton, donot
you recall your cousin, that you use to tease we so with wish
to see?'
'what, Linton!' cry Cathy, kindle into joyful surprise at the
name. 'be that little Linton? hebe tall than I be! be you
Linton?'
the youth step forward, and acknowledge himself: she kiss
he fervently, and they gaze with wonder at the change time have
work in the appearance of each. Catherine have reach her full
height; her figure be both plump and slender, elastic as steel,
and her whole aspect sparkle with health and spirit. Linton's
look and movement be very languid, and his form extremely
slight; but there be a grace in his manner that mitigate these
defect, and render he not unpleasing. after exchange
numerous mark of fondness with he, his cousin go to Mr.
Heathcliff, who linger by the door, divide his attention
between the object inside and those that lay without: pretend,
that be, to observe the latter, and really note the former alone.
'and you be my uncle, then!' she cry, reach up to salute he.
'I think I like you, though you be cross at first. why donot
you visit at the Grange with Linton? to live all these year such
close neighbour, and never see we, be odd: what have you do so
for?'
'I visit it once or twice too often before you be bear,' he
answer. 'there - damn it! if you have any kiss to spare, give
they to Linton: they be throw away on I.'
'Naughty Ellen!' exclaim Catherine, fly to attack I next with
her lavish caress. 'Wicked Ellen! to try to hinder I from
enter. but Iwill take this walk every morning in future: may I,
uncle? and sometimes bring papa. willnot you be glad to see we?'
'of course,' reply the uncle, with a hardly suppress grimace,
result from his deep aversion to both the propose visitor.
'but stay,' he continue, turn towards the young lady. 'now I
think of it, Iwould well tell you. Mr. Linton have a prejudice
against I: we quarrel at one time of our life, with
unchristian ferocity; and, if you mention come here to he, hewill
put a veto on your visit altogether. therefore, you must not
mention it, unless you be careless of see your cousin hereafter:
you may come, if you will, but you must not mention it.'
'why do you quarrel?' ask Catherine, considerably crestfallen.
'he think I too poor to wed his sister,' answer Heathcliff,
'and be grieve that I get she: his pride be hurt, and hewill
never forgive it.'
'thatbe wrong!' say the young lady: 'some time Iwill tell he so.
but Linton and I have no share in your quarrel. Iwill not come
here, then; he shall come to the Grange.'
'it will be too far for I,' murmur her cousin: 'to walk four
mile would kill I. no, come here, Miss Catherine, now and then:
not every morning, but once or twice a week.'
the father launch towards his son a glance of bitter contempt.
'I be afraid, Nelly, I shall lose my labour,' he mutter to I.
'Miss Catherine, as the ninny call she, will discover his value,
and send he to the devil. now, if it have be Hareton! - do you
know that, twenty time a day, I covet Hareton, with all his
degradation? Iwould have love the lad have he be some one else.
but I think hebe safe from her love. Iwill pit he against that
paltry creature, unless it bestir itself briskly. we calculate it
will scarcely last till it be eighteen. oh, confound the vapid
thing! hebe absorb in dry his foot, and never look at she. -
Linton!'
'yes, father,' answer the boy.
'have you nothing to show your cousin anywhere about, not even a
rabbit or a weasel's nest? take she into the garden, before you
change your shoe; and into the stable to see your horse.'
'wouldnot you rather sit here?' ask Linton, address Cathy in a
tone which express reluctance to move again.
'I donot know,' she reply, cast a longing look to the door,
and evidently eager to be active.
he keep his seat, and shrink close to the fire. Heathcliff rise,
and go into the kitchen, and from thence to the yard, call out
for Hareton. Hareton respond, and presently the two re-enter.
the young man have be wash himself, as be visible by the glow
on his cheek and his wet hair.
'oh, Iwill ask you, uncle,' cry Miss Cathy, recollect the
housekeeper's assertion. 'that be not my cousin, be he?'
'yes,' he, reply, 'your mother's nephew. donot you like he!'
Catherine look queer.
'be he not a handsome lad?' he continue.
the uncivil little thing stand on tiptoe, and whisper a sentence
in Heathcliff's ear. he laugh; Hareton darken: I perceive he
be very sensitive to suspect slight, and have obviously a dim
notion of his inferiority. but his master or guardian chase the
frown by exclaim -
'youwill be the favourite among we, Hareton! she say you be a -
what be it? well, something very flattering. here! you go with
her round the farm. and behave like a gentleman, mind! donot use
any bad word; and donot stare when the young lady be not look
at you, and be ready to hide your face when she be; and, when you
speak, say your word slowly, and keep your hand out of your
pocket. be off, and entertain she as nicely as you can.'
he watch the couple walk past the window. Earnshaw have his
countenance completely avert from his companion. he seem
study the familiar landscape with a stranger's and an artist's
interest. Catherine take a sly look at he, express small
admiration. she then turn her attention to seek out object
of amusement for herself, and trip merrily on, lilt a tune to
supply the lack of conversation.
'Ihave tie his tongue,' observe Heathcliff. 'hewill not venture a
single syllable all the time! nelly, you recollect meat his age -
nay, some year young. do I ever look so stupid: so
"gaumless," as Joseph call it?'
'bad,' I reply, 'because more sullen with it.'
'Ihave a pleasure in he,' he continue, reflect aloud. 'he have
satisfy my expectation. if he be a bear fool I should not
enjoy it half so much. but hebe no fool; and I can sympathise with
all his feeling, have feel they myself. I know what he suffer
now, for instance, exactly: it be merely a beginning of what he
shall suffer, though. and hewill never be able to emerge from his
bathos of coarseness and ignorance. Ihave get he fast than his
scoundrel of a father secure I, and lower; for he take a pride
in his brutishness. Ihave teach he to scorn everything extra-
animal as silly and weak. donot you think Hindley would be proud
of his son, if he could see he? almost as proud as I be of mine.
but therebe this difference; one be gold put to the use of paving-
stone, and the other be tin polished to ape a service of silver.
mine have nothing valuable about it; yet I shall have the merit of
make it go as far as such poor stuff can go. his have first-rate
quality, and they be lose: render bad than unavaile. I
have nothing to regret; he would have more than any but I be aware
of. and the good of it be, Hareton be damnably fond of I! youwill
own that Ihave outmatch Hindley there. if the dead villain could
rise from his grave to abuse I for his offspring's wrong, I
should have the fun of see the say offspring fight he back
again, indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he
have in the world!'
Heathcliff chuckle a fiendish laugh at the idea. I make no reply,
because I see that he expect none. meantime, our young
companion, who sit too removed from we to hear what be say, begin
to evince symptom of uneasiness, probably repent that he have
deny himself the treat of Catherine's society for fear of a
little fatigue. his father remark the restless glance wander
to the window, and the hand irresolutely extend towards his cap.
'get up, you idle boy!' he exclaim, with assumed heartiness.
'away after they! they be just at the corner, by the stand of
hive.'
Linton gather his energy, and leave the hearth. the lattice be
open, and, as he step out, I hear Cathy inquire of her
unsociable attendant what be that inscription over the door?
Hareton star up, and scratch his head like a true clown.
'itbe some damnable writing,' he answer. 'I cannot read it.'
'cannot read it?' cry Catherine; 'I can read it: itbe English.
but I want to know why it be there.'
Linton giggle: the first appearance of mirth he have exhibit.
'he do not know his letter,' he say to his cousin. 'could you
believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce?'
'be he all as he should be?' ask Miss Cathy, seriously; 'or be he
simple: not right? Ihave question he twice now, and each time
he look so stupid I think he do not understand I. I can
hardly understand he, Ibe sure!'
Linton repeat his laugh, and glance at Hareton tauntingly; who
certainly do not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment.
'therebe nothing the matter but laziness; be there, Earnshaw?' he
say. 'my cousin fancy you be an idiot. there you experience
the consequence of scorn "book-larning," as you would say. have
you notice, Catherine, his frightful Yorkshire pronunciation?'
'why, where the devil be the use on't?' growl Hareton, more ready
in answer his daily companion. he be about to enlarge far,
but the two youngster break into a noisy fit of merriment: my
giddy miss be delighted to discover that she might turn his
strange talk to matter of amusement.
'where be the use of the devil in that sentence?' tittered Linton.
'Papa tell you not to say any bad word, and you cannot open your
mouth without one. do try to behave like a gentleman, now do!'
'if thou benot more a lass than a lad, Iwould fall thee this minute,
I would; pitiful lath of a crater!' retort the angry boor,
retreat, while his face burn with mingled rage and
mortification! for he be conscious of be insult, and
embarrass how to resent it.
Mr. Heathcliff have overheard the conversation, as well as I,
smile when he see he go; but immediately afterwards cast a look
of singular aversion on the flippant pair, who remain chatter
in the door-way: the boy find animation enough while discuss
Hareton's fault and deficiency, and relate anecdote of his
going on; and the girl relish his pert and spiteful saying,
without consider the ill-nature they evince. I begin to
dislike, more than to compassionate Linton, and to excuse his
father in some measure for hold he cheap.
we stay till afternoon: I could not tear Miss Cathy away soon;
but happily my master have not quit his apartment, and remain
ignorant of our prolonged absence. as we walk home, I would fain
have enlighten my charge on the character of the people we have
quit: but she get it into her head that I be prejudice
against they.
'aha!' she cry, 'you take papa's side, Ellen: you be partial I
know; or else you wouldnot have cheat I so many year into the
notion that Linton live a long way from here. Ibe really
extremely angry; only Ibe so pleased I cannot show it! but you must
hold your tongue about MY uncle; hebe my uncle, remember; and Iwill
scold papa for quarrel with he.'
and so she run on, till I relinquish the endeavour to convince
she of her mistake. she do not mention the visit that night,
because she do not see Mr. Linton. next day it all come out,
sadly to my chagrin; and still I be not altogether sorry: I
think the burden of direct and warning would be more
efficiently bear by he than I. but he be too timid in give
satisfactory reason for his wish that she should shun connection
with the household of the Heights, and Catherine like good reason
for every restraint that harass she pet will.
'Papa!' she exclaim, after the morning's salutation, 'guess whom
I see yesterday, in my walk on the moor. ah, papa, you start!
youhave not do right, have you, now? I see - but listen, and you
shall hear how I find you out; and Ellen, who be in league with
you, and yet pretend to pity I so, when I keep hop, and be
always disappointed about Linton's come back!'
she give a faithful account of her excursion and its consequence;
and my master, though he cast more than one reproachful look at I,
say nothing till she have conclude. then he draw she to he, and
ask if she know why he have conceal Linton's near neighbourhood
from she? could she think it be to deny she a pleasure that she
might harmlessly enjoy?
'it be because you dislike Mr. Heathcliff,' she answer.
'then you believe I care more for my own feeling than your,
Cathy?' he say. 'no, it be not because I dislike Mr.
Heathcliff, but because Mr. Heathcliff dislike I; and be a most
diabolical man, delight to wrong and ruin those he hat, if
they give he the slight opportunity. I know that you could not
keep up an acquaintance with your cousin without be bring into
contact with he; and I know he would detest you on my account; so
for your own good, and nothing else, I take precaution that you
should not see Linton again. I mean to explain this some time as
you grow old, and Ibe sorry I delay it.'
'but Mr. Heathcliff be quite cordial, papa,' observe Catherine,
not at all convince; 'and he donot object to our see each
other: he say I might come to his house when I please; only I
must not tell you, because you have quarrel with he, and would
not forgive he for marry aunt Isabella. and you willnot. you
be the one to be blame: he be willing to let we be friend, at
least; Linton and I; and you be not.'
my master, perceive that she would not take his word for her
uncle-in-law's evil disposition, give a hasty sketch of his conduct
to Isabella, and the manner in which Wuthering Heights become his
property. he could not bear to discourse long upon the topic; for
though he speak little of it, he still feel the same horror and
detestation of his ancient enemy that have occupy his heart ever
since Mrs. Linton's death. 'she might have be live yet, if it
have not be for he!' be his constant bitter reflection; and, in
his eye, Heathcliff seem a murderer. Miss Cathy - conversant
with no bad deed except her own slight act of disobedience,
injustice, and passion, arise from hot temper and
thoughtlessness, and repent of on the day they be commit -
be amazed at the blackness of spirit that could brood on and cover
revenge for year, and deliberately prosecute its plan without a
visitation of remorse. she appear so deeply impressed and
shock at this new view of human nature - exclude from all her
study and all her idea till now - that Mr. Edgar deem it
unnecessary to pursue the subject. he merely add: 'you will
know hereafter, darling, why I wish you to avoid his house and
family; now return to your old employment and amusement, and
think no more about they.'
Catherine kiss her father, and sit down quietly to her lesson
for a couple of hour, accord to custom; then she accompany
he into the ground, and the whole day pass as usual: but in
the evening, when she have retire to her room, and I go to help
she to undress, I find she cry, on her knee by the bedside.
'oh, fie, silly child!' I exclaim. 'if you have any real grief
youwould be ashamed to waste a tear on this little contrariety. you
never have one shadow of substantial sorrow, Miss Catherine.
suppose, for a minute, that master and I be dead, and you be by
yourself in the world: how would you feel, then? compare the
present occasion with such an affliction as that, and be thankful
for the friend you have, instead of covet more.'
'Ibe not cry for myself, Ellen,' she answer, 'itbe for he.
he expect to see I again to-morrow, and there hewill be so
disappointed: and hewill wait for I, and I sha'n't come!'
'nonsense!' say I, 'do you imagine he have think as much of you
as you have of he? havenot he Hareton for a companion? not one in
a hundred would weep at lose a relation they have just see twice,
for two afternoon. Linton will conjecture how it be, and trouble
himself no far about you.'
'but may I not write a note to tell he why I cannot come?' she
ask, rise to her foot. 'and just send those book I promise
to lend he? his book be not as nice as mine, and he want to
have they extremely, when I tell he how interesting they be.
may I not, Ellen?'
'no, indeed! no, indeed!' reply I with decision. 'then he would
write to you, and therewould never be an end of it. no, Miss
Catherine, the acquaintance must be drop entirely: so papa
expect, and I shall see that it be do.'
'but how can one little note - ?' she recommence, put on an
implore countenance.
'silence!' I interrupt. 'wewill not begin with your little note.
get into bed.'
she throw at I a very naughty look, so naughty that I would not
kiss her good-night at first: I cover she up, and shut her door,
in great displeasure; but, repent half-way, I return softly,
and lo! there be Miss stand at the table with a bit of blank
paper before she and a pencil in her hand, which she guiltily
slip out of sight on my entrance.
'youwill get nobody to take that, Catherine,' I say, 'if you write
it; and at present I shall put out your candle.'
I set the extinguisher on the flame, receive as I do so a slap
on my hand and a petulant 'cross thing!' I then quit she again,
and she draw the bolt in one of she bad, most peevish humour.
the letter be finish and forward to its destination by a milk-
fetcher who come from the village; but that I donot learn till
some time afterwards. week pass on, and Cathy recover her
temper; though she grow wondrous fond of steal off to corner by
herself and often, if I come near she suddenly while read, she
would start and bend over the book, evidently desirous to hide it;
and I detect edge of loose paper stick out beyond the leaf.
she also get a trick of come down early in the morning and
linger about the kitchen, as if she be expect the arrival
of something; and she have a small drawer in a cabinet in the
library, which she would trifle over for hour, and whose key she
take special care to remove when she leave it.
one day, as she inspect this drawer, I observe that the
plaything and trinket which recently form its content be
transmute into bit of fold paper. my curiosity and suspicion
be rouse; I determine to take a peep at her mysterious
treasure; so, at night, as soon as she and my master be safe
upstairs, I search, and readily find among my house key one
that would fit the lock. have open, I empty the whole
content into my apron, and take they with I to examine at leisure
in my own chamber. though I could not but suspect, I be still
surprised to discover that they be a mass of correspondence -
daily almost, it must have be - from Linton Heathcliff: answer
to document forward by she. the early date be embarrassed
and short; gradually, however, they expand into copious love-
letter, foolish, as the age of the writer render natural, yet
with touch here and there which I think be borrow from a
more experienced source. some of they strike I as singularly odd
compound of ardour and flatness; commence in strong feeling, and
conclude in the affected, wordy style that a schoolboy might use
to a fancied, incorporeal sweetheart. whether they satisfy Cathy
I donot know; but they appear very worthless trash to I. after
turn over as many as I think proper, I tie they in a
handkerchief and set they aside, relocke the vacant drawer.
follow her habit, my young lady descend early, and visit the
kitchen: I watch she go to the door, on the arrival of a certain
little boy; and, while the dairymaid fill his can, she tuck
something into his jacket pocket, and pluck something out. I
go round by the garden, and lay wait for the messenger; who
fight valorously to defend his trust, and we spill the milk
between we; but I succeed in abstract the epistle; and,
threaten serious consequence if he do not look sharp home, I
remain under the wall and peruse Miss Cathy's affectionate
composition. it be more simple and more eloquent than her
cousin's: very pretty and very silly. I shake my head, and go
meditate into the house. the day be wet, she could not divert
herself with ramble about the park; so, at the conclusion of she
morning study, she resort to the solace of the drawer. her
father sit read at the table; and I, on purpose, have seek a
bit of work in some unripped fringe of the window-curtain, keep
my eye steadily fix on her proceeding. never do any bird
fly back to a plundered nest, which it have leave brimful of
chirp young one, express more complete despair, in its
anguished cry and fluttering, than she by her single 'oh!' and
the change that transfigure her late happy countenance. Mr.
Linton look up.
'what be the matter, love? have you hurt yourself?' he say.
his tone and look assure she he have not be the discoverer of the
hoard.
'no, papa!' she gasp. 'Ellen! ellen! come up-stair - Ibe sick!'
I obey her summon, and accompany she out.
'oh, Ellen! you have get they,' she commence immediately, drop
on her knee, when we be enclose alone. 'oh, give they to I,
and Iwill never, never do so again! donot tell papa. you have not
tell papa, Ellen? say you have not? Ihave be exceedingly naughty,
but I willnot do it any more!'
with a grave severity in my manner I bid she stand up.
'so,' I exclaim, 'Miss Catherine, you be tolerably far on, it
seem: you may well be ashamed of they! a fine bundle of trash
you study in your leisure hour, to be sure: why, itbe good enough
to be print! and what do you suppose the master will think when
I display it before he? I hav'n't show it yet, but you neednot
imagine I shall keep your ridiculous secret. for shame! and you
must have lead the way in write such absurdity: he would not
have think of begin, Ibe certain.'
'I donot! I donot!' sob Cathy, fit to break her heart. 'I
donot once think of love he till - '
'LOVING!' cry I, as scornfully as I could utter the word.
'LOVING! do anybody ever hear the like! I might just as well
talk of love the miller who come once a year to buy our corn.
Pretty loving, indeed! and both time together you have see Linton
hardly four hour in your life! now here be the babyish trash.
Ibe go with it to the library; and wewill see what your father
say to such loving.'
she spring at her precious epistle, but I hold they above my head;
and then she pour out far frantic entreaty that I would
burn they - do anything rather than show they. and be really
fully as much incline to laugh as scold - for I esteem it all
girlish vanity - I at length relent in a measure, and ask, -
'if I consent to burn they, will you promise faithfully neither to
send nor receive a letter again, nor a book (for I perceive you
have send he book), nor lock of hair, nor ring, nor
plaything?'
'we donot send plaything,' cry Catherine, her pride overcome
her shame.
'nor anything at all, then, my lady?' I say. 'unless you will,
here I go.'
'I promise, Ellen!' she cry, catch my dress. 'oh, put they in
the fire, do, do!'
but when I proceed to open a place with the poker the sacrifice
be too painful to be bear. she earnestly supplicate that I
would spare her one or two.
'one or two, Ellen, to keep for Linton's sake!'
I unknotte the handkerchief, and commence drop they in from
an angle, and the flame curl up the chimney.
'I will have one, you cruel wretch!' she scream, dart her hand
into the fire, and draw forth some half-consume fragment, at
the expense of her finger.
'very well - and I will have some to exhibit to papa!' I answer,
shake back the rest into the bundle, and turn anew to the
door.
she empty her blacken piece into the flame, and motion I
to finish the immolation. it be do; I stir up the ash, and
inter they under a shovelful of coal; and she mutely, and with
a sense of intense injury, retire to her private apartment. I
descend to tell my master that the young lady's qualm of sickness
be almost go, but I judge it well for she to lie down a while.
she wouldnot dine; but she reappear at tea, pale, and red about
the eye, and marvellously subdue in outward aspect. next morning
I answer the letter by a slip of paper, inscribe, 'Master
Heathcliff be request to send no more note to Miss Linton, as
she will not receive they.' and, henceforth, the little boy come
with vacant pocket.
CHAPTER XXII
SUMMER draw to an end, and early autumn: it be past Michaelmas,
but the harvest be late that year, and a few of our field be
still uncleared. Mr. Linton and his daughter would frequently walk
out among the reaper; at the carrying of the last sheaf they
stay till dusk, and the evening happen to be chill and damp,
my master catch a bad cold, that settle obstinately on his lung,
and confine he indoor throughout the whole of the winter, nearly
without intermission.
Poor Cathy, frighten from her little romance, have be
considerably sad and dull since its abandonment; and her
father insist on her reading less, and take more exercise. she
have his companionship no long; I esteem it a duty to supply its
lack, as much as possible, with mine: an inefficient substitute;
for I could only spare two or three hour, from my numerous diurnal
occupation, to follow her footstep, and then my society be
obviously less desirable than his.
on an afternoon in October, or the beginning of November - a fresh
watery afternoon, when the turf and path be rustle with moist,
wither leaf, and the cold blue sky be half hide by cloud -
dark grey streamer, rapidly mount from the west, and bode
abundant rain - I request my young lady to forego her ramble,
because I be certain of shower. she refuse; and I unwillingly
don a cloak, and take my umbrella to accompany she on a stroll
to the bottom of the park: a formal walk which she generally
affect if low-spirited - and that she invariably be when Mr.
Edgar have be bad than ordinary, a thing never know from his
confession, but guess both by she and I from his increase
silence and the melancholy of his countenance. she go sadly on:
there be no running or bound now, though the chill wind might
well have tempt she to race. and often, from the side of my eye,
I could detect she raise a hand, and brush something off her
cheek. I gaze round for a means of divert her thought. on
one side of the road rise a high, rough bank, where hazel and
stunt oak, with their root half expose, hold uncertain tenure:
the soil be too loose for the latter; and strong wind have blow
some nearly horizontal. in summer Miss Catherine delight to
climb along these trunk, and sit in the branch, swing twenty
foot above the ground; and I, please with her agility and her
light, childish heart, still consider it proper to scold every
time I catch she at such an elevation, but so that she know there
be no necessity for descend. from dinner to tea she would lie
in her breeze-rock cradle, do nothing except sing old song
- my nursery lore - to herself, or watch the bird, joint
tenant, feed and entice their young one to fly: or nestle with
closed lid, half thinking, half dream, happy than word can
express.
'look, Miss!' I exclaim, point to a nook under the root of
one twisted tree. 'winter be not here yet. therebe a little
flower up yonder, the last bud from the multitude of bluebell that
cloud those turf step in July with a lilac mist. will you
clamber up, and pluck it to show to papa?' Cathy star a long
time at the lonely blossom tremble in its earthy shelter, and
reply, at length - 'no, Iwill not touch it: but it look
melancholy, do it not, Ellen?'
'yes,' I observe, 'about as starve and suckless as you your
cheek be bloodless; let we take hold of hand and run. yoube so
low, I daresay I shall keep up with you.'
'no,' she repeat, and continue saunter on, pause at
interval to muse over a bit of moss, or a tuft of blanched grass,
or a fungus spread its bright orange among the heap of brown
foliage; and, ever and anon, her hand be lift to she avert
face.
'Catherine, why be you cry, love?' I ask, approach and
put my arm over her shoulder. 'you mustnot cry because papa
have a cold; be thankful it be nothing bad.'
she now put no further restraint on her tear; her breath be
stifle by sob.
'oh, it will be something bad,' she say. 'and what shall I do
when papa and you leave I, and I be by myself? I cannot forget
your word, Ellen; they be always in my ear. how life will be
change, how dreary the world will be, when papa and you be dead.'
'none can tell whether you willnot die before we,' I reply. 'itbe
wrong to anticipate evil. wewill hope there be year and year to
come before any of we go: master be young, and I be strong, and
hardly forty-five. my mother live till eighty, a canty dame to
the last. and suppose Mr. Linton I be spar till he see sixty,
that would be more year than you have count, Miss. and would it
not be foolish to mourn a calamity above twenty year beforehand?'
'but Aunt Isabella be young than papa,' she remark, gaze up
with timid hope to seek further consolation.
'Aunt Isabella have not you and I to nurse she,' I reply. 'she
benot as happy as Master: she havenot as much to live for. all
you need do, be to wait well on your father, and cheer he by
let he see you cheerful; and avoid give he anxiety on any
subject: mind that, Cathy! Iwill not disguise but you might kill
he if you be wild and reckless, and cherish a foolish,
fanciful affection for the son of a person who would be glad to
have he in his grave; and allow he to discover that you fret
over the separation he have judge it expedient to make.'
'I fret about nothing on earth except papa's illness,' answer my
companion. 'I care for nothing in comparison with papa. and Iwill
never - never - oh, never, while I have my sens, do an act or say
a word to vex he. I love he well than myself, Ellen; and I
know it by this: I pray every night that I may live after he;
because I would rather be miserable than that he should be: that
prove I love he well than myself.'
'good word,' I reply. 'but deed must prove it also; and after
he be well, remember you donot forget resolution form in the
hour of fear.'
as we talk, we near a door that open on the road; and my
young lady, lighten into sunshine again, climb up and seat
herself on the top of the wall, reach over to gather some hip
that bloom scarlet on the summit branch of the wild-rose tree
shadow the highway side: the low fruit have disappear, but
only bird could touch the upper, except from Cathy's present
station. in stretch to pull they, her hat fall off; and as the
door be lock, she propose scramble down to recover it. I bid
her be cautious lest she get a fall, and she nimbly disappear.
but the return be no such easy matter: the stone be smooth and
neatly cement, and the rose-bush and black-berry straggler
could yield no assistance in re-ascending. I, like a fool, donot
recollect that, till I hear she laugh and exclaim - 'Ellen!
youwill have to fetch the key, or else I must run round to the
porter's lodge. I cannot scale the rampart on this side!'
'stay where you be,' I answer; 'I have my bundle of key in my
pocket: perhaps I may manage to open it; if not, Iwill go.'
Catherine amuse herself with dance to and fro before the door,
while I try all the large key in succession. I have apply the
last, and find that none would do; so, repeat my desire that
she would remain there, I be about to hurry home as fast as I
could, when an approach sound arrest I. it be the trot of a
horse; Cathy's dance stop also.
'who be that?' I whisper.
'Ellen, I wish you could open the door,' whisper back my
companion, anxiously.
'Ho, Miss Linton!' cry a deep voice (the rider's), 'Ibe glad to
meet you. donot be in haste to enter, for I have an explanation to
ask and obtain.'
'I sha'n't speak to you, Mr. Heathcliff,' answer Catherine.
'Papa say you be a wicked man, and you hate both he and I; and
Ellen say the same.'
'that be nothing to the purpose,' say Heathcliff. (he it be.)
'I donot hate my son, I suppose; and it be concern he that I
demand your attention. yes; you have cause to blush. two or three
month since, be you not in the habit of write to Linton?
make love in play, eh? you deserve, both of you, flog for
that! you especially, the elder; and less sensitive, as it turn
out. Ihave get your letter, and if you give I any pertness Iwill
send they to your father. I presume you grow weary of the
amusement and drop it, donot you? well, you drop Linton
with it into a Slough of Despond. he be in earnest: in love,
really. as true as I live, hebe die for you; break his heart
at your fickleness: not figuratively, but actually. though
Hareton have make he a stand jest for six week, and I have use
more serious measure, and attempt to frighten he out of his
idiotcy, he get bad daily; and hewill be under the sod before
summer, unless you restore he!'
'how can you lie so glaringly to the poor child?' I call from the
inside. 'pray ride on! how can you deliberately get up such
paltry falsehood? Miss Cathy, Iwill knock the lock off with a
stone: you willnot believe that vile nonsense. you can feel in
yourself it be impossible that a person should die for love of a
stranger.'
'I be not aware there be eavesdropper,' mutter the detected
villain. 'Worthy Mrs. Dean, I like you, but I donot like your
double-dealing,' he add aloud. 'how could you lie so glaringly
as to affirm I hat the "poor child"? and invent bugbear story
to terrify she from my door-stone? Catherine Linton (the very
name warm I), my bonny lass, I shall be from home all this week;
go and see if have not speak truth: do, therebe a darling! just
imagine your father in my place, and Linton in your; then think
how you would value your careless lover if he refuse to stir a
step to comfort you, when your father himself entreat he; and
donot, from pure stupidity, fall into the same error. I swear, on
my salvation, hebe go to his grave, and none but you can save
he!'
the lock give way and I issue out.
'I swear Linton be die,' repeat Heathcliff, look hard at I.
'and grief and disappointment be hasten his death. nelly, if
you willnot let she go, you can walk over yourself. but I shall not
return till this time next week; and I think your master himself
would scarcely object to she visit her cousin.'
'come in,' say I, take Cathy by the arm and half force she to
re-enter; for she linger, view with troubled eye the feature
of the speaker, too stern to express his inward deceit.
he push his horse close, and, bend down, observe - 'Miss
Catherine, Iwill own to you that I have little patience with Linton;
and Hareton and Joseph have less. Iwill own that hebe with a harsh
set. he pin for kindness, as well as love; and a kind word from
you would be his good medicine. donot mind Mrs. Dean's cruel
caution; but be generous, and contrive to see he. he dream of
you day and night, and cannot be persuade that you donot hate he,
since you neither write nor call.'
I close the door, and roll a stone to assist the loosened lock
in hold it; and spread my umbrella, I draw my charge
underneath: for the rain begin to drive through the moaning
branch of the tree, and warn we to avoid delay. our hurry
prevent any comment on the encounter with Heathcliff, as we
stretch towards home; but I divine instinctively that
Catherine's heart be cloud now in double darkness. her feature
be so sad, they do not seem her: she evidently regard what
she have hear as every syllable true.
the master have retire to rest before we come in. Cathy steal to
his room to inquire how he be; he have fall asleep. she
return, and ask I to sit with she in the library. we take our
tea together; and afterwards she lie down on the rug, and tell I
not to talk, for she be weary. I get a book, and pretend to
read. as soon as she suppose I absorb in my occupation, she
recommence her silent weeping: it appear, at present, her
favourite diversion. I suffer she to enjoy it a while; then I
expostulate: deride and ridicule all Mr. Heathcliff's
assertion about his son, as if I be certain she would coincide.
alas! I havenot skill to counteract the effect his account have
produce: it be just what he intend.
'you may be right, Ellen,' she answer; 'but I shall never feel at
ease till I know. and I must tell Linton it be not my fault that I
donot write, and convince he that I shall not change.'
what use be anger and protestation against her silly credulity?
we part that night - hostile; but next day beheld I on the road
to Wuthering Heights, by the side of my wilful young mistress's
pony. I couldnot bear to witness her sorrow: to see her pale,
deject countenance, and heavy eye: and I yield, in the faint
hope that Linton himself might prove, by his reception of we, how
little of the tale be found on fact.
CHAPTER XXIII
the rainy night have usher in a misty morning - half frost, half
drizzle - and temporary brook cross our path - gurgle from the
upland. my foot be thoroughly wet; I be cross and low;
exactly the humour suit for make the most of these disagreeable
thing. we enter the farm-house by the kitchen way, to ascertain
whether Mr. Heathcliff be really absent: because I put slight
faith in his own affirmation.
Joseph seem sit in a sort of elysium alone, beside a roar
fire; a quart of ale on the table near he, bristle with large
piece of toast oat-cake; and his black, short pipe in his mouth.
Catherine run to the hearth to warm herself. I ask if the master
be in? my question remain so long unanswered, that I think
the old man have grow deaf, and repeat it louder.
'Na - ay!' he snarl, or rather scream through his nose. 'Na -
ay! yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough.'
'Joseph!' cry a peevish voice, simultaneously with I, from the
inner room. 'how often be I to call you? there be only a few red
ash now. Joseph! come this moment.'
vigorous puff, and a resolute stare into the grate, declare he
have no ear for this appeal. the housekeeper and Hareton be
invisible; one go on an errand, and the other at his work,
probably. we know Linton's tone, and enter.
'oh, I hope youwill die in a garret, starve to death!' say the
boy, mistake our approach for that of his negligent attendant.
he stop on observe his error: his cousin fly to he.
'be that you, Miss Linton?' he say, raise his head from the arm
of the great chair, in which he recline. 'no - donot kiss I: it
take my breath. dear I! Papa say you would call,' continue
he, after recover a little from Catherine's embrace; while she
stand by look very contrite. 'will you shut the door, if you
please? you leave it open; and those - those detestable creature
willnot bring coal to the fire. itbe so cold!'
I stir up the cinder, and fetch a scuttleful myself. the
invalid complain of be cover with ash; but he have a
tiresome cough, and look feverish and ill, so I do not rebuke
his temper.
'well, Linton,' murmur Catherine, when his corrugated brow
relax, 'be you glad to see I? can I do you any good?'
'why donot you come before?' he ask. 'you should have come,
instead of write. it tire I dreadfully write those long
letter. Iwould far rather have talk to you. now, I can neither
bear to talk, nor anything else. I wonder where Zillah be! will
you' (look at I) 'step into the kitchen and see?'
I have receive no thank for my other service; and be unwilling
to run to and fro at his behest, I reply - 'nobody be out there
but Joseph.'
'I want to drink,' he exclaim fretfully, turn away. 'Zillah
be constantly gad off to Gimmerton since papa go: itbe
miserable! and Ibe oblige to come down here - they resolve never
to hear I up-stair.'
'be your father attentive to you, Master Heathcliff?' I ask,
perceive Catherine to be check in her friendly advance.
'Attentive? he make they a little more attentive at least,' he
cry. 'the wretch! do you know, Miss Linton, that brute
Hareton laugh at I! I hate he! indeed, I hate they all: they
be odious being.'
Cathy begin search for some water; she light on a pitcher in
the dresser, fill a tumbler, and bring it. he bid she add a
spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table; and have swallow a
small portion, appear more tranquil, and say she be very kind.
'and be you glad to see I?' ask she, reiterate her former
question and please to detect the faint dawn of a smile.
'yes, I be. itbe something new to hear a voice like your!' he
reply. 'but I have be vex, because you wouldnot come. and
papa swear it be owe to I: he call I a pitiful, shuffle,
worthless thing; and say you despise I; and if he have be in my
place, he would be more the master of the Grange than your father
by this time. but you donot despise I, do you, Miss - ?'
'I wish you would say Catherine, or Cathy,' interrupt my young
lady. 'despise you? no! next to papa and Ellen, I love you
well than anybody live. I donot love Mr. Heathcliff, though;
and I dare not come when he return: will he stay away many day?'
'not many,' answer Linton; 'but he go on to the moor
frequently, since the shooting season commence; and you might
spend an hour or two with I in his absence. do say you will. I
think I should not be peevish with you: youwould not provoke I, and
youwould always be ready to help I, wouldnot you?'
'yes" say Catherine, stroke his long soft hair: 'if I could
only get papa's consent, Iwould spend half my time with you. pretty
Linton! I wish you be my brother.'
'and then you would like I as well as your father?' observe he,
more cheerfully. 'but papa say you would love I well than he
and all the world, if you be my wife; so Iwould rather you be
that.'
'no, I should never love anybody well than papa,' she return
gravely. 'and people hate their wife, sometimes; but not their
sister and brother: and if you be the latter, you would live
with we, and papa would be as fond of you as he be of I.'
Linton deny that people ever hat their wife; but Cathy
affirm they do, and, in her wisdom, instance his own father's
aversion to her aunt. I endeavour to stop her thoughtless
tongue. I couldnot succeed till everything she know be out.
Master Heathcliff, much irritated, assert her relation be false.
'Papa tell I; and papa do not tell falsehood,' she answer
pertly.
'MY papa scorn your!' cry Linton. 'he call he a sneaking
fool.'
'your be a wicked man,' retort Catherine; 'and you be very
naughty to dare to repeat what he say. he must be wicked to have
make Aunt Isabella leave he as she do.'
'she donot leave he,' say the boy; 'you sha'n't contradict I.'
'she do,' cry my young lady.
'well, Iwill tell you something!' say Linton. 'your mother hat
your father: now then.'
'oh!' exclaim Catherine, too enraged to continue.
'and she love mine,' add he.
'you little liar! I hate you now!' she pant, and her face grow
red with passion.
'she do! she do!' sing Linton, sink into the recess of his
chair, and lean back his head to enjoy the agitation of the
other disputant, who stand behind.
'Hush, Master Heathcliff!' I say; 'thatbe your father's tale, too,
I suppose.'
'it benot: you hold your tongue!' he answer. 'she do, she do,
Catherine! she do, she do!'
Cathy, beside herself, give the chair a violent push, and cause
he to fall against one arm. he be immediately seize by a
suffocating cough that soon end his triumph. it last so long
that it frighten even I. as to his cousin, she weep with all
her might, aghast at the mischief she have do: though she say
nothing. I hold he till the fit exhaust itself. then he thrust
I away, and leant his head down silently. Catherine quell she
lamentation also, take a seat opposite, and look solemnly into
the fire.
'how do you feel now, Master Heathcliff?' I inquire, after wait
ten minute.
'I wish she feel as I do,' he reply: 'spiteful, cruel thing!
Hareton never touch I: he never strike I in his life. and I
be well to-day: and there - ' his voice die in a whimper.
'I donot strike you!' muttered Cathy, chew her lip to prevent
another burst of emotion.
he sigh and moan like one under great suffering, and keep it up
for a quarter of an hour; on purpose to distress his cousin
apparently, for whenever he catch a stifle sob from she he put
renew pain and pathos into the inflexion of his voice.
'Ibe sorry I hurt you, Linton,' she say at length, rack beyond
endurance. 'but I couldnot have be hurt by that little push, and
I have no idea that you could, either: yoube not much, be you,
Linton? donot let I go home thinking Ihave do you harm. answer!
speak to I.'
'I cannot speak to you,' he murmur; 'youhave hurt I so that I
shall lie awake all night choke with this cough. if you have it
youwould know what it be; but you'll be comfortably asleep while Ibe
in agony, and nobody near I. I wonder how you would like to pass
those fearful night!' and he begin to wail aloud, for very pity
of himself.
'since you be in the habit of pass dreadful night,' I say,
'it willnot be Miss who spoil your ease: youwould be the same have she
never come. however, she shall not disturb you again; and perhaps
youwill get quieter when we leave you.'
'must I go?' ask Catherine dolefully, bend over he. 'do you
want I to go, Linton?'
'you cannot alter what youhave do,' he reply pettishly, shrink
from she, 'unless you alter it for the bad by tease I into a
fever.'
'well, then, I must go?' she repeat.
'let I alone, at least,' say he; 'I cannot bear your talking.'
she linger, and resist my persuasion to departure a tiresome
while; but as he neither look up nor speak, she finally make a
movement to the door, and I follow. we be recall by a
scream. Linton have slide from his seat on to the hearthstone, and
lay writhe in the mere perverseness of an indulged plague of a
child, determine to be as grievous and harass as it can. I
thoroughly gauge his disposition from his behaviour, and see at
once it would be folly to attempt humour he. not so my
companion: she run back in terror, kneel down, and cry, and
soothe, and entreat, till he grow quiet from lack of breath: by
no mean from compunction at distress she.
'I shall lift he on to the settle,' I say, 'and he may roll about
as he please: we cannot stop to watch he. I hope you be
satisfied, Miss Cathy, that you be not the person to benefit he;
and that his condition of health be not occasion by attachment to
you. now, then, there he be! come away: as soon as he know
there be nobody by to care for his nonsense, hewill be glad to lie
still.'
she place a cushion under his head, and offer he some water; he
reject the latter, and toss uneasily on the former, as if it
be a stone or a block of wood. she try to put it more
comfortably.
'I cannot do with that,' he say; 'itbe not high enough.'
Catherine bring another to lay above it.
'thatbe too high,' murmur the provoke thing.
'how must I arrange it, then?' she ask despairingly.
he twin himself up to she, as she half kneel by the settle, and
convert her shoulder into a support.
'no, that willnot do,' I say. 'youwill be content with the cushion,
Master Heathcliff. Miss have waste too much time on you already:
we cannot remain five minute long.'
'yes, yes, we can!' reply Cathy. 'hebe good and patient now.
hebe begin to think I shall have far great misery than he
will to-night, if I believe he be the bad for my visit: and then
I dare not come again. tell the truth about it, Linton; for I
musn't come, if I have hurt you.'
'you must come, to cure I,' he answer. 'you ought to come,
because you have hurt I: you know you have extremely! I be not
as ill when you enter as I be at present - be I?'
'but youhave make yourself ill by cry and be in a passion. - I
donot do it all,' say his cousin. 'however, wewill be friend
now. and you want I: you would wish to see I sometimes,
really?'
'I tell you I do,' he reply impatiently. 'sit on the settle and
let I lean on your knee. thatbe as mamma use to do, whole
afternoon together. sit quite still and donot talk: but you may
sing a song, if you can sing; or you may say a nice long
interesting ballad - one of those you promise to teach I; or a
story. Iwould rather have a ballad, though: begin.'
Catherine repeat the long she could remember. the employment
please both mightily. Linton would have another, and after that
another, notwithstanding my strenuous objection; and so they go
on until the clock strike twelve, and we hear Hareton in the
court, return for his dinner.
'and to-morrow, Catherine, will you be here to-morrow?' ask young
Heathcliff, hold her frock as she rise reluctantly.
'no,' I answer, 'nor next day neither.' she, however, give a
different response evidently, for his forehead clear as she
stoop and whisper in his ear.
'you willnot go to-morrow, recollect, Miss!' I commence, when we
be out of the house. 'you be not dream of it, be you?'
she smile.
'oh, Iwill take good care,' I continue: 'Iwill have that lock
mend, and you can escape by no way else.'
'I can get over the wall,' she say laugh. 'the Grange be not a
prison, Ellen, and you be not my gaoler. and besides, Ibe almost
seventeen: Ibe a woman. and Ibe certain Linton would recover
quickly if he have I to look after he. Ibe old than he be, you
know, and wiser: less childish, be I not? and hewill soon do as I
direct he, with some slight coax. hebe a pretty little darling
when hebe good. Iwould make such a pet of he, if he be mine. we
should, never quarrel, should we after we be use to each other?
donot you like he, Ellen?'
'like he!' I exclaim. 'the worst-temper bit of a sickly slip
that ever struggle into its teen. happily, as Mr. Heathcliff
conjecture, hewill not win twenty. I doubt whether hewill see
spring, indeed. and small loss to his family whenever he drop
off. and lucky it be for we that his father take he: the kinder
he be treat, the more tedious and selfish hewould be. Ibe glad you
have no chance of have he for a husband, Miss Catherine.'
my companion wax serious at hear this speech. to speak of his
death so regardlessly wound her feeling.
'hebe young than I,' she answer, after a protract pause of
meditation, 'and he ought to live the long: he will - he must
live as long as I do. hebe as strong now as when he first come
into the north; Ibe positive of that. itbe only a cold that ail
he, the same as papa have. you say papa will get well, and why
shouldnot he?'
'well, well,' I cry, 'after all, we neednot trouble ourselves;
for listen, Miss, - and mind, Iwill keep my word, - if you attempt
go to Wuthering Heights again, with or without I, I shall
inform Mr. Linton, and, unless he allow it, the intimacy with your
cousin must not be revive.'
'it have be revive,' mutter Cathy, sulkily.
'must not be continue, then,' I say.
'wewill see,' be her reply, and she set off at a gallop, leave I
to toil in the rear.
we both reach home before our dinner-time; my master suppose we
have be wander through the park, and therefore he demand no
explanation of our absence. as soon as I enter I hasten to
change my soaked shoe and stocking; but sit such awhile at
the Heights have do the mischief. on the succeed morning I be
lay up, and during three week I remain incapacitate for
attend to my duty: a calamity never experience prior to that
period, and never, I be thankful to say, since.
my little mistress behave like an angel in come to wait on I,
and cheer my solitude; the confinement bring I exceedingly low.
it be wearisome, to a stir active body: but few have slighter
reason for complaint than I have. the moment Catherine leave Mr.
Linton's room she appear at my bedside. her day be divide
between we; no amusement usurp a minute: she neglect she
meal, her study, and her play; and she be the fond nurse
that ever watch. she must have have a warm heart, when she love
her father so, to give so much to I. I say her day be divide
between we; but the master retire early, and I generally need
nothing after six o'clock, thus the evening be her own. poor
thing! I never consider what she do with herself after tea.
and though frequently, when she look in to bid I good-night, I
remark a fresh colour in her cheek and a pinkness over her
slender finger, instead of fancy the line borrow from a cold
ride across the moor, I lay it to the charge of a hot fire in the
library.
CHAPTER XXIV
at the close of three week I be able to quit my chamber and move
about the house. and on the first occasion of my sit up in the
evening I ask Catherine to read to I, because my eye be weak.
we be in the library, the master have go to bed: she
consent, rather unwillingly, I fancy; and imagine my sort of
book do not suit she, I bid she please herself in the choice of
what she peruse. she select one of her own favourite, and get
forward steadily about an hour; then come frequent question.
'Ellen, be not you tired? hadnot you well lie down now? youwill
be sick, keep up so long, Ellen.'
'no, no, dear, Ibe not tired,' I return, continually.
perceive I immovable, she essay another method of show she
disrelish for her occupation. it change to yawning, and
stretching, and -
'Ellen, Ibe tired.'
'give over then and talk,' I answer.
that be bad: she fret and sigh, and look at her watch
till eight, and finally go to her room, completely overdone with
sleep; judge by her peevish, heavy look, and the constant rubbing
she inflict on her eye. the following night she seem more
impatient still; and on the third from recover my company she
complain of a headache, and leave I. I think her conduct odd;
and have remain alone a long while, I resolve on go and
inquire whether she be well, and ask she to come and lie
on the sofa, instead of up-stair in the dark. no Catherine could
I discover up-stair, and none below. the servant affirm they
have not see she. I listen at Mr. Edgar's door; all be silence.
I return to her apartment, extinguish my candle, and seat
myself in the window.
the moon shine bright; a sprinkling of snow cover the ground, and
I reflect that she might, possibly, have take it into her head
to walk about the garden, for refreshment. I do detect a figure
creep along the inner fence of the park; but it be not my young
mistress: on its emerge into the light, I recognise one of the
groom. he stand a considerable period, view the carriage-road
through the ground; then start off at a brisk pace, as if he have
detect something, and reappear presently, lead Miss's pony;
and there she be, just dismount, and walk by its side. the
man take his charge stealthily across the grass towards the stable.
Cathy enter by the casement-window of the drawing-room, and
glide noiselessly up to where I await she. she put the door
gently too, slip off her snowy shoe, untie her hat, and be
proceeding, unconscious of my espionage, to lay aside her mantle,
when I suddenly rise and reveal myself. the surprise petrify
she an instant: she utter an inarticulate exclamation, and stand
fix.
'my dear Miss Catherine,' I begin, too vividly impress by her
recent kindness to break into a scold, 'where have you be rid
out at this hour? and why should you try to deceive I by tell
a tale? where have you be? speak!'
'to the bottom of the park,' she stammer. 'I donot tell a
tale.'
'and nowhere else?' I demand.
'no,' be the muttered reply.
'oh, Catherine!' I cry, sorrowfully. 'you know you have be
do wrong, or you wouldnot be drive to utter an untruth to
I. that do grieve I. Iwould rather be three month ill, than
hear you frame a deliberate lie.'
she spring forward, and burst into tear, throw her arm round
my neck.
'well, Ellen, Ibe so afraid of you be angry,' she say.
'promise not to be angry, and you shall know the very truth: I
hate to hide it.'
we sit down in the window-seat; I assure she I would not scold,
whatever her secret might be, and I guess it, of course; so she
commence -
'Ihave be to Wuthering Heights, Ellen, and Ihave never miss go
a day since you fall ill; except thrice before, and twice after you
leave your room. I give Michael book and picture to prepare Minny
every evening, and to put she back in the stable: you mustnot
scold he either, mind. I be at the Heights by half-past six, and
generally stay till half-past eight, and then gallop home. it
be not to amuse myself that I go: I be often wretche all the
time. now and then I be happy: once in a week perhaps. at
first, I expect there would be sad work persuade you to let I
keep my word to Linton: for I have engage to call again next day,
when we quit he; but, as you stay up-stair on the morrow, I
escape that trouble. while Michael be refastene the lock of
the park door in the afternoon, I get possession of the key, and
tell he how my cousin wish I to visit he, because he be sick,
and couldnot come to the Grange; and how papa would object to my
go: and then I negotiate with he about the pony. he be fond
of reading, and he think of leave soon to get marry; so he
offer, if I would lend he book out of the library, to do what I
wish: but I prefer give he my own, and that satisfy he
well.
'on my second visit Linton seem in lively spirit; and Zillah
(that be their housekeeper) make we a clean room and a good fire,
and tell we that, as Joseph be out at a prayer-meeting and Hareton
Earnshaw be off with his dog - rob our wood of pheasant, as
I hear afterwards - we might do what we like. she bring I
some warm wine and gingerbread, and appear exceedingly good-
natured, and Linton sit in the arm-chair, and I in the little
rock chair on the hearth-stone, and we laugh and talk so
merrily, and find so much to say: we plan where we would go,
and what we would do in summer. I neednot repeat that, because you
would call it silly.
'one time, however, we be near quarrelling. he say the
pleasantest manner of spend a hot July day be lie from
morning till evening on a bank of heath in the middle of the moor,
with the bee hum dreamily about among the bloom, and the lark
sing high up overhead, and the blue sky and bright sun shin
steadily and cloudlessly. that be his most perfect idea of
heaven's happiness: mine be rock in a rustle green tree,
with a west wind blow, and bright white cloud flit rapidly
above; and not only lark, but throstle, and blackbird, and
linnet, and cuckoo pour out music on every side, and the moor
see at a distance, break into cool dusky dell; but close by
great swell of long grass undulating in wave to the breeze; and
wood and sound water, and the whole world awake and wild with
joy. he want all to lie in an ecstasy of peace; I want all to
sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee. I say his heaven would
be only half alive; and he say mine would be drunk: I say I
should fall asleep in his; and he say he could not breathe in
mine, and begin to grow very snappish. at last, we agree to try
both, as soon as the right weather come; and then we kiss each
other and be friend.
'after sit still an hour, I look at the great room with its
smooth uncarpeted floor, and think how nice it would be to play
in, if we remove the table; and I ask Linton to call Zillah in
to help we, and wewould have a game at blindman's-buff; she should try
to catch we: you use to, you know, Ellen. he wouldnot: there
be no pleasure in it, he say; but he consent to play at ball
with I. we find two in a cupboard, among a heap of old toy,
top, and hoop, and battledore and shuttlecock. one be mark
C., and the other H.; I wish to have the C., because that stand
for Catherine, and the H. might be for Heathcliff, his name; but
the bran come out of H., and Linton donot like it. I beat he
constantly: and he get cross again, and cough, and return to
his chair. that night, though, he easily recover his good
humour: he be charm with two or three pretty song - your
song, Ellen; and when I be oblige to go, he beg and entreat
I to come the follow evening; and I promise. Minny and I go
fly home as light as air; and I dream of Wuthering Heights and
my sweet, darling cousin, till morning.
'on the morrow I be sad; partly because you be poorly, and
partly that I wish my father know, and approve of my excursion:
but it be beautiful moonlight after tea; and, as I ride on, the
gloom clear. I shall have another happy evening, I think to
myself; and what delight I more, my pretty Linton will. I
trot up their garden, and be turn round to the back, when
that fellow Earnshaw meet I, take my bridle, and bid I go in by
the front entrance. he pat Minny's neck, and say she be a
bonny beast, and appear as if he want I to speak to he. I
only tell he to leave my horse alone, or else it would kick he.
he answer in his vulgar accent, "it wouldnot do mitch hurt if it
do;" and survey its leg with a smile. I be half inclined to
make it try; however, he move off to open the door, and, as he
raise the latch, he look up to the inscription above, and say,
with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation: "Miss Catherine!
I can read yon, now."
'"wonderful," I exclaim. "pray let we hear you - you be grow
clever!"
'he spelt, and drawl over by syllable, the name - "Hareton
Earnshaw."
'"and the figure?" I cry, encouragingly, perceive that he come
to a dead halt.
'"I cannot tell they yet," he answer.
'"oh, you dunce!" I say, laugh heartily at his failure.
'the fool star, with a grin hover about his lip, and a scowl
gathering over his eye, as if uncertain whether he might not join
in my mirth: whether it be not pleasant familiarity, or what it
really be, contempt. I settle his doubt, by suddenly retrieve
my gravity and desire he to walk away, for I come to see Linton,
not he. he redden - I see that by the moonlight - drop his
hand from the latch, and skulk off, a picture of mortify
vanity. he imagine himself to be as accomplish as Linton, I
suppose, because he could spell his own name; and be marvellously
discomfited that I donot think the same.'
'stop, Miss Catherine, dear!' - I interrupt. 'I shall not scold,
but I donot like your conduct there. if you have remember that
Hareton be your cousin as much as Master Heathcliff, you would
have feel how improper it be to behave in that way. at least, it
be praiseworthy ambition for he to desire to be as accomplish
as Linton; and probably he do not learn merely to show off: you
have make he ashamed of his ignorance before, I have no doubt; and
he wish to remedy it and please you. to sneer at his imperfect
attempt be very bad breeding. have you be bring up in his
circumstance, would you be less rude? he be as quick and as
intelligent a child as ever you be; and Ibe hurt that he should
be despise now, because that base Heathcliff have treat he so
unjustly.'
'well, Ellen, you willnot cry about it, will you?' she exclaim,
surprised at my earnestness. 'but wait, and you shall hear if he
con his A B c to please I; and if it be worth while be
civil to the brute. I enter; Linton be lie on the settle, and
half get up to welcome I.
'"Ibe ill to-night, Catherine, love," he say; "and you must have
all the talk, and let I listen. come, and sit by I. I be sure
you wouldnot break your word, and Iwill make you promise again,
before you go."
'I know now that I mustnot tease he, as he be ill; and I speak
softly and put no question, and avoid irritate he in any way.
I have bring some of my nice book for he: he ask I to read
a little of one, and I be about to comply, when Earnshaw burst the
door open: have gather venom with reflection. he advance
direct to we, seize Linton by the arm, and swing he off the seat.
'"get to thy own room!" he say, in a voice almost inarticulate
with passion; and his face look swell and furious. "take she
there if she come to see thee: thou shalln't keep I out of this.
begone wi' ye both!"
'he swear at we, and leave Linton no time to answer, nearly throw
he into the kitchen; and he clench his fist as I follow,
seemingly long to knock I down. I be afraid for a moment, and
I let one volume fall; he kick it after I, and shut we out. I
hear a malignant, crackly laugh by the fire, and turn, beheld
that odious Joseph standing rub his bony hand, and quivering.
'"I wer sure hewould sarve ye out! hebe a grand lad! hebe getten t'
raight sperrit in he! HE knaw - ay, he knaw, as weel as I do,
who sud be t' maister yonder - Ech, ech, ech! he make ye skift
properly! Ech, ech, ech!"
'"where must we go?" I ask of my cousin, disregard the old
wretch's mockery.
'Linton be white and tremble. he be not pretty then, Ellen:
oh, no! he look frightful; for his thin face and large eye be
work into an expression of frantic, powerless fury. he grasp
the handle of the door, and shake it: it be fasten inside.
'"if you donot let I in, Iwill kill you! - if you donot let I in,
Iwill kill you!" he rather shriek than say. "Devil! devil! -
Iwill kill you - Iwill kill you!"
Joseph utter his croak laugh again.
'"Thear, thatbe t' father!" he cry. "thatbe father! wehave alla
summut o' either side in we. Niver heed, Hareton, lad - dunnut be
'feard - he cannot get at thee!"
'I take hold of Linton's hand, and try to pull he away; but he
shriek so shockingly that I dare not proceed. at last his cry
be choke by a dreadful fit of coughing; blood gush from his
mouth, and he fall on the ground. I run into the yard, sick with
terror; and call for Zillah, as loud as I could. she soon hear
I: she be milk the cow in a shed behind the barn, and
hurrying from her work, she inquire what there be to do? I
havenot breath to explain; drag she in, I look about for
Linton. Earnshaw have come out to examine the mischief he have
cause, and he be then convey the poor thing up-stair. Zillah
and I ascend after he; but he stop I at the top of the
step, and say I shouldnot go in: I must go home. I exclaim
that he have kill Linton, and I would enter. Joseph lock the
door, and declare I should do "no sich stuff," and ask I
whether I be "bahn to be as mad as he." I stand cry till the
housekeeper reappear. she affirm he would be well in a bit,
but he couldnot do with that shrieking and din; and she take I,
and nearly carry I into the house.
'Ellen, I be ready to tear my hair off my head! I sob and weep
so that my eye be almost blind; and the ruffian you have such
sympathy with stand opposite: presume every now and then to bid
I "wisht," and deny that it be his fault; and, finally,
frighten by my assertion that I would tell papa, and that he
should be put in prison and hang, he commence blubber
himself, and hurry out to hide his cowardly agitation. still, I
be not rid of he: when at length they compel I to depart,
and I have get some hundred yard off the premise, he suddenly
issue from the shadow of the road-side, and check Minny and take
hold of I.
'"Miss Catherine, Ibe ill grieve," he begin, "but itbe rayther too
bad - "
'I give he a cut with my whip, think perhaps he would murder
I. he let go, thunder one of his horrid curse, and I gallop
home more than half out of my sens.
'I donot bid you good-night that evening, and I donot go to
Wuthering Heights the next: I wish to go exceedingly; but I be
strangely excited, and dread to hear that Linton be dead,
sometimes; and sometimes shudder at the thought of encounter
Hareton. on the third day I take courage: at least, I couldnot
bear long suspense, and steal off once more. I go at five
o'clock, and walk; fancy I might manage to creep into the
house, and up to Linton's room, unobserve. however, the dog give
notice of my approach. Zillah receive I, and say "the lad be
mend nicely," show I into a small, tidy, carpet apartment,
where, to my inexpressible joy, I behold Linton lay on a little
sofa, read one of my book. but he would neither speak to I
nor look at I, through a whole hour, Ellen: he have such an
unhappy temper. and what quite confound I, when he do open his
mouth, it be to utter the falsehood that I have occasion the
uproar, and Hareton be not to blame! unable to reply, except
passionately, I get up and walk from the room. he send after I
a faint "Catherine!" he do not reckon on be answer so: but
I wouldnot turn back; and the morrow be the second day on which I
stay at home, nearly determined to visit he no more. but it be
so miserable go to bed and get up, and never hear
anything about he, that my resolution melt into air before it
be properly form. it have appear wrong to take the journey
once; now it seem wrong to refrain. Michael come to ask if he
must saddle Minny; I say "yes," and consider myself do a duty
as she bear I over the hill. I be force to pass the front
window to get to the court: it be no use try to conceal my
presence.
'"young master be in the house," say Zillah, as she see I make
for the parlour. I go in; Earnshaw be there also, but he
quit the room directly. Linton sit in the great arm-chair half
asleep; walk up to the fire, I begin in a serious tone, partly
mean it to be true -
'"as you donot like I, Linton, and as you think I come on purpose
to hurt you, and pretend that I do so every time, this be our last
meeting: let we say good-bye; and tell Mr. Heathcliff that you
have no wish to see I, and that he mustnot invent any more
falsehood on the subject."
'"sit down and take your hat off, Catherine," he answer. "you
be so much happy than I be, you ought to be well. papa talk
enough of my defect, and show enough scorn of I, to make it
natural I should doubt myself. I doubt whether I be not altogether
as worthless as he call I, frequently; and then I feel so cross
and bitter, I hate everybody! I be worthless, and bad in temper,
and bad in spirit, almost always; and, if you choose, you may say
good-bye: youwill get rid of an annoyance. only, Catherine, do I
this justice: believe that if I might be as sweet, and as kind,
and as good as you be, I would be; as willingly, and more so, than
as happy and as healthy. and believe that your kindness have make
I love you deeply than if I deserve your love: and though I
couldnot, and cannot help show my nature to you, I regret it and
repent it; and shall regret and repent it till I die!"
'I feel he speak the truth; and I feel I must forgive he: and,
though we should quarrel the next moment, I must forgive he again.
we be reconcile; but we cry, both of we, the whole time I
stay: not entirely for sorrow; yet I be sorry Linton have that
distorted nature. hewill never let his friend be at ease, and
hewill never be at ease himself! I have always go to his little
parlour, since that night; because his father return the day
after.
'about three time, I think, we have be merry and hopeful, as we
be the first evening; the rest of my visit be dreary and
trouble: now with his selfishness and spite, and now with his
suffering: but Ihave learn to endure the former with nearly as
little resentment as the latter. Mr. Heathcliff purposely avoid
I: I have hardly see he at all. last Sunday, indeed, come
early than usual, I hear he abuse poor Linton cruelly for his
conduct of the night before. I cannot tell how he know of it,
unless he listen. Linton have certainly behave provokingly:
however, it be the business of nobody but I, and I interrupt
Mr. Heathcliff's lecture by enter and tell he so. he burst
into a laugh, and go away, say he be glad I take that view of
the matter. since then, Ihave tell Linton he must whisper his
bitter thing. now, Ellen, you have hear all. I cannot be
prevent from go to Wuthering Heights, except by inflict
misery on two people; whereas, if youwill only not tell papa, my
go need disturb the tranquillity of none. youwill not tell, will
you? it will be very heartless, if you do.'
'Iwill make up my mind on that point by to-morrow, Miss Catherine,'
I reply. 'it require some study; and so Iwill leave you to your
rest, and go think it over.'
I think it over aloud, in my master's presence; walk straight
from her room to his, and relate the whole story: with the
exception of her conversation with her cousin, and any mention of
Hareton. Mr. Linton be alarmed and distressed, more than he would
acknowledge to I. in the morning, Catherine learn my betrayal of
her confidence, and she learn also that her secret visit be to
end. in vain she weep and writhe against the interdict, and
implore her father to have pity on Linton: all she get to comfort
she be a promise that he would write and give he leave to come to
the Grange when he please; but explain that he must no long
expect to see Catherine at Wuthering Heights. perhaps, have he be
aware of his nephew's disposition and state of health, he would
have see fit to withhold even that slight consolation.
CHAPTER XXV
'these thing happen last winter, sir,' say Mrs. Dean; 'hardly
more than a year ago. last winter, I do not think, at another
twelve month' end, I should be amuse a stranger to the family
with relate they! yet, who know how long youwill be a stranger?
yoube too young to rest always content, live by yourself; and
I some way fancy no one could see Catherine Linton and not love
she. you smile; but why do you look so lively and interested when
I talk about she? and why have you ask I to hang her picture
over your fireplace? and why - ?'
'stop, my good friend!' I cry. 'it may be very possible that I
should love she; but would she love I? I doubt it too much to
venture my tranquillity by run into temptation: and then my
home be not here. Ibe of the busy world, and to its arm I must
return. go on. be Catherine obedient to her father's command?'
'she be,' continue the housekeeper. 'her affection for he be
still the chief sentiment in her heart; and he speak without anger:
he speak in the deep tenderness of one about to leave his treasure
amid peril and foe, where his remember word would be the only
aid that he could bequeath to guide she. he say to I, a few day
afterwards, "I wish my nephew would write, Ellen, or call. tell
I, sincerely, what you think of he: be he change for the
well, or be there a prospect of improvement, as he grow a man?"
'"hebe very delicate, sir," I reply; "and scarcely likely to
reach manhood: but this I can say, he do not resemble his
father; and if Miss Catherine have the misfortune to marry he, he
would not be beyond her control: unless she be extremely and
foolishly indulgent. however, master, youwill have plenty of time
to get acquaint with he and see whether he would suit she: it
want four year and more to his being of age."'
Edgar sigh; and, walk to the window, look out towards
Gimmerton Kirk. it be a misty afternoon, but the February sun
shine dimly, and we could just distinguish the two fir-tree in the
yard, and the sparely-scatter gravestone.
'Ihave pray often,' he half soliloquise, 'for the approach of
what be come; and now I begin to shrink, and fear it. I think
the memory of the hour I come down that glen a bridegroom would be
less sweet than the anticipation that I be soon, in a few month,
or, possibly, week, to be carry up, and lay in its lonely
hollow! Ellen, Ihave be very happy with my little Cathy: through
winter night and summer day she be a live hope at my side.
but Ihave be as happy musing by myself among those stone, under
that old church: lie, through the long June evening, on the
green mound of her mother's grave, and wish - yearn for the
time when I might lie beneath it. what can I do for Cathy? how
must I quit she? Iwould not care one moment for Linton be
Heathcliff's son; nor for his take she from I, if he could
console she for my loss. Iwould not care that Heathcliff gain his
end, and triumph in rob I of my last blessing! but should
Linton be unworthy - only a feeble tool to his father - I cannot
abandon she to he! and, hard though it be to crush her buoyant
spirit, I must persevere in make she sad while I live, and
leave her solitary when I die. darling! Iwould rather resign she
to God, and lie she in the earth before I.'
'resign she to God as it be, sir,' I answer, 'and if we should
lose you - which may he forbid - under his providence, Iwill stand
her friend and counsellor to the last. Miss Catherine be a good
girl: I donot fear that she will go wilfully wrong; and people who
do their duty be always finally reward.'
Spring advance; yet my master gather no real strength, though he
resume his walk in the ground with his daughter. to her
inexperienced notion, this itself be a sign of convalescence; and
then his cheek be often flushed, and his eye be bright; she
feel sure of his recovering. on her seventeenth birthday, he do
not visit the churchyard: it be rain, and I observe - 'youwill
surely not go out to-night, sir?'
he answer, - 'no, Iwill defer it this year a little long.' he
write again to Linton, express his great desire to see he; and,
have the invalid be presentable, Ihave no doubt his father would
have permit he to come. as it be, be instruct, he
return an answer, intimate that Mr. Heathcliff object to his
call at the Grange; but his uncle's kind remembrance delight
he, and he hop to meet he sometimes in his ramble, and
personally to petition that his cousin and he might not remain long
so utterly divide.
that part of his letter be simple, and probably his own.
Heathcliff know he could plead eloquently for Catherine's company,
then.
'I do not ask,' he say, 'that she may visit here; but be I never
to see she, because my father forbid I to go to her home, and you
forbid she to come to mine? do, now and then, ride with she
towards the Heights; and let we exchange a few word, in your
presence! we have do nothing to deserve this separation; and you
be not angry with I: you have no reason to dislike I, you
allow, yourself. dear uncle! send I a kind note to-morrow, and
leave to join you anywhere you please, except at Thrushcross
Grange. I believe an interview would convince you that my father's
character be not mine: he affirm I be more your nephew than his
son; and though I have fault which render I unworthy of
Catherine, she have excuse they, and for her sake, you should also.
you inquire after my health - it be well; but while I remain cut
off from all hope, and doom to solitude, or the society of those
who never do and never will like I, how can I be cheerful and
well?'
Edgar, though he feel for the boy, could not consent to grant his
request; because he could not accompany Catherine. he say, in
summer, perhaps, they might meet: meantime, he wish he to
continue write at interval, and engage to give he what advice
and comfort he be able by letter; be well aware of his hard
position in his family. Linton comply; and have he be
unrestrained, would probably have spoil all by fill his
epistle with complaint and lamentation. but his father keep a
sharp watch over he; and, of course, insist on every line that
my master send be show; so, instead of pen his peculiar
personal suffering and distress, the theme constantly uppermost
in his thought, he harp on the cruel obligation of be hold
asunder from his friend and love; and gently intimate that Mr.
Linton must allow an interview soon, or he should fear he be
purposely deceive he with empty promise.
Cathy be a powerful ally at home; and between they they at length
persuade my master to acquiesce in their have a ride or a walk
together about once a week, under my guardianship, and on the moor
near the Grange: for June find he still decline. though he
have set aside yearly a portion of his income for my young lady's
fortune, he have a natural desire that she might retain - or at
least return in a short time to - the house of her ancestor; and
he consider she only prospect of do that be by a union with
his heir; he have no idea that the latter be fail almost as fast
as himself; nor have any one, I believe: no doctor visit the
Heights, and no one see Master Heathcliff to make report of his
condition among we. I, for my part, begin to fancy my foreboding
be false, and that he must be actually rally, when he
mention rid and walk on the moor, and seem so earnest in
pursue his object. I could not picture a father treat a die
child as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterwards learn
Heathcliff have treat he, to compel this apparent eagerness: his
effort redouble the more imminently his avaricious and unfeele
plan be threaten with defeat by death.
CHAPTER XXVI
SUMMER be already past its prime, when Edgar reluctantly yield
his assent to their entreaty, and Catherine and I set out on our
first ride to join her cousin. it be a close, sultry day: devoid
of sunshine, but with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain:
and our place of meeting have be fix at the guide-stone, by the
cross-road. on arrive there, however, a little herd-boy,
despatch as a messenger, tell we that, - 'Maister Linton wer just
o' this side th' Heights: and hewould be mitch obleege to we to gang
on a bit far.'
'then Master Linton have forget the first injunction of his uncle,'
I observe: 'he bid we keep on the Grange land, and here we be
off at once.'
'well, wewill turn our horse' head round when we reach he,'
answer my companion; 'our excursion shall lie towards home.'
but when we reach he, and that be scarcely a quarter of a mile
from his own door, we find he have no horse; and we be force to
dismount, and leave our to graze. he lie on the heath, await
our approach, and do not rise till we come within a few yard.
then he walk so feebly, and look so pale, that I immediately
exclaim, - 'why, Master Heathcliff, you be not fit for enjoy
a ramble this morning. how ill you do look!'
Catherine survey he with grief and astonishment: she change
the ejaculation of joy on her lip to one of alarm; and the
congratulation on their long-postpone meeting to an anxious
inquiry, whether he be bad than usual?
'no - well - well!' he pant, tremble, and retain she
hand as if he need its support, while his large blue eye
wander timidly over she; the hollowness round they transform
to haggard wildness the languid expression they once possess.
'but you have be bad,' persist his cousin; 'bad than when I
see you last; you be thin, and - '
'Ibe tired,' he interrupt, hurriedly. 'it be too hot for
walking, let we rest here. and, in the morning, I often feel sick
- papa say I grow so fast.'
badly satisfied, Cathy sit down, and he recline beside she.
'this be something like your paradise,' say she, make an effort
at cheerfulness. 'you recollect the two day we agree to spend in
the place and way each thought pleasantest? this be nearly your,
only there be cloud; but then they be so soft and mellow: it be
nice than sunshine. next week, if you can, wewill ride down to the
Grange Park, and try mine.'
Linton do not appear to remember what she talk of and he have
evidently great difficulty in sustain any kind of conversation.
his lack of interest in the subject she start, and his equal
incapacity to contribute to her entertainment, be so obvious that
she could not conceal her disappointment. an indefinite alteration
have come over his whole person and manner. the pettishness that
might be caress into fondness, have yield to a listless apathy;
there be less of the peevish temper of a child which fret and
tease on purpose to be soothe, and more of the self-absorb
moroseness of a confirm invalid, repel consolation, and ready
to regard the good-humour mirth of other as an insult.
Catherine perceive, as well as I do, that he hold it rather a
punishment, than a gratification, to endure our company; and she
make no scruple of propose, presently, to depart. that proposal,
unexpectedly, rouse Linton from his lethargy, and throw he into a
strange state of agitation. he glance fearfully towards the
Heights, beg she would remain another half-hour, at least.
'but I think,' say Cathy, 'youwould be more comfortable at home than
sit here; and I cannot amuse you to-day, I see, by my tale,
and song, and chatter: you have grow wise than I, in these six
month; you have little taste for my diversion now: or else, if I
could amuse you, Iwould willingly stay.'
'stay to rest yourself,' he reply. 'and, Catherine, donot think
or say that Ibe very unwell: it be the heavy weather and heat that
make I dull; and I walk about, before you come, a great deal for
I. tell uncle Ibe in tolerable health, will you?'
'Iwill tell he that you say so, Linton. I couldnot affirm that you
be,' observe my young lady, wonder at his pertinacious
assertion of what be evidently an untruth.
'and be here again next Thursday,' continue he, shun she
puzzled gaze. 'and give he my thank for permit you to come -
my good thank, Catherine. and - and, if you do meet my father,
and he ask you about I, donot lead he to suppose that Ihave be
extremely silent and stupid: donot look sad and downcast, as you
be do - hewill be angry.'
'I care nothing for his anger,' exclaim Cathy, imagine she
would be its object.
'but I do,' say her cousin, shudder. 'don't provoke he
against I, Catherine, for he be very hard.'
'be he severe to you, Master Heathcliff?' I inquire. 'have he
grow weary of indulgence, and pass from passive to active
hatred?'
Linton look at I, but do not answer; and, after keep she
seat by his side another ten minute, during which his head fall
drowsily on his breast, and he utter nothing except suppress
moan of exhaustion or pain, Cathy begin to seek solace in look
for bilberry, and share the produce of her research with I:
she do not offer they to he, for she see further notice would
only weary and annoy.
'be it half-an-hour now, Ellen?' she whisper in my ear, at last.
'I cannot tell why we should stay. hebe asleep, and papa will be
want we back.'
'well, we must not leave he asleep,' I answer; 'wait till lie
wake, and be patient. you be mighty eager to set off, but your
longing to see poor Linton have soon evaporate!'
'why do he wish to see I?' return Catherine. 'in his crossest
humour, formerly, I like he well than I do in his present
curious mood. itbe just as if it be a task he be compel to
perform - this interview - for fear his father should scold he.
but Ibe hardly go to come to give Mr. Heathcliff pleasure;
whatever reason he may have for order Linton to undergo this
penance. and, though Ibe glad hebe well in health, Ibe sorry
hebe so much less pleasant, and so much less affectionate to I.'
'you think he be well in health, then?' I say.
'yes,' she answer; 'because he always make such a great deal of
his suffering, you know. he be not tolerably well, as he tell I
to tell papa; but hebe well, very likely.'
'there you differ with I, Miss Cathy,' I remark; 'I should
conjecture he to be far bad.'
Linton here start from his slumber in bewildered terror, and
ask if any one have call his name.
'no,' say Catherine; 'unless in dream. I cannot conceive how you
manage to doze out of door, in the morning.'
'I think I hear my father,' he gasp, glance up to the
frowning nab above we. 'you be sure nobody speak?'
'quite sure,' reply his cousin. 'only Ellen and I be dispute
concern your health. be you truly strong, Linton, than when
we separate in winter? if you be, Ibe certain one thing be not
strong - your regard for I: speak, - be you?'
the tear gush from Linton's eye as he answer, 'yes, yes, I
be!' and, still under the spell of the imaginary voice, his gaze
wander up and down to detect its owner.
Cathy rise. 'for to-day we must part,' she say. 'and I willnot
conceal that I have be sadly disappoint with our meeting;
though Iwill mention it to nobody but you: not that I stand in awe
of Mr. Heathcliff.'
'hush,' murmur Linton; 'for God's sake, hush! hebe come.' and
he cling to Catherine's arm, strive to detain she; but at that
announcement she hastily disengage herself, and whistle to Minny,
who obey she like a dog.
'Iwill be here next Thursday,' she cry, spring to the saddle.
'good-bye. Quick, Ellen!'
and so we leave he, scarcely conscious of our departure, so
absorb be he in anticipate his father's approach.
before we reach home, Catherine's displeasure soften into a
perplexed sensation of pity and regret, largely blend with vague,
uneasy doubt about Linton's actual circumstance, physical and
social: in which I partook, though I counsel she not to say
much; for a second journey would make we well judge. my master
request an account of our ongoing. his nephew's offering of
thank be duly deliver, Miss Cathy gently touch on the rest:
I also throw little light on his inquiry, for I hardly know what
to hide and what to reveal.
CHAPTER XXVII
seven day glide away, every one mark its course by the
henceforth rapid alteration of Edgar Linton's state. the havoc
that month have previously work be now emulate by the inroad
of hour. Catherine we would fain have delude yet; but her own
quick spirit refuse to delude she: it divine in secret, and
brood on the dreadful probability, gradually ripen into
certainty. she have not the heart to mention her ride, when
Thursday come round; I mention it for she, and obtain
permission to order she out of door: for the library, where she
father stop a short time daily - the brief period he could bear
to sit up - and his chamber, have become her whole world. she
grudge each moment that do not find she bend over his pillow,
or seat by his side. her countenance grow wan with watching and
sorrow, and my master gladly dismiss she to what he flatter
himself would be a happy change of scene and society; drawing
comfort from the hope that she would not now be leave entirely alone
after his death.
he have a fix idea, I guess by several observation he let fall,
that, as his nephew resemble he in person, he would resemble he
in mind; for Linton's letter bear few or no indication of his
defective character. and I, through pardonable weakness, refrain
from correct the error; ask myself what good there would be
in disturb his last moment with information that he have neither
power nor opportunity to turn to account.
we defer our excursion till the afternoon; a golden afternoon of
August: every breath from the hill so full of life, that it
seem whoever respire it, though die, might revive.
Catherine's face be just like the landscape - shadow and sunshine
flit over it in rapid succession; but the shadow rest
long, and the sunshine be more transient; and her poor little
heart reproach itself for even that pass forgetfulness of its
care.
we discern Linton watch at the same spot he have select
before. my young mistress alight, and tell I that, as she be
resolve to stay a very little while, I have well hold the pony
and remain on horseback; but I dissent: I wouldnot risk lose
sight of the charge commit to I a minute; so we climb the
slope of heath together. Master Heathcliff receive we with
great animation on this occasion: not the animation of high
spirit though, nor yet of joy; it look more like fear.
'it be late!' he say, speak short and with difficulty. 'be not
your father very ill? I think you wouldnot come.'
'why willnot you be candid?' cry Catherine, swallow she
greeting. 'why cannot you say at once you donot want I? it be
strange, Linton, that for the second time you have bring I here
on purpose, apparently to distress we both, and for no reason
besides!'
Linton shiver, and glance at she, half supplicate, half
ashamed; but his cousin's patience be not sufficient to endure
this enigmatical behaviour.
'my father be very ill,' she say; 'and why be I call from his
bedside? why donot you send to absolve I from my promise, when
you wish I wouldnot keep it? come! I desire an explanation:
play and trifling be completely banish out of my mind; and I
cannot dance attendance on your affectation now!'
'my affectation!' he murmur; 'what be they? for heaven's sake,
Catherine, donot look so angry! despise I as much as you please;
I be a worthless, cowardly wretch: I cannot be scorn enough; but
Ibe too mean for your anger. hate my father, and spare I for
contempt.'
'nonsense!' cry Catherine in a passion. 'foolish, silly boy!
and there! he tremble: as if I be really go to touch he!
you neednot bespeak contempt, Linton: anybody will have it
spontaneously at your service. get off! I shall return home: it
be folly drag you from the hearth-stone, and pretend - what
do we pretend? let go my frock! if I pity you for cry and
look so very frightened, you should spurn such pity. Ellen,
tell he how disgraceful this conduct be. rise, and donot degrade
yourself into an abject reptile - don't!'
with streaming face and an expression of agony, Linton have throw
his nerveless frame along the ground: he seem convulse with
exquisite terror.
'oh!' he sob, 'I cannot bear it! Catherine, Catherine, Ibe a
traitor, too, and I dare not tell you! but leave I, and I shall
be kill! DEAR Catherine, my life be in your hand: and you have
say you love I, and if you do, it wouldnot harm you. youwill
not go, then? kind, sweet, good Catherine! and perhaps you will
consent - and hewill let I die with you!'
my young lady, on witness his intense anguish, stoop to raise
he. the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcome her
vexation, and she grow thoroughly move and alarm.
'consent to what?' she ask. 'to stay! tell I the meaning of
this strange talk, and I will. you contradict your own word, and
distract I! be calm and frank, and confess at once all that
weigh on your heart. you wouldnot injure I, Linton, would you?
you wouldnot let any enemy hurt I, if you could prevent it? Iwill
believe you be a coward, for yourself, but not a cowardly betrayer
of your good friend.'
'but my father threaten I,' gasp the boy, clasp his
attenuate finger, 'and I dread he - I dread he! I dare not
tell!'
'oh, well!' say Catherine, with scornful compassion, 'keep your
secret: i'm no coward. save yourself: Ibe not afraid!'
her magnanimity provoke his tear: he weep wildly, kiss she
support hand, and yet could not summon courage to speak out. I
be cogitate what the mystery might be, and determine Catherine
should never suffer to benefit he or any one else, by my good
will; when, hear a rustle among the ling, I look up and see
Mr. Heathcliff almost close upon we, descend the Heights. he
donot cast a glance towards my companion, though they be
sufficiently near for Linton's sob to be audible; but hail I
in the almost hearty tone he assume to none besides, and the
sincerity of which I couldnot avoid doubt, he say -
'it be something to see you so near to my house, nelly. how be
you at the Grange? let we hear. the rumour go,' he add, in a
low tone, 'that Edgar Linton be on his death-bed: perhaps they
exaggerate his illness?'
'no; my master be die,' I reply: 'it be true enough. a sad
thing it will be for we all, but a blessing for he!'
'how long will he last, do you think?' he ask.
'I donot know,' I say.
'because,' he continue, look at the two young people, who be
fix under his eye - Linton appear as if he could not venture to
stir or raise his head, and Catherine could not move, on his
account - 'because that lad yonder seem determined to beat I; and
Iwould thank his uncle to be quick, and go before he! Hallo! have the
whelp be play that game long? I do give he some lesson
about snivel. be he pretty lively with Miss Linton generally?'
'Lively? no - he have show the great distress,' I answer. 'to
see he, I should say, that instead of ramble with his sweetheart
on the hill, he ought to be in bed, under the hand of a doctor.'
'he shall be, in a day or two,' mutter Heathcliff. 'but first -
get up, Linton! get up!' he shout. 'donot grovel on the ground
there up, this moment!'
Linton have sink prostrate again in another paroxysm of helpless
fear, cause by his father's glance towards he, I suppose: there
be nothing else to produce such humiliation. he make several
effort to obey, but his little strength be annihilate for the
time, and he fall back again with a moan. Mr. Heathcliff advance,
and lift he to lean against a ridge of turf.
'now,' say he, with curbed ferocity, 'Ibe get angry and if you
donot command that paltry spirit of yours - DAMN you! get up
directly!'
'I will, father,' he pant. 'only, let I alone, or I shall
faint. Ihave do as you wish, Ibe sure. Catherine will tell you
that I - that I - have be cheerful. ah! keep by I, Catherine;
give I your hand.'
'take mine,' say his father; 'stand on your foot. there now -
shewill lend you her arm: thatbe right, look at she. you would
imagine I be the devil himself, Miss Linton, to excite such
horror. be so kind as to walk home with he, will you? he
shudder if I touch he.'
'Linton dear!' whisper Catherine, 'I cannot go to Wuthering
Heights: papa have forbid I. hewill not harm you: why be you
so afraid?'
'I can never re-enter that house,' he answer. 'Ibe not to re-
enter it without you!'
'stop!' cry his father. 'wewill respect Catherine's filial
scruple. nelly, take he in, and Iwill follow your advice
concern the doctor, without delay.'
'youwill do well,' reply I. 'but I must remain with my mistress:
to mind your son be not my business.'
'you be very stiff,' say Heathcliff, 'I know that: but youwill
force I to pinch the baby and make it scream before it move your
charity. come, then, my hero. be you willing to return, escort
by I?'
he approach once more, and make as if he would seize the fragile
being; but, shrink back, Linton clung to his cousin, and
implore she to accompany he, with a frantic importunity that
admit no denial. however I disapprove, I couldnot hinder she:
indeed, how could she have refuse he herself? what be fill
he with dread we have no mean of discerning; but there he be,
powerless under its gripe, and any addition seem capable of
shock he into idiotcy. we reach the threshold; Catherine
walk in, and I stand wait till she have conduct the invalid
to a chair, expect she out immediately; when Mr. Heathcliff,
push I forward, exclaim - 'my house be not stricken with the
plague, Nelly; and I have a mind to be hospitable to-day: sit
down, and allow I to shut the door.'
he shut and lock it also. I start.
'you shall have tea before you go home,' he add. 'I be by
myself. Hareton be go with some cattle to the Lees, and Zillah
and Joseph be off on a journey of pleasure; and, though Ibe use
to be alone, Iwould rather have some interesting company, if I can
get it. Miss Linton, take your seat by HIM. I give you what I
have: the present be hardly worth accept; but I have nothing
else to offer. it be Linton, I mean. how she do stare! itbe
odd what a savage feeling I have to anything that seem afraid of
I! have I be bear where law be less strict and taste less
dainty, I should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those two,
as an evening's amusement.'
he draw in his breath, strike the table, and swear to himself, 'by
hell! I hate they.'
'I be not afraid of you!' exclaim Catherine, who could not hear
the latter part of his speech. she step close up; her black
eye flash with passion and resolution. 'give I that key: I
will have it!' she say. 'I wouldnot eat or drink here, if I be
starve.'
Heathcliff have the key in his hand that remain on the table. he
look up, seize with a sort of surprise at her boldness; or,
possibly, remind, by her voice and glance, of the person from
whom she inherit it. she snatch at the instrument, and half
succeed in get it out of his loosened finger: but her
action recall he to the present; he recover it speedily.
'now, Catherine Linton,' he say, 'stand off, or I shall knock you
down; and, that will make Mrs. Dean mad.'
regardless of this warning, she capture his closed hand and its
content again. 'we will go!' she repeat, exert her utmost
effort to cause the iron muscle to relax; and find that her
nail make no impression, she apply her tooth pretty sharply.
Heathcliff glance at I a glance that keep I from interfere a
moment. Catherine be too intent on his finger to notice his
face. he open they suddenly, and resign the object of dispute;
but, ere she have well secure it, he seize she with the liberated
hand, and, pull she on his knee, administer with the other a
shower of terrific slap on both side of the head, each sufficient
to have fulfil his threat, have she be able to fall.'
at this diabolical violence I rush on he furiously. 'you
villain!' I begin to cry, 'you villain!' a touch on the chest
silence I: I be stout, and soon put out of breath; and, what
with that and the rage, I stagger dizzily back and feel ready to
suffocate, or to burst a blood-vessel. the scene be over in two
minute; Catherine, release, put she two hand to her temple, and
look just as if she be not sure whether her ear be off or
on. she tremble like a reed, poor thing, and leant against the
table perfectly bewildered.
'I know how to chastise child, you see,' say the scoundrel,
grimly, as he stoop to repossess himself of the key, which have
drop to the floor. 'go to Linton now, as I tell you; and cry at
your ease! I shall be your father, to-morrow - all the father
youwill have in a few day - and you shall have plenty of that. you
can bear plenty; yoube no weakling: you shall have a daily taste,
if I catch such a devil of a temper in your eye again!'
Cathy run to I instead of Linton, and kneel down and put she
burn cheek on my lap, weep aloud. her cousin have shrink into
a corner of the settle, as quiet as a mouse, congratulate
himself, I dare say, that the correction have alight on another
than he. Mr. Heathcliff, perceive we all confound, rise, and
expeditiously make the tea himself. the cup and saucer be lay
ready. he pour it out, and hand I a cup.
'wash away your spleen,' he say. 'and help your own naughty pet
and mine. it be not poison, though I prepare it. Ibe go out
to seek your horse.'
our first thought, on his departure, be to force an exit
somewhere. we try the kitchen door, but that be fasten
outside: we look at the window - they be too narrow for even
Cathy's little figure.
'Master Linton,' I cry, see we be regularly imprison, 'you
know what your diabolical father be after, and you shall tell we,
or Iwill box your ear, as he have do your cousin's.'
'yes, Linton, you must tell,' say Catherine. 'it be for your
sake I come; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse.'
'give I some tea, Ibe thirsty, and then Iwill tell you,' he
answer. 'Mrs. Dean, go away. I donot like you stand over I.
now, Catherine, you be let your tear fall into my cup. I
willnot drink that. give I another.' Catherine push another to
he, and wipe her face. I feel disgusted at the little wretch's
composure, since he be no long in terror for himself. the
anguish he have exhibit on the moor subside as soon as ever he
enter Wuthering Heights; so I guess he have be menace with an
awful visitation of wrath if he fail in decoy we there; and,
that accomplish, he have no further immediate fear.
'Papa want we to be marry,' he continue, after sip some of
the liquid. 'and he know your papa wouldnot let we marry now; and
hebe afraid of my dying if we wait; so we be to be marry in the
morning, and you be to stay here all night; and, if you do as he
wish, you shall return home next day, and take I with you.'
'take you with she, pitiful changeling!' I exclaim. 'you marry?
why, the man be mad! or he think us fool, every one. and do you
imagine that beautiful young lady, that healthy, hearty girl, will
tie herself to a little perish monkey like you? be you
cherish the notion that anybody, let alone Miss Catherine
Linton, would have you for a husband? you want whip for
bring we in here at all, with your dastardly puling trick: and
- donot look so silly, now! Ihave a very good mind to shake you
severely, for your contemptible treachery, and your imbecile
conceit.'
I do give he a slight shaking; but it bring on the cough, and
he take to his ordinary resource of moaning and weeping, and
Catherine rebuke I.
'stay all night? no,' she say, look slowly round. 'ellen,
Iwill burn that door down but Iwill get out.'
and she would have commence the execution of her threat directly,
but Linton be up in alarm for his dear self again. he clasp she
in his two feeble arm sobbing:- 'willnot you have I, and save I?
not let I come to the Grange? oh, darle Catherine! you mustnot
go and leave, after all. you must obey my father - you must!'
'I must obey my own,' she reply, 'and relieve he from this cruel
suspense. the whole night! what would he think? hewill be
distressed already. Iwill either break or burn a way out of the
house. be quiet! yoube in no danger; but if you hinder I -
Linton, I love papa well than you!' the mortal terror he feel of
Mr. Heathcliff's anger restore to the boy his coward's eloquence.
Catherine be near distraught: still, she persist that she must
go home, and try entreaty in her turn, persuade he to subdue
his selfish agony. while they be thus occupy, our jailor re-
enter.
'your beast have trot off,' he say, 'and - now Linton!
snivel again? what have she be do to you? come, come -
have do, and get to bed. in a month or two, my lad, youwill be
able to pay she back her present tyranny with a vigorous hand.
yoube pin for pure love, be you not? nothing else in the
world: and she shall have you! there, to bed! Zillah willnot be
here to-night; you must undress yourself. hush! hold your noise!
once in your own room, Iwill not come near you: you neednot fear.
by chance, youhave manage tolerably. Iwill look to the rest.'
he speak these word, hold the door open for his son to pass,
and the latter achieve his exit exactly as a spaniel might which
suspect the person who attend on it of design a spiteful
squeeze. the lock be re-secured. Heathcliff approach the fire,
where my mistress and I stand silent. Catherine look up, and
instinctively raise her hand to her cheek: his neighbourhood
revive a painful sensation. anybody else would have be
incapable of regard the childish act with sternness, but he
scowl on she and muttered - 'oh! you be not afraid of I? your
courage be well disguised: you seem damnably afraid!'
'I be afraid now,' she reply, 'because, if I stay, papa will be
miserable: and how can I endure make he miserable - when he -
when he - Mr. Heathcliff, let I go home! I promise to marry
Linton: papa would like I to: and I love he. why should you
wish to force I to do what Iwill willingly do of myself?'
'let he dare to force you,' I cry. 'therebe law in the land,
thank God! there be; though we be in an out-of-the-way place. Iwould
inform if he be my own son: and itbe felony without benefit of
clergy!'
'silence!' say the ruffian. 'to the devil with your clamour! I
donot want you to speak. Miss Linton, I shall enjoy myself
remarkably in think your father will be miserable: I shall not
sleep for satisfaction. you could have hit on no surer way of
fix your residence under my roof for the next twenty-four hour
than inform I that such an event would follow. as to your
promise to marry Linton, Iwill take care you shall keep it; for you
shall not quit this place till it be fulfil.'
'send Ellen, then, to let papa know Ibe safe!' exclaim Catherine,
weep bitterly. 'or marry I now. poor papa! Ellen, hewill
think webe lost. what shall we do?'
'not he! hewill think you be tired of wait on he, and run off
for a little amusement,' answer Heathcliff. 'you cannot deny
that you enter my house of your own accord, in contempt of his
injunction to the contrary. and it be quite natural that you
should desire amusement at your age; and that you would weary of
nurse a sick man, and that man only your father. Catherine, his
happy day be over when your day begin. he curse you, I
dare say, for come into the world (I do, at least); and it would
just do if he curse you as he go out of it. Iwould join he. I
donot love you! how should I? weep away. as far as I can see, it
will be your chief diversion hereafter; unless Linton make amend
for other loss: and your provident parent appear to fancy he
may. his letter of advice and consolation entertain I vastly.
in his last he recommend my jewel to be careful of his; and kind
to she when he get she. careful and kind - thatbe paternal. but
Linton require his whole stock of care and kindness for himself.
Linton can play the little tyrant well. hewill undertake to torture
any number of cat, if their tooth be draw and their claw par.
youwill be able to tell his uncle fine tale of his KINDNESS, when
you get home again, I assure you.'
'yoube right there!' I say; 'explain your son's character. show
his resemblance to yourself: and then, I hope, Miss Cathy will
think twice before she take the cockatrice!'
'I donot much mind speak of his amiable quality now,' he
answer; 'because she must either accept he or remain a prisoner,
and you along with she, till your master die. I can detain you
both, quite conceal, here. if you doubt, encourage she to
retract her word, and youwill have an opportunity of judge!'
'Iwill not retract my word,' say Catherine. 'Iwill marry he within
this hour, if I may go to Thrushcross Grange afterwards. Mr.
Heathcliff, yoube a cruel man, but yoube not a fiend; and you
willnot, from MERE malice, destroy irrevocably all my happiness. if
papa think I have leave he on purpose, and if he die before I
return, could I bear to live? Ihave give over crying: but Ibe
go to kneel here, at your knee; and Iwill not get up, and Iwill
not take my eye from your face till you look back at I! no,
donot turn away! do LOOK! youwill see nothing to provoke you. I
donot hate you. Ibe not angry that you strike I. have you never
love ANYBODY in all your life, uncle? never? ah! you must look
once. Ibe so wretched, you cannot help be sorry and pity I.'
'keep your eft's finger off; and move, or Iwill kick you!' cry
Heathcliff, brutally repulse she. 'Iwould rather be hug by a
snake. how the devil can you dream of fawn on I? I DETEST
you!'
he shrug his shoulder: shake himself, indeed, as if his flesh
creep with aversion; and thrust back his chair; while I get up, and
open my mouth, to commence a downright torrent of abuse. but I
be render dumb in the middle of the first sentence, by a threat
that I should be show into a room by myself the very next syllable
I utter. it be grow dark - we hear a sound of voice at the
garden-gate. our host hurry out instantly: he have his wit
about he; we have not. there be a talk of two or three minute,
and he return alone.
'I think it have be your cousin Hareton,' I observe to
Catherine. 'I wish he would arrive! who know but he might take
our part?'
'it be three servant send to seek you from the Grange,' say
Heathcliff, overhear I. 'you should have open a lattice and
call out: but I could swear that chit be glad you donot. shebe
glad to be oblige to stay, Ibe certain.'
at learn the chance we have miss, we both give vent to our
grief without control; and he allow we to wail on till nine
o'clock. then he bid we go upstairs, through the kitchen, to
Zillah's chamber; and I whisper my companion to obey: perhaps we
might contrive to get through the window there, or into a garret,
and out by its skylight. the window, however, be narrow, like
those below, and the garret trap be safe from our attempt; for we
be fasten in as before. we neither of we lie down: Catherine
take her station by the lattice, and watch anxiously for morning;
a deep sigh be the only answer I could obtain to my frequent
entreaty that she would try to rest. I seat myself in a chair,
and rock to and fro, pass harsh judgment on my many
dereliction of duty; from which, it strike I then, all the
misfortune of my employer spring. it be not the case, in
reality, I be aware; but it be, in my imagination, that dismal
night; and I think Heathcliff himself less guilty than I.
at seven o'clock he come, and inquire if Miss Linton have rise.
she run to the door immediately, and answer, 'yes.' 'here,
then,' he say, open it, and pull she out. I rise to follow,
but he turn the lock again. I demand my release.
'be patient,' he reply; 'Iwill send up your breakfast in a while.'
I thump on the panel, and rattle the latch angrily and
Catherine ask why I be still shut up? he answer, I must try
to endure it another hour, and they go away. I endure it two or
three hour; at length, I hear a footstep: not Heathcliff's.
'Ihave bring you something to eat,' say a voice; 'oppen t' door!'
comply eagerly, I behold Hareton, laden with food enough to last
I all day.
'tak' it,' he add, thrust the tray into my hand.
'stay one minute,' I begin.
'Nay,' cry he, and retire, regardless of any prayer I could
pour forth to detain he.
and there I remain enclose the whole day, and the whole of the
next night; and another, and another. five night and four day I
remain, altogether, see nobody but Hareton once every morning;
and he be a model of a jailor: surly, and dumb, and deaf to every
attempt at move his sense of justice or compassion.
CHAPTER XXVIII
on the fifth morning, or rather afternoon, a different step
approach - light and short; and, this time, the person
enter the room. it be Zillah; don in her scarlet shawl, with
a black silk bonnet on her head, and a willow-basket swung to her
arm.
'eh, dear! Mrs. Dean!' she exclaim. 'well! there be a talk
about you at Gimmerton. I never think but you be sink in the
Blackhorse marsh, and missy with you, till master tell I youwould
be find, and hewould lodge you here! what! and you must have get
on an island, sure? and how long be you in the hole? do master
save you, Mrs. Dean? but yoube not so thin - youhave not be so
poorly, have you?'
'your master be a true scoundrel!' I reply. 'but he shall answer
for it. he neednot have raise that tale: it shall all be lay
bare!'
'what do you mean?' ask Zillah. 'itbe not his tale: they tell
that in the village - about your be lose in the marsh; and I
call to Earnshaw, when I come in - "eh, theybe queer thing, Mr.
Hareton, happen since I go off. itbe a sad pity of that likely
young lass, and cannot Nelly Dean." he star. I think he have not
hear aught, so I tell he the rumour. the master listen, and he
just smile to himself, and say, "if they have be in the marsh,
they be out now, Zillah. Nelly Dean be lodge, at this minute, in
your room. you can tell she to flit, when you go up; here be the
key. the bog-water get into her head, and she would have run home
quite flighty; but I fix she till she come round to her sens.
you can bid she go to the Grange at once, if she be able, and carry
a message from I, that her young lady will follow in time to
attend the squire's funeral."'
'Mr. Edgar be not dead?' I gasp. 'oh! Zillah, Zillah!'
'no, no; sit you down, my good mistress,' she reply; 'yoube
right sickly yet. hebe not dead; Doctor Kenneth think he may last
another day. I meet he on the road and ask.'
instead of sit down, I snatch my outdoor thing, and hasten
below, for the way be free. on enter the house, I look about
for some one to give information of Catherine. the place be
fill with sunshine, and the door stand wide open; but nobody
seem at hand. as I hesitate whether to go off at once, or
return and seek my mistress, a slight cough draw my attention to
the hearth. Linton lie on the settle, sole tenant, suck a stick
of sugar-candy, and pursue my movement with apathetic eye.
'where be Miss Catherine?' I demand sternly, suppose I could
frighten he into give intelligence, by catch he thus, alone.
he suck on like an innocent.
'be she go?' I say.
'no,' he reply; 'shebe upstairs: shebe not to go; we willnot let
she.'
'you willnot let she, little idiot!' I exclaim. 'direct I to her
room immediately, or Iwill make you sing out sharply.'
'Papa would make you sing out, if you attempt to get there,' he
answer. 'he say Ibe not to be soft with Catherine: shebe my
wife, and itbe shameful that she should wish to leave I. he say
she hat I and want I to die, that she may have my money; but
she shallnot have it: and she shallnot go home! she never shall! -
she may cry, and be sick as much as she please!'
he resume his former occupation, close his lid, as if he mean
to drop asleep.
'Master Heathcliff,' I resume, 'have you forget all Catherine's
kindness to you last winter, when you affirm you love she, and
when she bring you book and sing you song, and come many a time
through wind and snow to see you? she weep to miss one evening,
because you would be disappoint; and you feel then that she be a
hundred time too good to you: and now you believe the lie your
father tell, though you know he detest you both. and you join
he against she. thatbe fine gratitude, be it not?'
the corner of Linton's mouth fall, and he take the sugar-candy from
his lip.
'do she come to Wuthering height because she hat you?' I
continue. 'think for yourself! as to your money, she do not
even know that you will have any. and you say shebe sick; and yet
you leave she alone, up there in a strange house! you who have
feel what it be to be so neglect! you could pity your own
suffering; and she pity they, too; but you willnot pity her! I
shed tear, Master Heathcliff, you see - an elderly woman, and a
servant merely - and you, after pretend such affection, and
have reason to worship she almost, store every tear you have for
yourself, and lie there quite at ease. ah! yoube a heartless,
selfish boy!'
'I cannot stay with she,' he answer crossly. 'Iwill not stay by
myself. she cry so I cannot bear it. and she willnot give over,
though I say Iwill call my father. I do call he once, and he
threaten to strangle she if she be not quiet; but she begin
again the instant he leave the room, moan and grieve all night
long, though I scream for vexation that I couldnot sleep.'
'be Mr. Heathcliff out?' I inquire, perceive that the wretched
creature have no power to sympathize with his cousin's mental
torture.
'hebe in the court,' he reply, 'talk to Doctor Kenneth; who
say uncle be die, truly, at last. Ibe glad, for I shall be
master of the Grange after he. Catherine always speak of it as
her house. it benot her! itbe mine: papa say everything she
have be mine. all her nice book be mine; she offer to give I
they, and her pretty bird, and her pony Minny, if I would get the
key of our room, and let she out; but I tell she she have nothing to
give, they ware all, all mine. and then she cry, and take a
little picture from her neck, and say I should have that; two
picture in a gold case, on one side her mother, and on the other
uncle, when they be young. that be yesterday - I say they be
mine, too; and try to get they from she. the spiteful thing
wouldnot let I: she push I off, and hurt I. I shriek out -
that frighten she - she hear papa come, and she break the
hinge and divide the case, and give I her mother's portrait; the
other she attempt to hide: but papa ask what be the matter,
and I explain it. he take the one I have away, and order she to
resign her to I; she refuse, and he - he strike she down, and
wrench it off the chain, and crush it with his foot.'
'and be you pleased to see she strike?' I ask: have my
design in encourage his talk.
'I wink,' he answer: 'I wink to see my father strike a dog or
a horse, he do it so hard. yet I be glad at first - she
deserve punish for push I: but when papa be go, she
make I come to the window and show I her cheek cut on the
inside, against her tooth, and her mouth fill with blood; and
then she gather up the bit of the picture, and go and sit down
with her face to the wall, and she have never speak to I since:
and I sometimes think she cannot speak for pain. I donot like to
think so; but shebe a naughty thing for cry continually; and she
look so pale and wild, Ibe afraid of she.'
'and you can get the key if you choose?' I say.
'yes, when I be up-stair,' he answer; 'but I cannot walk up-
stair now.'
'in what apartment be it?' I ask.
'oh,' he cry, 'I shallnot tell you where it be. it be our secret.
nobody, neither Hareton nor Zillah, be to know. there! youhave
tire I - go away, go away!' and he turn his face on to his
arm, and shut his eye again.
I consider it good to depart without see Mr. Heathcliff, and
bring a rescue for my young lady from the Grange. on reach it,
the astonishment of my fellow-servant to see I, and their joy
also, be intense; and when they hear that their little mistress
be safe, two or three be about to hurry up and shout the news at
Mr. Edgar's door: but I bespoke the announcement of it myself.
how changed I find he, even in those few day! he lie an image
of sadness and resignation await his death. very young he
look: though his actual age be thirty-nine, one would have
call he ten year young, at least. he think of Catherine;
for he murmur her name. I touch his hand, and speak.
'Catherine be come, dear master!' I whisper; 'she be alive and
well; and will be here, I hope, to-night.'
I tremble at the first effect of this intelligence: he half rise
up, look eagerly round the apartment, and then sink back in a
swoon. as soon as he recover, I relate our compulsory visit,
and detention at the Heights. I say Heathcliff force I to go
in: which be not quite true. I utter as little as possible
against Linton; nor do I describe all his father's brutal conduct
- my intention be to add no bitterness, if I could help it, to
his already over-flow cup.
he divine that one of his enemy's purpose be to secure the
personal property, as well as the estate, to his son: or rather
himself; yet why he do not wait till his decease be a puzzle to
my master, because ignorant how nearly he and his nephew would quit
the world together. however, he feel that his will have well be
alter: instead of leave Catherine's fortune at her own
disposal, he determine to put it in the hand of trustee for her
use during life, and for her child, if she have any, after she.
by that mean, it could not fall to Mr. Heathcliff should Linton
die.
have receive his order, I despatch a man to fetch the
attorney, and four more, provide with serviceable weapon, to
demand my young lady of her jailor. both party be delay very
late. the single servant return first. he say Mr. Green, the
lawyer, be out when he arrive at his house, and he have to wait
two hour for his re-entrance; and then Mr. Green tell he he have a
little business in the village that must be do; but he would be
at Thrushcross Grange before morning. the four man come back
unaccompanie also. they bring word that Catherine be ill: too
ill to quit her room; and Heathcliff would not suffer they to see
she. I scold the stupid fellow well for listen to that tale,
which I would not carry to my master; resolve to take a whole
bevy up to the Heights, at day-light, and storm it literally,
unless the prisoner be quietly surrender to we. her father
shall see she, I vow, and vow again, if that devil be kill on
his own doorstone in try to prevent it!
happily, I be spar the journey and the trouble. I have go
down-stair at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water; and be
pass through the hall with it in my hand, when a sharp knock at
the front door make I jump. 'oh! it be Green,' I say,
recollect myself - 'only Green,' and I go on, intend to
send somebody else to open it; but the knock be repeat: not
loud, and still importunately. I put the jug on the banister and
hasten to admit he myself. the harvest moon shine clear
outside. it be not the attorney. my own sweet little mistress
spring on my neck sobbing, 'Ellen, Ellen! be papa alive?'
'yes,' I cry: 'yes, my angel, he be, God be thank, you be
safe with we again!'
she want to run, breathless as she be, up-stair to Mr. Linton's
room; but I compel she to sit down on a chair, and make she
drink, and wash her pale face, chafe it into a faint colour
with my apron. then I say I must go first, and tell of her
arrival; implore she to say, she should be happy with young
Heathcliff. she star, but soon comprehend why I counsel
she to utter the falsehood, she assure I she would not complain.
I couldnot abide to be present at their meeting. I stand outside
the chamber-door a quarter of an hour, and hardly venture near the
bed, then. all be compose, however: Catherine's despair be as
silent as her father's joy. she support he calmly, in
appearance; and he fix on her feature his raise eye that
seem dilate with ecstasy.
he die blissfully, Mr. Lockwood: he die so. kiss her cheek,
he murmur, - 'I be go to she; and you, darling child, shall
come to we!' and never stir or speak again; but continue that
rapt, radiant gaze, till his pulse imperceptibly stop and his
soul depart. none could have notice the exact minute of his
death, it be so entirely without a struggle.
whether Catherine have spend her tear, or whether the grief be
too weighty to let they flow, she sit there dry-eyed till the sun
rise: she sit till noon, and would still have remain brood
over that deathbed, but I insist on she come away and take
some repose. it be well I succeed in remove she, for at
dinner-time appear the lawyer, have call at Wuthering Heights
to get his instruction how to behave. he have sell himself to Mr.
Heathcliff: that be the cause of his delay in obey my master's
summon. fortunately, no thought of worldly affair cross the
latter's mind, to disturb he, after his daughter's arrival.
Mr. Green take upon himself to order everything and everybody about
the place. he give all the servant but I, notice to quit. he
would have carry his delegate authority to the point of
insist that Edgar Linton should not be bury beside his wife,
but in the chapel, with his family. there be the will, however,
to hinder that, and my loud protestation against any infringement
of its direction. the funeral be hurry over; Catherine, Mrs.
Linton Heathcliff now, be suffer to stay at the Grange till her
father's corpse have quit it.
she tell I that her anguish have at last spur Linton to incur
the risk of liberate she. she hear the man I send disputing at
the door, and she gather the sense of Heathcliff's answer. it
drive her desperate. Linton who have be convey up to the little
parlour soon after I leave, be terrify into fetch the key
before his father re-ascended. he have the cunning to unlock and
re-lock the door, without shut it; and when he should have go
to bed, he beg to sleep with Hareton, and his petition be
grant for once. Catherine steal out before break of day. she
dare not try the door lest the dog should raise an alarm; she
visit the empty chamber and examine their window; and,
luckily, light on her mother's, she get easily out of its
lattice, and on to the ground, by mean of the fir-tree close by.
her accomplice suffer for his share in the escape,
notwithstanding his timid contrivance.
CHAPTER XXIX
the evening after the funeral, my young lady and I be seat in
the library; now muse mournfully - one of we despairingly - on
our loss, now venture conjecture as to the gloomy future.
we have just agree the good destiny which could await Catherine
would be a permission to continue resident at the Grange; at least
during Linton's life: he be allow to join she there, and I to
remain as housekeeper. that seem rather too favourable an
arrangement to be hop for; and yet I do hope, and begin to cheer
up under the prospect of retain my home and my employment, and,
above all, my beloved young mistress; when a servant - one of the
discard one, not yet depart - rush hastily in, and say
'that devil Heathcliff' be come through the court: should he
fasten the door in his face?
if we have be mad enough to order that proceeding, we have not
time. he make no ceremony of knock or announce his name: he
be master, and avail himself of the master's privilege to walk
straight in, without say a word. the sound of our informant's
voice direct he to the library; he enter and motion he
out, shut the door.
it be the same room into which he have be usher, as a guest,
eighteen year before: the same moon shine through the window; and
the same autumn landscape lie outside. we have not yet light a
candle, but all the apartment be visible, even to the portrait on
the wall: the splendid head of Mrs. Linton, and the graceful one
of her husband. Heathcliff advance to the hearth. Time have
little alter his person either. there be the same man: his
dark face rather sallower and more compose, his frame a stone or
two heavy, perhaps, and no other difference. Catherine have rise
with an impulse to dash out, when she see he.
'stop!' he say, arrest she by the arm. 'no more running away!
where would you go? Ibe come to fetch you home; and I hope youwill
be a dutiful daughter and not encourage my son to further
disobedience. I be embarrassed how to punish he when I
discover his part in the business: hebe such a cobweb, a pinch
would annihilate he; but youwill see by his look that he have
receive his due! I bring he down one evening, the day before
yesterday, and just set he in a chair, and never touch he
afterwards. I send Hareton out, and we have the room to ourselves.
in two hour, I call Joseph to carry he up again; and since then
my presence be as potent on his nerve as a ghost; and I fancy he
see I often, though I be not near. Hareton say he wake and
shriek in the night by the hour together, and call you to protect
he from I; and, whether you like your precious mate, or not, you
must come: hebe your concern now; I yield all my interest in he
to you.'
'why not let Catherine continue here,' I plead, 'and send Master
Linton to she? as you hate they both, youwould not miss they: they
can only be a daily plague to your unnatural heart.'
'Ibe seek a tenant for the Grange,' he answer; 'and I want my
child about I, to be sure. besides, that lass owe I her
service for her bread. Ibe not go to nurture she in luxury and
idleness after Linton be go. make haste and get ready, now; and
donot oblige I to compel you.'
'I shall,' say Catherine. 'Linton be all I have to love in the
world, and though you have do what you could to make he hateful
to I, and I to he, you cannot make we hate each other. and I
defy you to hurt he when I be by, and I defy you to frighten I!'
'you be a boastful champion,' reply Heathcliff; 'but I donot
like you well enough to hurt he: you shall get the full benefit
of the torment, as long as it last. it be not I who will make he
hateful to you - it be his own sweet spirit. hebe as bitter as
gall at your desertion and its consequence: donot expect thank
for this noble devotion. I hear he draw a pleasant picture to
Zillah of what he would do if he be as strong as I: the
inclination be there, and his very weakness will sharpen his wit
to find a substitute for strength.'
'I know he have a bad nature,' say Catherine: 'hebe your son. but
Ibe glad Ihave a well, to forgive it; and I know he love I, and
for that reason I love he. Mr. Heathcliff you have NOBODY to love
you; and, however miserable you make we, we shall still have the
revenge of think that your cruelty arise from your great
misery. you be miserable, be you not? lonely, like the devil,
and envious like he? NOBODY love you - NOBODY will cry for you
when you die! I wouldnot be you!'
Catherine speak with a kind of dreary triumph: she seem to have
make up her mind to enter into the spirit of her future family, and
draw pleasure from the grief of her enemy.
'you shall be sorry to be yourself presently,' say her father-in-
law, 'if you stand there another minute. begone, witch, and get
your thing!'
she scornfully withdraw. in her absence I begin to beg for
Zillah's place at the Heights, offer to resign mine to she; but
he would suffer it on no account. he bid I be silent; and then,
for the first time, allow himself a glance round the room and a
look at the picture. have study Mrs. Linton's, he say - 'I
shall have that home. not because I need it, but - ' he turn
abruptly to the fire, and continue, with what, for lack of a
well word, I must call a smile - 'Iwill tell you what I do
yesterday! I get the sexton, who be dig Linton's grave, to
remove the earth off her coffin lid, and I open it. I think,
once, I would have stay there: when I see her face again - it be
hers yet! - he have hard work to stir I; but he say it would
change if the air blow on it, and so I strike one side of the
coffin loose, and cover it up: not Linton's side, damn he! I
wish hehave be solder in lead. and I bribe the sexton to pull
it away when Ibe lay there, and slide mine out too; Iwill have it
make so: and then by the time Linton get to we hewill not know
which be which!'
'you be very wicked, Mr. Heathcliff!' I exclaim; 'be you not
ashame to disturb the dead?'
'I disturb nobody, nelly,' he reply; 'and I give some ease to
myself. I shall be a great deal more comfortable now; and youwill
have a well chance of keep I underground, when I get there.
disturb she? no! she have disturb I, night and day, through
eighteen year - incessantly - remorselessly - till yesternight;
and yesternight I be tranquil. I dream I be sleep the last
sleep by that sleeper, with my heart stop and my cheek freeze
against her.'
'and if she have be dissolve into earth, or bad, what would you
have dream of then?' I say.
'of dissolve with she, and be more happy still!' he answer.
'do you suppose I dread any change of that sort? I expect such a
transformation on raise the lid - but Ibe well pleased that it
should not commence till I share it. besides, unless I have
receive a distinct impression of her passionless feature, that
strange feeling would hardly have be remove. it begin oddly.
you know I be wild after she die; and eternally, from dawn to
dawn, pray she to return to I her spirit! I have a strong
faith in ghost: I have a conviction that they can, and do, exist
among we! the day she be bury, there come a fall of snow. in
the evening I go to the churchyard. it blow bleak as winter -
all round be solitary. I donot fear that her fool of a husband
would wander up the glen so late; and no one else have business to
bring they there. be alone, and conscious two yard of loose
earth be the sole barrier between we, I say to myself - 'Iwill
have she in my arm again! if she be cold, Iwill think it be this
north wind that chill I; and if she be motionless, it be sleep."
I get a spade from the tool-house, and begin to delve with all my
might - it scrap the coffin; I fall to work with my hand; the
wood commence crack about the screw; I be on the point of
attain my object, when it seem that I hear a sigh from some
one above, close at the edge of the grave, and bend down. "if I
can only get this off," I mutter, "I wish they may shovel in the
earth over we both!" and I wrench at it more desperately still.
there be another sigh, close at my ear. I appear to feel the
warm breath of it displace the sleet-laden wind. I know no
living thing in flesh and blood be by; but, as certainly as you
perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark, though
it cannot be discern, so certainly I feel that Cathy be there:
not under I, but on the earth. a sudden sense of relief flow
from my heart through every limb. I relinquish my labour of
agony, and turn console at once: unspeakably console. she
presence be with I: it remain while I re-fill the grave, and
lead I home. you may laugh, if you will; but I be sure I should
see she there. I be sure she be with I, and I could not help
talk to she. have reach the Heights, I rush eagerly to
the door. it be fasten; and, I remember, that accurse Earnshaw
and my wife oppose my entrance. I remember stop to kick the
breath out of he, and then hurry up-stair, to my room and
her. I look round impatiently - I feel she by I - I could
almost see she, and yet I could not! I ought to have sweat blood
then, from the anguish of my yearning - from the fervour of my
supplication to have but one glimpse! I have not one. she show
herself, as she often be in life, a devil to I! and, since then,
sometimes more and sometimes less, Ihave be the sport of that
intolerable torture! Infernal! keep my nerve at such a stretch
that, if they have not resemble catgut, they would long ago have
relax to the feebleness of Linton's. when I sit in the house
with Hareton, it seem that on go out I should meet she; when I
walk on the moor I should meet she come in. when I go from
home I hasten to return; she must be somewhere at the Heights, I
be certain! and when I sleep in her chamber - I be beat out of
that. I couldnot lie there; for the moment I close my eye, she
be either outside the window, or slide back the panel, or
enter the room, or even rest her darling head on the same
pillow as she do when a child; and I must open my lid to see.
and so I open and close they a hundred time a night - to be
always disappoint! it rack I! Ihave often groan aloud, till
that old rascal Joseph no doubt believe that my conscience be
play the fiend inside of I. now, since Ihave see she, Ibe
pacify - a little. it be a strange way of killing: not by
inch, but by fraction of hairbreadth, to beguile I with the
spectre of a hope through eighteen year!'
Mr. Heathcliff pause and wipe his forehead; his hair clung to it,
wet with perspiration; his eye be fix on the red ember of the
fire, the brow not contract, but raise next the temple;
diminish the grim aspect of his countenance, but impart a
peculiar look of trouble, and a painful appearance of mental
tension towards one absorbing subject. he only half address I,
and I maintain silence. I donot like to hear he talk! after a
short period he resume his meditation on the picture, take it down
and leant it against the sofa to contemplate it at well
advantage; and while so occupy Catherine enter, announce that
she be ready, when her pony should be saddle.
'send that over to-morrow,' say Heathcliff to I; then turn to
she, he add: 'you may do without your pony: it be a fine
evening, and youwill need no pony at Wuthering Heights; for what
journey you take, your own foot will serve you. come along.'
'good-bye, Ellen!' whisper my dear little mistress.
as she kiss I, her lip feel like ice. 'come and see I, Ellen;
donot forget.'
'take care you do no such thing, Mrs. Dean!' say her new father.
'when I wish to speak to you Iwill come here. I want none of your
prying at my house!'
he sign she to precede he; and cast back a look that cut my
heart, she obey. I watch they, from the window, walk down the
garden. Heathcliff fix Catherine's arm under his: though she
dispute the act at first evidently; and with rapid stride he
hurry she into the alley, whose tree conceal they.
CHAPTER XXX
I have pay a visit to the Heights, but I have not see she since
she leave: Joseph hold the door in his hand when I call to ask
after she, and wouldnot let I pass. he say Mrs. Linton be
'thrang,' and the master be not in. Zillah have tell I something
of the way they go on, otherwise I should hardly know who be dead
and who live. she think Catherine haughty, and do not like
she, I can guess by her talk. my young lady ask some aid of she
when she first come; but Mr. Heathcliff tell she to follow her own
business, and let his daughter-in-law look after herself; and
Zillah willingly acquiesce, be a narrow-minded, selfish woman.
Catherine evince a child's annoyance at this neglect; repay it
with contempt, and thus enlist my informant among her enemy, as
securely as if she have do she some great wrong. I have a long
talk with Zillah about six week ago, a little before you come, one
day when we foregather on the moor; and this be what she tell I.
'the first thing Mrs. Linton do,' she say, 'on her arrival at the
Heights, be to run up-stair, without even wish good-evening to
I and Joseph; she shut herself into Linton's room, and remain
till morning. then, while the master and Earnshaw be at
breakfast, she enter the house, and ask all in a quiver if the
doctor might be send for? her cousin be very ill.
'"we know that!" answer Heathcliff; "but his life be not worth a
farthing, and I willnot spend a farthing on he."
'"but I cannot tell how to do," she say; "and if nobody will help
I, hewill die!"
'"walk out of the room," cry the master, "and let I never hear a
word more about he! none here care what become of he; if you
do, act the nurse; if you do not, lock he up and leave he."
'then she begin to bother I, and I say Ihave have enough plague with
the tiresome thing; we each have our task, and hers be to wait on
Linton: Mr. Heathcliff bid I leave that labour to she.
'how they manage together, I cannot tell. I fancy he fret a
great deal, and moan hisseln night and day; and she have precious
little rest: one could guess by her white face and heavy eye.
she sometimes come into the kitchen all wildere like, and look
as if she would fain beg assistance; but I be not go to disobey
the master: I never dare disobey he, Mrs. Dean; and, though I
think it wrong that Kenneth should not be send for, it be no
concern of mine either to advise or complain, and I always refuse
to meddle. once or twice, after we have go to bed, Ihave happen
to open my door again and see she sit cry on the stairs'-
top; and then Ihave shut myself in quick, for fear of be move to
interfere. I do pity she then, Ibe sure: still I donot wish to
lose my place, you know.
'at last, one night she come boldly into my chamber, and frighten
I out of my wit, by say, "tell Mr. Heathcliff that his son be
die - Ibe sure he be, this time. get up, instantly, and tell
he."
'have utter this speech, she vanish again. I lie a quarter
of an hour listening and trembling. nothing stir - the house
be quiet.
'shebe mistaken, I say to myself. hebe get over it. I neednot
disturb they; and I begin to doze. but my sleep be mar a
second time by a sharp ringing of the bell - the only bell we have,
put up on purpose for Linton; and the master call to I to see
what be the matter, and inform they that he wouldnot have that
noise repeat.
'I deliver Catherine's message. he curse to himself, and in a
few minute come out with a lighted candle, and proceed to their
room. I follow. Mrs. Heathcliff be seat by the bedside, with
her hand fold on her knee. her father-in-law go up, hold the
light to Linton's face, look at he, and touch he; afterwards
he turn to she.
'"now - Catherine," he say, "how do you feel?"
'she be dumb.
'"how do you feel, Catherine?" he repeat.
'"hebe safe, and Ibe free," she answer: "I should feel well -
but," she continue, with a bitterness she couldnot conceal, "you
have leave I so long to struggle against death alone, that I feel
and see only death! I feel like death!"
'and she look like it, too! I give she a little wine. Hareton
and Joseph, who have be waken by the ringing and the sound of
foot, and hear our talk from outside, now enter. Joseph be
fain, I believe, of the lad's removal; Hareton seem a thought
bother: though he be more take up with star at Catherine
than thinking of Linton. but the master bid he get off to bed
again: we donot want his help. he afterwards make Joseph remove
the body to his chamber, and tell I to return to mine, and Mrs.
Heathcliff remain by herself.
'in the morning, he send I to tell she she must come down to
breakfast: she have undress, and appear go to sleep, and
say she be ill; at which I hardly wonder. I inform Mr.
Heathcliff, and he reply, - "well, let she be till after the
funeral; and go up now and then to get she what be needful; and, as
soon as she seem well, tell I."'
Cathy stay upstairs a fortnight, accord to Zillah; who visit
her twice a day, and would have be rather more friendly, but her
attempt at increase kindness be proudly and promptly repel.
Heathcliff go up once, to show her Linton's will. he have
bequeath the whole of his, and what have be she, moveable
property, to his father: the poor creature be threaten, or
coax, into that act during her week's absence, when his uncle
die. the land, be a minor, he could not meddle with.
however, Mr. Heathcliff have claim and keep they in his wife's
right and his also: I suppose legally; at any rate, Catherine,
destitute of cash and friend, cannot disturb his possession.
'nobody,' say Zillah, 'ever approach her door, except that once,
but I; and nobody ask anything about she. the first occasion of
she come down into the house be on a Sunday afternoon. she have
cry out, when I carry up her dinner, that she couldnot bear any
long be in the cold; and I tell she the master be go to
Thrushcross Grange, and Earnshaw and I neednot hinder she from
descending; so, as soon as she hear Heathcliff's horse trot off,
she make her appearance, don in black, and her yellow curl
comb back behind her ear as plain as a Quaker: she couldnot
comb they out.
'Joseph and I generally go to chapel on Sundays:' the kirk, you
know, have no minister now, explain Mrs. Dean; and they call the
Methodists' or Baptists' place (I cannot say which it be) at
Gimmerton, a chapel. 'Joseph have go,' she continue, 'but I
think proper to bide at home. young folk be always the well
for an elder's over-looking; and Hareton, with all his bashfulness,
benot a model of nice behaviour. I let he know that his cousin
would very likely sit with we, and she have be always use to see
the Sabbath respect; so he have as good leave his gun and bit of
indoor work alone, while she stay. he colour up at the news,
and cast his eye over his hand and clothe. the train-oil and
gunpowder be shove out of sight in a minute. I see he mean to
give she his company; and I guess, by his way, he want to be
presentable; so, laugh, as I durst not laugh when the master be
by, I offer to help he, if he would, and joke at his confusion.
he grow sullen, and begin to swear.
'now, Mrs. Dean,' Zillah go on, see I not pleased by her
manner, 'you happen think your young lady too fine for Mr. Hareton;
and happen yoube right: but I own I should love well to bring she
pride a peg low. and what will all her learning and her
daintiness do for she, now? shebe as poor as you or I: poorer,
Iwill be bind: yoube say, and Ibe do my little all that
road.'
Hareton allow Zillah to give he her aid; and she flatter he
into a good humour; so, when Catherine come, half forget her
former insult, he try to make himself agreeable, by the
housekeeper's account.
'Missis walk in,' she say, 'as chill as an icicle, and as high
as a princess. I get up and offer she my seat in the arm-chair.
no, she turn up her nose at my civility. Earnshaw rise, too, and
bid she come to the settle, and sit close by the fire: he be sure
she be starve.
'"Ihave be starve a month and more," she answer, rest on the
word as scornful as she could.
'and she get a chair for herself, and place it at a distance from
both of we. have sit till she be warm, she begin to look round,
and discover a number of book on the dresser; she be instantly
upon her foot again, stretch to reach they: but they be too
high up. her cousin, after watch her endeavour a while, at
last summon courage to help she; she hold her frock, and he
fill it with the first that come to hand.
'that be a great advance for the lad. she donot thank he;
still, he feel gratified that she have accept his assistance, and
venture to stand behind as she examine they, and even to stoop
and point out what strike his fancy in certain old picture which
they contain; nor be he daunt by the saucy style in which she
jerk the page from his finger: he content himself with go a
bit far back and look at she instead of the book. she
continue reading, or seek for something to read. his attention
become, by degree, quite centre in the study of her thick silky
curl: her face he couldnot see, and she couldnot see he. and,
perhaps, not quite awake to what he do, but attract like a child
to a candle, at last he proceed from star to touch; he put
out his hand and stroke one curl, as gently as if it be a bird.
he might have stick a knife into her neck, she start round in
such a taking.
'"get away this moment! how dare you touch I? why be you
stop there?" she cry, in a tone of disgust. "I cannot endure
you! Iwill go upstairs again, if you come near I."
'Mr. Hareton recoil, look as foolish as he could do: he sit
down in the settle very quiet, and she continue turn over her
volume another half hour; finally, Earnshaw cross over, and
whisper to I.
'will you ask she to read to we, Zillah? Ibe stall of do
naught; and I do like - I could like to hear she! dunnot say I
want it, but ask of yourseln."
'"Mr. Hareton wish you would read to we, ma'am," I say,
immediately. "hewould take it very kind - hewould be much oblige."
'she frown; and look up, answer -
'"Mr. Hareton, and the whole set of you, will be good enough to
understand that I reject any pretence at kindness you have the
hypocrisy to offer! I despise you, and will have nothing to say to
any of you! when I would have give my life for one kind word,
even to see one of your face, you all keep off. but I willnot
complain to you! Ibe drive down here by the cold; not either to
amuse you or enjoy your society."
'"what could I ha' do?" begin Earnshaw. "how be I to blame?"
'"oh! you be an exception," answer Mrs. Heathcliff. "I never
miss such a concern as you."
'"but I offer more than once, and ask," he say, kindle up at
her pertness, "I ask Mr. Heathcliff to let I wake for you - "
'"be silent! Iwill go out of door, or anywhere, rather than have
your disagreeable voice in my ear!" say my lady.
'Hareton mutter she might go to hell, for he! and unslinge his
gun, restrain himself from his Sunday occupation no long. he
talk now, freely enough; and she presently see fit to retreat to
her solitude: but the frost have set in, and, in spite of her
pride, she be force to condescend to our company, more and more.
however, I take care there should be no far scorning at my good
nature: ever since, Ihave be as stiff as herself; and she have no
lover or liker among we: and she do not deserve one; for, let
they say the least word to she, and shewill curl back without
respect of any one. shewill snap at the master himself, and as good
as dare he to thrash she; and the more hurt she get, the more
venomous she grow.'
at first, on hear this account from Zillah, I determine to
leave my situation, take a cottage, and get Catherine to come and
live with I: but Mr. Heathcliff would as soon permit that as he
would set up Hareton in an independent house; and I can see no
remedy, at present, unless she could marry again; and that scheme
it do not come within my province to arrange.
thus end Mrs. Dean's story. notwithstanding the doctor's
prophecy, I be rapidly recover strength; and though it be only
the second week in January, I propose get out on horseback in a
day or two, and rid over to Wuthering Heights, to inform my
landlord that I shall spend the next six month in London; and, if
he like, he may look out for another tenant to take the place
after October. I would not pass another winter here for much.
CHAPTER XXXI
yesterday be bright, calm, and frosty. I go to the Heights as I
propose: my housekeeper entreat I to bear a little note from
she to her young lady, and I do not refuse, for the worthy woman
be not conscious of anything odd in her request. the front door
stand open, but the jealous gate be fasten, as at my last visit;
I knock and invoke Earnshaw from among the garden-bed; he
unchain it, and I enter. the fellow be as handsome a rustic as
need be see. I take particular notice of he this time; but then
he do his good apparently to make the least of his advantage.
I ask if Mr. Heathcliff be at home? he answer, no; but he
would be in at dinner-time. it be eleven o'clock, and I announce
my intention of go in and wait for he; at which he
immediately fling down his tool and accompany I, in the office
of watchdog, not as a substitute for the host.
we enter together; Catherine be there, make herself useful in
prepare some vegetable for the approach meal; she look more
sulky and less spirited than when I have see she first. she hardly
raise her eye to notice I, and continue her employment with the
same disregard to common form of politeness as before; never
return my bow and good-morning by the slight acknowledgment.
'she do not seem so amiable,' I think, 'as Mrs. Dean would
persuade I to believe. shebe a beauty, it be true; but not an
angel.'
Earnshaw surlily bid she remove her thing to the kitchen. 'remove
they yourself,' she say, push they from she as soon as she have
do; and retire to a stool by the window, where she begin to
carve figure of bird and beast out of the turnip-paring in her
lap. I approach she, pretend to desire a view of the garden;
and, as I fancy, adroitly drop Mrs. Dean's note on to her
knee, unnoticed by Hareton - but she ask aloud, 'what be that?'
and chuck it off.
'a letter from your old acquaintance, the housekeeper at the
Grange,' I answer; annoy at she expose my kind deed, and
fearful lest it should be imagine a missive of my own. she would
gladly have gather it up at this information, but Hareton beat
she; he seize and put it in his waistcoat, say Mr. Heathcliff
should look at it first. thereat, Catherine silently turn she
face from we, and, very stealthily, draw out her pocket-
handkerchief and apply it to her eye; and her cousin, after
struggle awhile to keep down his soft feeling, pull out the
letter and fling it on the floor beside she, as ungraciously as he
could. Catherine catch and peruse it eagerly; then she put a few
question to I concern the inmate, rational and irrational, of
her former home; and gaze towards the hill, murmur in
soliloquy:
'I should like to be rid Minny down there! I should like to be
climb up there! oh! Ibe tired - Ibe stalled, Hareton!' and
she leant her pretty head back against the sill, with half a yawn
and half a sigh, and lapse into an aspect of abstract sadness:
neither care nor know whether we remark she.
'Mrs. Heathcliff,' I say, after sit some time mute, 'you be
not aware that I be an acquaintance of your? so intimate that I
think it strange you willnot come and speak to I. my housekeeper
never wearie of talk about and praise you; and shewill be
greatly disappointed if I return with no news of or from you,
except that you receive her letter and say nothing!'
she appear to wonder at this speech, and ask, -
'do Ellen like you?'
'yes, very well,' I reply, hesitatingly.
'you must tell she,' she continue, 'that I would answer she
letter, but I have no material for writing: not even a book from
which I might tear a leaf.'
'no book!' I exclaim. 'how do you contrive to live here without
they? if I may take the liberty to inquire. though provide with a
large library, Ibe frequently very dull at the Grange; take my
book away, and I should be desperate!'
'I be always read, when I have they,' say Catherine; 'and Mr.
Heathcliff never read; so he take it into his head to destroy my
book. I have not have a glimpse of one for week. only once, I
search through Joseph's store of theology, to his great
irritation; and once, Hareton, I come upon a secret stock in your
room - some Latin and Greek, and some tale and poetry: all old
friend. I bring the last here - and you gather they, as a
magpie gather silver spoon, for the mere love of steal! they
be of no use to you; or else you conceal they in the bad spirit
that, as you cannot enjoy they, nobody else shall. perhaps your
envy counsel Mr. Heathcliff to rob I of my treasure? but Ihave
most of they write on my brain and print in my heart, and you
cannot deprive I of those!'
Earnshaw blush crimson when his cousin make this revelation of
his private literary accumulation, and stammer an indignant
denial of her accusation.
'Mr. Hareton be desirous of increase his amount of knowledge,' I
say, come to his rescue. 'he be not envious, but EMULOUS of
your attainment. hewill be a clever scholar in a few year.'
'and he want I to sink into a dunce, meantime,' answer
Catherine. 'yes, I hear he try to spell and read to himself,
and pretty blunder he make! I wish you would repeat Chevy Chase
as you do yesterday: it be extremely funny. I hear you; and I
hear you turn over the dictionary to seek out the hard word,
and then curse because you couldnot read their explanation!'
the young man evidently think it too bad that he should be
laugh at for his ignorance, and then laugh at for try to
remove it. I have a similar notion; and, remember Mrs. Dean's
anecdote of his first attempt at enlighten the darkness in which
he have be rear, I observe, - 'but, Mrs. Heathcliff, we have
each have a commencement, and each stumble and totter on the
threshold; have our teacher scorn instead of aid we, we should
stumble and totter yet.'
'oh!' she reply, 'I donot wish to limit his acquirement: still,
he have no right to appropriate what be mine, and make it ridiculous
to I with his vile mistake and mispronunciation! those book,
both prose and verse, be consecrate to I by other association;
and I hate to have they debase and profane in his mouth!
besides, of all, he have select my favourite piece that I love
the most to repeat, as if out of deliberate malice.'
Hareton's chest heave in silence a minute: he labour under a
severe sense of mortification and wrath, which it be no easy task
to suppress. I rise, and, from a gentlemanly idea of relieve his
embarrassment, take up my station in the doorway, survey the
external prospect as I stand. he follow my example, and leave the
room; but presently reappear, bear half a dozen volume in his
hand, which he throw into Catherine's lap, exclaim, - 'take
they! I never want to hear, or read, or think of they again!'
'I willnot have they now,' she answer. 'I shall connect they with
you, and hate they.'
she open one that have obviously be often turn over, and read
a portion in the drawling tone of a beginner; then laugh, and
throw it from she. 'and listen,' she continue, provokingly,
commence a verse of an old ballad in the same fashion.
but his self-love would endure no further torment: I hear, and
not altogether disapprovingly, a manual cheek give to her saucy
tongue. the little wretch have do she utmost to hurt her cousin's
sensitive though uncultivated feeling, and a physical argument be
the only mode he have of balance the account, and repay its
effect on the inflictor. he afterwards gather the book and
hurl they on the fire. I read in his countenance what anguish it
be to offer that sacrifice to spleen. I fancy that as they
consume, he recall the pleasure they have already impart, and
the triumph and ever-increase pleasure he have anticipate from
they; and I fancy I guess the incitement to his secret study
also. he have be content with daily labour and rough animal
enjoyment, till Catherine cross his path. shame at her scorn,
and hope of her approval, be his first prompter to high
pursuit; and instead of guard he from one and win he to
the other, his endeavour to raise himself have produce just the
contrary result.
'yes thatbe all the good that such a brute as you can get from
they!' cry Catherine, suck her damage lip, and watch the
conflagration with indignant eye.
'youwould well hold your tongue, now,' he answer fiercely.
and his agitation preclude further speech; he advance hastily to
the entrance, where I make way for he to pass. but ere he have
cross the door-stone, Mr. Heathcliff, come up the causeway,
encounter he, and lay hold of his shoulder ask, - 'whatbe
to do now, my lad?'
'naught, naught,' he say, and break away to enjoy his grief and
anger in solitude.
Heathcliff gaze after he, and sigh.
'it will be odd if I thwart myself,' he mutter, unconscious that
I be behind he. 'but when I look for his father in his face, I
find she every day more! how the devil be he so like? I can
hardly bear to see he.'
he bend his eye to the ground, and walk moodily in. there be a
restless, anxious expression in his countenance. I have never
remark there before; and he look sparer in person. his
daughter-in-law, on perceive he through the window, immediately
escape to the kitchen, so that I remain alone.
'Ibe glad to see you out of door again, Mr. Lockwood,' he say, in
reply to my greeting; 'from selfish motif partly: I donot think
I could readily supply your loss in this desolation. Ihave wonder
more than once what bring you here.'
'an idle whim, I fear, sir,' be my answer; 'or else an idle whim
be go to spirit I away. I shall set out for London next week;
and I must give you warn that I feel no disposition to retain
Thrushcross Grange beyond the twelve month I agree to rent it. I
believe I shall not live there any more.'
'oh, indeed; yoube tired of be banish from the world, be
you?' he say. 'but if you be come to plead off pay for a
place you willnot occupy, your journey be useless: I never relent in
exact my due from any one.'
'Ibe come to plead off nothing about it,' I exclaim,
considerably irritated. 'should you wish it, Iwill settle with you
now,' and I draw my note-book from my pocket.
'no, no,' he reply, coolly; 'youwill leave sufficient behind to
cover your debt, if you fail to return: Ibe not in such a hurry.
sit down and take your dinner with we; a guest that be safe from
repeat his visit can generally be make welcome. Catherine bring
the thing in: where be you?'
Catherine reappear, bear a tray of knife and fork.
'you may get your dinner with Joseph,' mutter Heathcliff, aside,
'and remain in the kitchen till he be go.'
she obey his direction very punctually: perhaps she have no
temptation to transgress. live among clown and misanthropist,
she probably cannot appreciate a well class of people when she
meet they.
with Mr. Heathcliff, grim and saturnine, on the one hand, and
Hareton, absolutely dumb, on the other, I make a somewhat cheerless
meal, and bade adieu early. I would have depart by the back way,
to get a last glimpse of Catherine and annoy old Joseph; but
Hareton receive order to lead up my horse, and my host himself
escort I to the door, so I could not fulfil my wish.
'how dreary life get over in that house!' I reflect, while
rid down the road. 'what a realisation of something more
romantic than a fairy tale it would have be for Mrs. Linton
Heathcliff, have she and I strike up an attachment, as her good
nurse desire, and migrate together into the stir atmosphere
of the town!'
CHAPTER XXXII
1802. - this September I be invite to devastate the moor of a
friend in the north, and on my journey to his abode, I unexpectedly
come within fifteen mile of Gimmerton. the ostler at a roadside
public-house be hold a pail of water to refresh my horse, when
a cart of very green oat, newly reap, pass by, and he
remark, - 'Yon's frough Gimmerton, nah! theybe alla three
wick' after other folk wi' ther harvest.'
'Gimmerton?' I repeat - my residence in that locality have already
grow dim and dreamy. 'ah! I know. how far be it from this?'
'happen fourteen mile o'er th' hill; and a rough road,' he
answer.
a sudden impulse seize I to visit Thrushcross Grange. it be
scarcely noon, and I conceive that I might as well pass the night
under my own roof as in an inn. besides, I could spare a day
easily to arrange matter with my landlord, and thus save myself
the trouble of invade the neighbourhood again. have rest
awhile, I direct my servant to inquire the way to the village;
and, with great fatigue to our beast, we manage the distance in
some three hour.
I leave he there, and proceed down the valley alone. the grey
church look greyer, and the lonely churchyard lonelier. I
distinguish a moor-sheep crop the short turf on the graf.
it be sweet, warm weather - too warm for travel; but the heat
do not hinder I from enjoy the delightful scenery above and
below: have I see it near August, Ibe sure it would have tempt
I to waste a month among its solitude. in winter nothing more
dreary, in summer nothing more divine, than those glen shut in by
hill, and those bluff, bold swell of heath.
I reach the Grange before sunset, and knock for admittance; but
the family have retreat into the back premise, I judge, by one
thin, blue wreath, curl from the kitchen chimney, and they do
not hear. I ride into the court. under the porch, a girl of nine
or ten sit knitting, and an old woman recline on the housestep,
smoke a meditative pipe.
'be Mrs. Dean within?' I demand of the dame.
'Mistress Dean? Nay!' she answer, 'she donot bide here:
shoo's up at th' Heights.'
'be you the housekeeper, then?' I continue.
'Eea, aw keep th' hause,' she reply.
'well, Ibe Mr. Lockwood, the master. be there any room to lodge
I in, I wonder? I wish to stay all night.'
'T' maister!' she cry in astonishment. 'Whet, whoiver know yah
wur come? yah sud ha' send word. theybe nowt norther dry nor
mensful abaht t' place: nowt there benot!'
she throw down her pipe and bustle in, the girl follow, and I
enter too; soon perceive that her report be true, and,
moreover, that I have almost upset her wit by my unwelcome
apparition, I bid she be compose. I would go out for a walk;
and, meantime she must try to prepare a corner of a sitting-room
for I to sup in, and a bedroom to sleep in. no sweeping and
dusting, only good fire and dry sheet be necessary. she seem
willing to do she well; though she thrust the hearth-brush into the
grate in mistake for the poker, and malappropriate several other
article of her craft: but I retire, confide in her energy for
a resting-place against my return. wuthere Heights be the goal
of my propose excursion. an afterthought bring I back, when I
have quit the court.
'all well at the Heights?' I inquire of the woman.
'Eea, f'r owt ee knaw!' she answer, skurrye away with a pan of
hot cinder.
I would have ask why Mrs. Dean have desert the Grange, but it
be impossible to delay she at such a crisis, so I turn away and
make my exit, ramble leisurely along, with the glow of a sinking
sun behind, and the mild glory of a rise moon in front - one
fading, and the other brightening - as I quit the park, and
climb the stony by-road branch off to Mr. Heathcliff's
dwelling. before I arrive in sight of it, all that remain of
day be a beamless amber light along the west: but I could see
every pebble on the path, and every blade of grass, by that
splendid moon. I have neither to climb the gate nor to knock - it
yield to my hand. that be an improvement, I think. and I
notice another, by the aid of my nostril; a fragrance of stock
and wallflower waft on the air from amongst the homely fruit-
tree.
both door and lattice be open; and yet, as be usually the case
in a coal-district, a fine red fire illumine the chimney: the
comfort which the eye derive from it render the extra heat
endurable. but the house of Wuthering Heights be so large that the
inmate have plenty of space for withdraw out of its influence;
and accordingly what inmate there be have station themselves
not far from one of the window. I could both see they and hear
they talk before I enter, and look and listen in consequence;
be move thereto by a mingled sense of curiosity and envy, that
grow as I linger.
'Con-TRARY!' say a voice as sweet as a silver bell. 'that for the
third time, you dunce! Ibe not go to tell you again.
Recollect, or Iwill pull your hair!'
'Contrary, then,' answer another, in deep but soften tone.
'and now, kiss I, for mind so well.'
'no, read it over first correctly, without a single mistake.'
the male speaker begin to read: he be a young man, respectably
dress and seat at a table, have a book before he. his
handsome feature glow with pleasure, and his eye keep
impatiently wander from the page to a small white hand over his
shoulder, which recall he by a smart slap on the cheek, whenever
its owner detect such sign of inattention. its owner stand
behind; her light, shin ringlet blend, at interval, with
his brown look, as she bend to superintend his study; and her
face - it be lucky he could not see her face, or he would never
have be so steady. I could; and I bite my lip in spite, at have
throw away the chance I might have have of do something besides
star at its smite beauty.
the task be do, not free from further blunder; but the pupil
claim a reward, and receive at least five kiss; which,
however, he generously return. then they come to the door, and
from their conversation I judge they be about to issue out and
have a walk on the moor. I suppose I should be condemn in
Hareton Earnshaw's heart, if not by his mouth, to the low pit in
the infernal region if I show my unfortunate person in his
neighbourhood then; and feel very mean and malignant, I skulk
round to seek refuge in the kitchen. there be unobstructed
admittance on that side also; and at the door sit my old friend
Nelly Dean, sewing and sing a song; which be often interrupt
from within by harsh word of scorn and intolerance, utter in far
from musical accent.
'Iwould rayther, by th' haulf, hev' them swear I' my lug fro'h morn
to neeght, nor hearken ye hahsiver!' say the tenant of the
kitchen, in answer to an unheard speech of Nelly's. 'itbe a
blaze shame, that I cannot oppen t' blessed Book, but yah set up
they glory to sattan, and all t' flaysome wickedness that iver
be bear into th' warld! oh! ye're a raight nowt; and shoo's
another; and that poor lad will be lose atween ye. poor lad!' he
add, with a groan; 'hebe witch: Ibe sartin on't. oh, Lord,
judge them, for there's norther law nor justice among wer ruller!'
'no! or we should be sit in flame fagot, I suppose,'
retort the singer. 'but wisht, old man, and read your Bible like
a Christian, and never mind I. this be "Fairy Annie's wedding" -
a bonny tune - it go to a dance.'
Mrs. Dean be about to recommence, when I advance; and recognise
I directly, she jump to her foot, cry - 'why, bless you, Mr.
Lockwood! how could you think of return in this way? Allbe
shut up at Thrushcross Grange. you should have give we notice!'
'Ihave arrange to be accommodate there, for as long as I shall
stay,' I answer. 'I depart again to-morrow. and how be you
transplant here, Mrs. Dean? tell I that.'
'Zillah leave, and Mr. Heathcliff wish I to come, soon after you
go to London, and stay till you return. but, step in, pray!
have you walk from Gimmerton this evening?'
'from the Grange,' I reply; 'and while they make I lodge room
there, I want to finish my business with your master; because I
donot think of have another opportunity in a hurry.'
'what business, sir?' say Nelly, conduct I into the house.
'hebe go out at present, and willnot return soon.'
'about the rent,' I answer.
'oh! then it be with Mrs. Heathcliff you must settle,' she
observe; 'or rather with I. she have not learn to manage her
affair yet, and I act for she: therebe nobody else.'
I look surprised.
'ah! you have not hear of Heathcliff's death, I see,' she
continue.
'Heathcliff dead!' I exclaim, astonish. 'how long ago?'
'three month since: but sit down, and let I take your hat, and
Iwill tell you all about it. stop, you have have nothing to eat,
have you?'
'I want nothing: I have order supper at home. you sit down too.
I never dream of his dying! let I hear how it come to pass. you
say you donot expect they back for some time - the young people?'
'no - I have to scold they every evening for their late ramble:
but they donot care for I. at least, have a drink of our old ale;
it will do you good: you seem weary.'
she hasten to fetch it before I could refuse, and I hear Joseph
ask whether 'it warn't a cry scandal that she should have
follower at her time of life? and then, to get they jock out o'
t' maister's cellar! he fair shaame to 'bide still and see it.'
she do not stay to retaliate, but re-enter in a minute, bear
a ream silver pint, whose content I laud with become
earnestness. and afterwards she furnish I with the sequel of
Heathcliff's history. he have a 'queer' end, as she express it.
I be summon to Wuthering Heights, within a fortnight of your
leave we, she say; and I obey joyfully, for Catherine's sake.
my first interview with her grieve and shock I: she have
alter so much since our separation. Mr. Heathcliff do not
explain his reason for take a new mind about my come here; he
only tell I he want I, and he be tired of see Catherine: I
must make the little parlour my sitting-room, and keep she with I.
it be enough if he be oblige to see she once or twice a day.
she seem pleased at this arrangement; and, by degree, I smuggle
over a great number of book, and other article, that have form
her amusement at the Grange; and flatter myself we should get on
in tolerable comfort. the delusion do not last long. Catherine,
content at first, in a brief space grow irritable and restless.
for one thing, she be forbid to move out of the garden, and it
fret she sadly to be confine to its narrow bound as spring
draw on; for another, in follow the house, I be force to quit
she frequently, and she complain of loneliness: she prefer
quarrel with Joseph in the kitchen to sit at peace in her
solitude. I do not mind their skirmish: but Hareton be often
oblige to seek the kitchen also, when the master want to have
the house to himself! and though in the beginning she either leave
it at his approach, or quietly join in my occupation, and
shun remark or address he - and though he be always as
sullen and silent as possible - after a while, she change her
behaviour, and become incapable of let he alone: talk at
he; comment on his stupidity and idleness; express she
wonder how he could endure the life he live - how he could sit a
whole evening star into the fire, and dozing.
'hebe just like a dog, be he not, Ellen?' she once observe, 'or a
cart-horse? he do his work, eat his food, and sleep eternally!
what a blank, dreary mind he must have! do you ever dream,
Hareton? and, if you do, what be it about? but you cannot speak to
I!'
then she look at he; but he would neither open his mouth nor
look again.
'hebe, perhaps, dream now,' she continue. 'he twitch his
shoulder as Juno twitch her. ask he, Ellen.'
'Mr. Hareton will ask the master to send you up-stair, if you
donot behave!' I say. he have not only twitch his shoulder but
clench his fist, as if tempt to use it.
'I know why Hareton never speak, when I be in the kitchen,' she
exclaim, on another occasion. 'he be afraid I shall laugh at
he. Ellen, what do you think? he begin to teach himself to read
once; and, because I laugh, he burn his book, and drop it:
be he not a fool?'
'be not you naughty?' I say; 'answer I that.'
'perhaps I be,' she go on; 'but I do not expect he to be so
silly. Hareton, if I give you a book, would you take it now? Iwill
try!'
she place one she have be peruse on his hand; he fling it off,
and mutter, if she do not give over, he would break her neck.
'well, I shall put it here,' she say, 'in the table-drawer; and
Ibe go to bed.'
then she whisper I to watch whether he touch it, and depart.
but he would not come near it; and so I inform she in the
morning, to her great disappointment. I see she be sorry for his
persevere sulkiness and indolence: her conscience reprove she
for frighten he off improve himself: she have do it
effectually. but her ingenuity be at work to remedy the injury:
while I iron, or pursue other such stationary employment as I
could not well do in the parlour, she would bring some pleasant
volume and read it aloud to I. when Hareton be there, she
generally pause in an interesting part, and leave the book lie
about: that she do repeatedly; but he be as obstinate as a mule,
and, instead of snatch at her bait, in wet weather he take to
smoke with Joseph; and they sit like automaton, one on each side
of the fire, the eld happily too deaf to understand her wicked
nonsense, as he would have call it, the young do his good to
seem to disregard it. on fine evening the latter follow his
shooting expedition, and Catherine yawn and sigh, and tease
I to talk to she, and run off into the court or garden the moment
I begin; and, as a last resource, cry, and say she be tired of
living: her life be useless.
Mr. Heathcliff, who grow more and more disinclined to society, have
almost banish Earnshaw from his apartment. owe to an accident
at the commencement of March, he become for some day a fixture in
the kitchen. his gun burst while out on the hill by himself; a
splinter cut his arm, and he lose a good deal of blood before he
could reach home. the consequence be that, perforce, he be
condemn to the fireside and tranquillity, till he make it up
again. it suit Catherine to have he there: at any rate, it
make she hate her room up-stair more than ever: and she would
compel I to find out business below, that she might accompany I.
on Easter Monday, Joseph go to Gimmerton fair with some cattle;
and, in the afternoon, I be busy get up linen in the kitchen.
Earnshaw sit, morose as usual, at the chimney corner, and my little
mistress be beguile an idle hour with draw picture on the
window-pane, vary her amusement by smothered burst of song,
and whisper ejaculation, and quick glance of annoyance and
impatience in the direction of her cousin, who steadfastly smoke,
and look into the grate. at a notice that I could do with her no
long intercept my light, she remove to the hearthstone. I
bestow little attention on her proceeding, but, presently, I
hear she begin - 'Ihave find out, Hareton, that I want - that Ibe
glad - that I should like you to be my cousin now, if you have not
grow so cross to I, and so rough.'
Hareton return no answer.
'Hareton, Hareton, Hareton! do you hear?' she continue.
'get off wi' ye!' he growl, with uncompromise gruffness.
'let I take that pipe,' she say, cautiously advance her hand
and abstract it from his mouth.
before he could attempt to recover it, it be break, and behind
the fire. he swear at she and seize another.
'stop,' she cry, 'you must listen to I first; and I cannot speak
while those cloud be float in my face.'
'will you go to the devil!' he exclaim, ferociously, 'and let I
be!'
'no,' she persist, 'I willnot: I cannot tell what to do to make you
talk to I; and you be determined not to understand. when I call
you stupid, I donot mean anything: I donot mean that I despise
you. come, you shall take notice of I, Hareton: you be my
cousin, and you shall own I.'
'I shall have naught to do wi' you and your mucky pride, and your
damned mocking trick!' he answer. 'Iwill go to hell, body and
soul, before I look sideways after you again. side out o' t' gate,
now, this minute!'
Catherine frown, and retreat to the window-seat chew her
lip, and endeavouring, by hum an eccentric tune, to conceal a
grow tendency to sob.
'you should be friend with your cousin, Mr. Hareton,' I
interrupt, 'since she repent of her sauciness. it would do you
a great deal of good: it would make you another man to have she
for a companion.'
'a companion!' he cry; 'when she hat I, and do not think I
fit to wipe her shoon! Nay, if it make I a king, Iwould not be
scorn for seek her good-will any more.'
'it be not I who hate you, it be you who hate I!' weep Cathy, no
long disguise her trouble. 'you hate I as much as Mr.
Heathcliff do, and more.'
'yoube a damned liar,' begin Earnshaw: 'why have I make he
angry, by take your part, then, a hundred time? and that when
you sneer at and despise I, and - go on plague I, and Iwill
step in yonder, and say you worry I out of the kitchen!'
'I donot know you take my part,' she answer, dry her eye;
'and I be miserable and bitter at everybody; but now I thank you,
and beg you to forgive I: what can I do besides?'
she return to the hearth, and frankly extend her hand. he
blacken and scowl like a thunder-cloud, and keep his fist
resolutely clench, and his gaze fix on the ground. Catherine,
by instinct, must have divine it be obdurate perversity, and not
dislike, that prompt this dogged conduct; for, after remain an
instant undecided, she stoop and impress on his cheek a gentle
kiss. the little rogue think I have not see she, and, draw
back, she take her former station by the window, quite demurely. I
shake my head reprovingly, and then she blush and whisper -
'well! what should I have do, Ellen? he wouldnot shake hand,
and he wouldnot look: I must show he some way that I like he -
that I want to be friend.'
whether the kiss convince Hareton, I cannot tell: he be very
careful, for some minute, that his face should not be see, and
when he do raise it, he be sadly puzzle where to turn his eye.
Catherine employ herself in wrap a handsome book neatly in
white paper, and have tie it with a bit of ribbon, and address
it to 'Mr. Hareton Earnshaw,' she desire I to be her
ambassadress, and convey the present to its destine recipient.
'and tell he, if hewill take it, Iwill come and teach he to read it
right,' she say; 'and, if he refuse it, Iwill go upstairs, and
never tease he again.'
I carry it, and repeat the message; anxiously watch by my
employer. Hareton would not open his finger, so I lay it on his
knee. he do not strike it off, either. I return to my work.
Catherine lean her head and arm on the table, till she hear the
slight rustle of the covering be remove; then she steal away,
and quietly seat herself beside her cousin. he tremble, and his
face glow: all his rudeness and all his surly harshness have
desert he: he could not summon courage, at first, to utter a
syllable in reply to her questioning look, and her murmur
petition.
'say you forgive I, Hareton, do. you can make I so happy by
speak that little word.'
he mutter something inaudible.
'and youwill be my friend?' add Catherine, interrogatively.
'Nay, youwill be ashamed of I every day of your life,' he answer;
'and the more ashamed, the more you know I; and I cannot bide it.'
'so you willnot be my friend?' she say, smile as sweet as honey,
and creep close up.
I overheard no far distinguishable talk, but, on look round
again, I perceive two such radiant countenance bent over the page
of the accept book, that I do not doubt the treaty have be
ratify on both side; and the enemy be, thenceforth, swear
ally.
the work they study be full of costly picture; and those and
their position have charm enough to keep they unmove till Joseph
come home. he, poor man, be perfectly aghast at the spectacle of
Catherine seat on the same bench with Hareton Earnshaw, lean
her hand on his shoulder; and confound at his favourite's
endurance of her proximity: it affect he too deeply to allow an
observation on the subject that night. his emotion be only
reveal by the immense sigh he draw, as he solemnly spread his
large Bible on the table, and overlay it with dirty bank-note
from his pocket-book, the produce of the day's transaction. at
length he summon Hareton from his seat.
'tak' these in to t' maist, lad,' he say, 'and bide there. Ibe
gang up to my own rahm. this hoilebe neither mensful nor seemly
for we: we mun side out and seearch another.'
'come, Catherine,' I say, 'we must "side out" too: Ihave do my
ironing. be you ready to go?'
'it be not eight o'clock!' she answer, rise unwillingly.
'Hareton, Iwill leave this book upon the chimney-piece, and Iwill
bring some more to-morrow.'
'ony book that yah leave, I shall tak' into th' hahse,' say
Joseph, 'and itwill be mitch if yah find them agean; soa, yah may
plase yerseln!'
Cathy threaten that his library should pay for her; and, smile
as she pass Hareton, go sing up-stair: light of heart, I
venture to say, than ever she have be under that roof before;
except, perhaps, during her early visit to Linton.
the intimacy thus commence grow rapidly; though it encounter
temporary interruption. Earnshaw be not to be civilized with a
wish, and my young lady be no philosopher, and no paragon of
patience; but both their mind tend to the same point - one
love and desire to esteem, and the other love and desire to
be esteem - they contrive in the end to reach it.
you see, Mr. Lockwood, it be easy enough to win Mrs. Heathcliff's
heart. but now, Ibe glad you do not try. the crown of all my
wish will be the union of those two. I shall envy no one on
their wedding day: there willnot be a happy woman than myself in
England!
CHAPTER XXXIII
on the morrow of that Monday, Earnshaw be still unable to follow
his ordinary employment, and therefore remain about the house,
I speedily find it would be impracticable to retain my charge
beside I, as heretofore. she get downstairs before I, and out
into the garden, where she have see her cousin perform some easy
work; and when I go to bid they come to breakfast, I see she have
persuade he to clear a large space of ground from currant and
gooseberry bush, and they be busy plan together an
importation of plant from the Grange.
I be terrify at the devastation which have be accomplish in a
brief half-hour; the black-currant tree be the apple of Joseph's
eye, and she have just fix her choice of a flower-bed in the midst
of they.
'there! that will be all show to the master,' I exclaim, 'the
minute it be discover. and what excuse have you to offer for
take such liberty with the garden? we shall have a fine
explosion on the head of it: see if we donot! Mr. Hareton, I
wonder you should have no more wit than to go and make that mess at
her bidding!'
'Iwould forget they be Joseph's,' answer Earnshaw, rather
puzzle; 'but Iwill tell he I do it.'
we always eat our meal with Mr. Heathcliff. I hold the mistress's
post in make tea and carving; so I be indispensable at table.
Catherine usually sit by I, but to-day she steal near to
Hareton; and I presently see she would have no more discretion in
her friendship than she have in her hostility.
'now, mind you donot talk with and notice your cousin too much,'
be my whisper instruction as we enter the room. 'it will
certainly annoy Mr. Heathcliff, and hewill be mad at you both.'
'Ibe not go to,' she answer.
the minute after, she have sidle to he, and be stick primrose
in his plate of porridge.
he dare not speak to she there: he dare hardly look; and yet she
go on teasing, till he be twice on the point of be provoke
to laugh. I frown, and then she glance towards the master:
whose mind be occupy on other subject than his company, as his
countenance evince; and she grow serious for an instant,
scrutinize he with deep gravity. afterwards she turn, and
recommence her nonsense; at last, Hareton utter a smothered
laugh. Mr. Heathcliff start; his eye rapidly survey our face,
Catherine meet it with her accustomed look of nervousness and yet
defiance, which he abhor.
'it be well you be out of my reach,' he exclaim. 'what fiend
possess you to stare back at I, continually, with those infernal
eye? down with they! and donot remind I of your existence again.
I think I have cure you of laugh.'
'it be I,' mutter Hareton.
'what do you say?' demand the master.
Hareton look at his plate, and do not repeat the confession.
Mr. Heathcliff look at he a bit, and then silently resume his
breakfast and his interrupted musing. we have nearly finish, and
the two young people prudently shift wider asunder, so I
anticipate no further disturbance during that sitting: when
Joseph appear at the door, reveal by his quivering lip and
furious eye that the outrage commit on his precious shrub be
detect. he must have see Cathy and her cousin about the spot
before he examine it, for while his jaw work like those of a
cow chew its cud, and render his speech difficult to
understand, he began:-
'I mun hev' my wage, and I mun goa! I HED aim to dee wheare Iwould
sarve fur sixty year; and I thowt Iwould lug my book up into t'
garret, and all my bit o' stuff, and they sud hev' t' kitchen to
theirseln; for t' sake o' quietness. it wur hard to gie up my awn
hearthstun, but I thowt I could do that! but nah, shoo's taan my
garden fro' I, and by th' heart, maister, I cannot stand it! yah
may bend to th' yoak an ye will - I noan use to 't, and an old man
donot sooin get use to new barthen. Iwould rayther arn my bite
an' my sup wi' a hammer in th' road!'
'now, now, idiot!' interrupt Heathcliff, 'cut it short! whatbe
your grievance? Iwill interfere in no quarrel between you and
nelly. she may thrust you into the coal-hole for anything I care.'
'itbe noan nelly!' answer Joseph. 'I sudn't shift for Nelly -
nasty ill nowt as shoo be. thank God! SHOO cannot stale t' sowl o'
nob'dy! shoo wer niver soa handsome, but what a body mud look at
she 'bout winking. itbe yon flaysome, graceless quean, thatbe
witch our lad, wi' her bold een and her forrard way - till -
Nay! it fair brust my heart! hebe forget all Ihave do for
he, and make on he, and goan and rive up a whole row o' t'
grand currant-tree I' t' garden!' and here he lament
outright; unmanned by a sense of his bitter injury, and
Earnshaw's ingratitude and dangerous condition.
'be the fool drunk?' ask Mr. Heathcliff. 'Hareton, be it you
hebe find fault with?'
'Ihave pull up two or three bush,' reply the young man; 'but
Ibe go to set them again.'
'and why have you pull they up?' say the master.
Catherine wisely put in her tongue.
'we want to plant some flower there,' she cry. 'Ibe the only
person to blame, for I wish he to do it.'
'and who the devil give you leave to touch a stick about the
place?' demand her father-in-law, much surprised. 'and who
order you to obey she?' he add, turn to Hareton.
the latter be speechless; his cousin reply - 'you shouldnot
grudge a few yard of earth for I to ornament, when you have take
all my land!'
'your land, insolent slut! you never have any,' say Heathcliff.
'and my money,' she continue; return his angry glare, and
meantime bite a piece of crust, the remnant of her breakfast.
'silence!' he exclaim. 'get do, and begone!'
'and Hareton's land, and his money,' pursue the reckless thing.
'Hareton and I be friend now; and I shall tell he all about
you!'
the master seem confound a moment: he grow pale, and rise up,
eye she all the while, with an expression of mortal hate.
'if you strike I, Hareton will strike you,' she say; 'so you may
as well sit down.'
'if Hareton do not turn you out of the room, Iwill strike he to
hell,' thunder Heathcliff. 'damnable witch! dare you pretend to
rouse he against I? off with she! do you hear? fling she into
the kitchen! Iwill kill she, Ellen Dean, if you let she come into
my sight again!'
Hareton try, under his breath, to persuade she to go.
'drag she away!' he cry, savagely. 'be you stay to talk?'
and he approach to execute his own command.
'hewill not obey you, wicked man, any more,' say Catherine; 'and
hewill soon detest you as much as I do.'
'Wisht! wisht!' mutter the young man, reproachfully; 'I will not
hear you speak so to he. have do.'
'but you willnot let he strike I?' she cry.
'come, then,' he whisper earnestly.
it be too late: Heathcliff have catch hold of she.
'now, you go!' he say to Earnshaw. 'Accursed witch! this time she
have provoke I when I could not bear it; and Iwill make her repent
it for ever!'
he have his hand in her hair; Hareton attempt to release she
look, entreat he not to hurt she that once. Heathcliff's
black eye flash; he seem ready to tear Catherine in piece,
and I be just work up to risk come to the rescue, when of a
sudden his finger relax; he shift his grasp from her head to
her arm, and gaze intently in her face. then he draw his hand
over his eye, stand a moment to collect himself apparently, and
turn anew to Catherine, say, with assume calmness - 'you must
learn to avoid put I in a passion, or I shall really murder
you some time! go with Mrs. Dean, and keep with she; and confine
your insolence to her ear. as to Hareton Earnshaw, if I see he
listen to you, Iwill send he seek his bread where he can get it!
your love will make he an outcast and a beggar. nelly, take she;
and leave I, all of you! leave I!'
I lead my young lady out: she be too glad of her escape to resist;
the other follow, and Mr. Heathcliff have the room to himself till
dinner. I have counsel Catherine to dine up-stair; but, as soon
as he perceive her vacant seat, he send I to call she. he speak
to none of we, eat very little, and go out directly afterwards,
intimate that he should not return before evening.
the two new friend establish themselves in the house during his
absence; where I hear Hareton sternly cheek his cousin, on she
offer a revelation of her father-in-law's conduct to his father.
he say he wouldnot suffer a word to be utter in his
disparagement: if he be the devil, it donot signify; he would
stand by he; and hewould rather she would abuse himself, as she use
to, than begin on Mr. Heathcliff. Catherine be wax cross at
this; but he find mean to make she hold her tongue, by ask how
she would like HIM to speak ill of her father? then she
comprehend that Earnshaw take the master's reputation home to
himself; and be attach by tie strong than reason could break
- chain, forge by habit, which it would be cruel to attempt to
loosen. she show a good heart, thenceforth, in avoid both
complaint and expression of antipathy concern Heathcliff; and
confess to I her sorrow that she have endeavour to raise a bad
spirit between he and Hareton: indeed, I donot believe she have
ever breathe a syllable, in the latter's hearing, against her
oppressor since.
when this slight disagreement be over, they be friend again,
and as busy as possible in their several occupation of pupil and
teacher. I come in to sit with they, after I have do my work; and
I feel so soothe and comfort to watch they, that I do not
notice how time get on. you know, they both appear in a measure
my child: I have long be proud of one; and now, I be sure,
the other would be a source of equal satisfaction. his honest,
warm, and intelligent nature shake off rapidly the cloud of
ignorance and degradation in which it have be breed; and
Catherine's sincere commendation act as a spur to his industry.
his brighten mind brighten his feature, and add spirit and
nobility to their aspect: I could hardly fancy it the same
individual I have behold on the day I discover my little lady at
Wuthering Heights, after her expedition to the crag. while I
admire and they labour, dusk draw on, and with it return the
master. he come upon we quite unexpectedly, enter by the front
way, and have a full view of the whole three, ere we could raise our
head to glance at he. well, I reflect, there be never a
pleasanter, or more harmless sight; and it will be a burn shame
to scold they. the red fire-light glow on their two bonny head,
and reveal their face animate with the eager interest of
child; for, though he be twenty-three and she eighteen, each
have so much of novelty to feel and learn, that neither experience
nor evince the sentiment of sober disenchanted maturity.
they lift their eye together, to encounter Mr. Heathcliff:
perhaps you have never remark that their eye be precisely
similar, and they be those of Catherine Earnshaw. the present
Catherine have no other likeness to she, except a breadth of
forehead, and a certain arch of the nostril that make she appear
rather haughty, whether she will or not. with Hareton the
resemblance be carry far: it be singular at all time, then
it be particularly striking; because his sens be alert, and
his mental faculty waken to unwonted activity. I suppose this
resemblance disarm Mr. Heathcliff: he walk to the hearth in
evident agitation; but it quickly subside as he look at the
young man: or, I should say, alter its character; for it be
there yet. he take the book from his hand, and glance at the open
page, then return it without any observation; merely sign
Catherine away: her companion linger very little behind she, and
I be about to depart also, but he bid I sit still.
'it be a poor conclusion, be it not?' he observe, have brood
awhile on the scene he have just witness: 'an absurd termination
to my violent exertion? I get lever and mattock to demolish the
two house, and train myself to be capable of work like
Hercules, and when everything be ready and in my power, I find the
will to lift a slate off either roof have vanish! my old enemy
have not beat I; now would be the precise time to revenge myself
on their representative: I could do it; and none could hinder I.
but where be the use? I donot care for strike: I cannot take the
trouble to raise my hand! that sound as if I have be labour
the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity. it be
far from be the case: I have lose the faculty of enjoy their
destruction, and I be too idle to destroy for nothing.
'nelly, there be a strange change approach; Ibe in its shadow at
present. I take so little interest in my daily life that I hardly
remember to eat and drink. those two who have leave the room be
the only object which retain a distinct material appearance to I;
and that appearance cause I pain, amount to agony. about she
I willnot speak; and I donot desire to think; but I earnestly wish
she be invisible: her presence invoke only madden
sensation. he move I differently: and yet if I could do it
without seem insane, Iwould never see he again! youwill perhaps
think I rather inclined to become so,' he add, make an effort
to smile, 'if I try to describe the thousand form of past
association and idea he awaken or embodie. but youwill not talk
of what I tell you; and my mind be so eternally seclude in itself,
it be tempting at last to turn it out to another.
'five minute ago Hareton seem a personification of my youth, not
a human being; I feel to he in such a variety of way, that it
would have be impossible to have accost he rationally. in the
first place, his startling likeness to Catherine connect he
fearfully with she. that, however, which you may suppose the most
potent to arrest my imagination, be actually the least: for what
be not connect with she to I? and what do not recall she? I
cannot look down to this floor, but her feature be shape in the
flag! in every cloud, in every tree - fill the air at night,
and catch by glimpse in every object by day - I be surround
with her image! the most ordinary face of man and woman - my own
feature - mock I with a resemblance. the entire world be a
dreadful collection of memoranda that she do exist, and that I
have lose she! well, Hareton's aspect be the ghost of my immortal
love; of my wild endeavour to hold my right; my degradation, my
pride, my happiness, and my anguish -
'but it be frenzy to repeat these thought to you: only it will
let you know why, with a reluctance to be always alone, his society
be no benefit; rather an aggravation of the constant torment I
suffer: and it partly contribute to render I regardless how he
and his cousin go on together. I can give they no attention any
more.'
'but what do you mean by a CHANGE, Mr. Heathcliff?' I say, alarm
at his manner: though he be neither in danger of lose his
sens, nor die, accord to my judgment: he be quite strong
and healthy; and, as to his reason, from childhood he have a delight
in dwelling on dark thing, and entertain odd fancy. he might
have have a monomania on the subject of his depart idol; but on
every other point his wit be as sound as mine.
'I shall not know that till it come,' he say; 'Ibe only half
conscious of it now.'
'you have no feeling of illness, have you?' I ask.
'no, Nelly, I have not,' he answer.
'then you be not afraid of death?' I pursue.
'Afraid? no!' he reply. 'I have neither a fear, nor a
presentiment, nor a hope of death. why should I? with my hard
constitution and temperate mode of living, and unperilous
occupation, I ought to, and probably shall, remain above ground
till there be scarcely a black hair on my head. and yet I cannot
continue in this condition! I have to remind myself to breathe -
almost to remind my heart to beat! and it be like bend back a
stiff spring: it be by compulsion that I do the slight act not
prompt by one thought; and by compulsion that I notice anything
alive or dead, which be not associate with one universal idea. I
have a single wish, and my whole being and faculty be yearn
to attain it. they have yearn towards it so long, and so
unwaveringly, that Ibe convinced it will be reach - and soon -
because it have devour my existence: I be swallow up in the
anticipation of its fulfilment. my confession have not relieve
I; but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phase of
humour which I show. o God! it be a long fight; I wish it be
over!'
he begin to pace the room, mutter terrible thing to himself,
till I be inclined to believe, as he say Joseph do, that
conscience have turn his heart to an earthly hell. I wonder
greatly how it would end. though he seldom before have reveal
this state of mind, even by look, it be his habitual mood, I have
no doubt: he assert it himself; but not a soul, from his general
bearing, would have conjecture the fact. you do not when you see
he, Mr. Lockwood: and at the period of which I speak, he be just
the same as then; only fonder of continued solitude, and perhaps
still more laconic in company.
CHAPTER XXXIV
for some day after that evening Mr. Heathcliff shun meet we
at meal; yet he would not consent formally to exclude Hareton and
Cathy. he have an aversion to yield so completely to his
feeling, choose rather to absent himself; and eat once in
twenty-four hour seem sufficient sustenance for he.
one night, after the family be in bed, I hear he go downstairs,
and out at the front door. I do not hear he re-enter, and in the
morning I find he be still away. we be in April then: the
weather be sweet and warm, the grass as green as shower and sun
could make it, and the two dwarf apple-tree near the southern wall
in full bloom. after breakfast, Catherine insist on my bringing
a chair and sit with my work under the fir-tree at the end of
the house; and she beguile Hareton, who have perfectly recover
from his accident, to dig and arrange her little garden, which be
shift to that corner by the influence of Joseph's complaint. I
be comfortably revel in the spring fragrance around, and the
beautiful soft blue overhead, when my young lady, who have run down
near the gate to procure some primrose root for a border, return
only half laden, and inform we that Mr. Heathcliff be come in.
'and he speak to I,' she add, with a perplexed countenance.
'what do he say?' ask Hareton.
'he tell I to begone as fast as I could,' she answer. 'but he
look so different from his usual look that I stop a moment to
stare at he.'
'how?' he inquire.
'why, almost bright and cheerful. no, almost nothing - very MUCH
excited, and wild, and glad!' she reply.
'night-walking amuse he, then,' I remark, affect a careless
manner: in reality as surprised as she be, and anxious to
ascertain the truth of her statement; for to see the master look
glad would not be an every-day spectacle. I frame an excuse to go
in. Heathcliff stand at the open door; he be pale, and he
tremble: yet, certainly, he have a strange joyful glitter in his
eye, that alter the aspect of his whole face.
'will you have some breakfast?' I say. 'you must be hungry,
ramble about all night!' I want to discover where he have be,
but I do not like to ask directly.
'no, Ibe not hungry,' he answer, avert his head, and speak
rather contemptuously, as if he guess I be try to divine the
occasion of his good humour.
I feel perplexed: I donot know whether it be not a proper
opportunity to offer a bit of admonition.
'I donot think it right to wander out of door,' I observe,
'instead of be in bed: it be not wise, at any rate this moist
season. I daresay youwill catch a bad cold or a fever: you have
something the matter with you now!'
'nothing but what I can bear,' he reply; 'and with the great
pleasure, provide youwill leave I alone: get in, and donot annoy
I.'
I obey: and, in pass, I notice he breathe as fast as a cat.
'yes!' I reflect to myself, 'we shall have a fit of illness. I
cannot conceive what he have be do.'
that noon he sit down to dinner with we, and receive a heap-up
plate from my hand, as if he intend to make amend for previous
fasting.
'Ihave neither cold nor fever, nelly,' he remark, in allusion to
my morning's speech; 'and Ibe ready to do justice to the food you
give I.'
he take his knife and fork, and be go to commence eating, when
the inclination appear to become suddenly extinct. he lay they
on the table, look eagerly towards the window, then rise and go
out. we see he walk to and fro in the garden while we
conclude our meal, and Earnshaw say hewould go and ask why he would
not dine: he think we have grieve he some way.
'well, be he come?' cry Catherine, when her cousin return.
'Nay,' he answer; 'but hebe not angry: he seem rarely please
indeed; only I make he impatient by speak to he twice; and
then he bid I be off to you: he wonder how I could want the
company of anybody else.'
I set his plate to keep warm on the fender; and after an hour or
two he re-enter, when the room be clear, in no degree calmer:
the same unnatural - it be unnatural - appearance of joy under his
black brow; the same bloodless hue, and his tooth visible, now and
then, in a kind of smile; his frame shiver, not as one shiver
with chill or weakness, but as a tight-stretch cord vibrates - a
strong thrilling, rather than tremble.
I will ask what be the matter, I think; or who should? and I
exclaim - 'have you hear any good news, Mr. Heathcliff? you
look uncommonly animate.'
'where should good news come from to I?' he say. 'Ibe animate
with hunger; and, seemingly, I must not eat.'
'your dinner be here,' I return; 'why willnot you get it?'
'I donot want it now,' he mutter, hastily: 'Iwill wait till
supper. and, nelly, once for all, let I beg you to warn Hareton
and the other away from I. I wish to be trouble by nobody: I
wish to have this place to myself.'
'be there some new reason for this banishment?' I inquire. 'tell
I why you be so queer, Mr. Heathcliff? where be you last
night? Ibe not put the question through idle curiosity, but -
'
'you be put the question through very idle curiosity,' he
interrupt, with a laugh. 'yet Iwill answer it. last night I be
on the threshold of hell. to-day, I be within sight of my heaven.
I have my eye on it: hardly three foot to sever I! and now
youwould well go! youwill neither see nor hear anything to frighten
you, if you refrain from pry.'
have sweep the hearth and wipe the table, I depart; more
perplex than ever.
he do not quit the house again that afternoon, and no one intrude
on his solitude; till, at eight o'clock, I deem it proper, though
unsummone, to carry a candle and his supper to he. he be
lean against the ledge of an open lattice, but not look out:
his face be turn to the interior gloom. the fire have smoulder
to ash; the room be fill with the damp, mild air of the cloudy
evening; and so still, that not only the murmur of the beck down
Gimmerton be distinguishable, but its ripple and its gurgling
over the pebble, or through the large stone which it could not
cover. I utter an ejaculation of discontent at see the dismal
grate, and commence shut the casement, one after another,
till I come to his.
'must I close this?' I ask, in order to rouse he; for he would
not stir.
the light flash on his feature as I speak. oh, Mr. Lockwood, I
cannot express what a terrible start I get by the momentary view!
those deep black eye! that smile, and ghastly paleness! it
appear to I, not Mr. Heathcliff, but a goblin; and, in my
terror, I let the candle bend towards the wall, and it leave I in
darkness.
'yes, close it,' he reply, in his familiar voice. 'there, that
be pure awkwardness! why do you hold the candle horizontally? be
quick, and bring another.'
I hurry out in a foolish state of dread, and say to Joseph -
'the master wish you to take he a light and rekindle the fire.'
for I dare not go in myself again just then.
Joseph rattle some fire into the shovel, and go: but he bring
it back immediately, with the supper-tray in his other hand,
explain that Mr. Heathcliff be go to bed, and he want
nothing to eat till morning. we hear he mount the stair
directly; he do not proceed to his ordinary chamber, but turn
into that with the panel bed: its window, as I mention
before, be wide enough for anybody to get through; and it strike I
that he plot another midnight excursion, of which he have rather
we have no suspicion.
'be he a ghoul or a vampire?' I muse. I have read of such hideous
incarnate demon. and then I set myself to reflect how I have
tend he in infancy, and watch he grow to youth, and follow
he almost through his whole course; and what absurd nonsense it
be to yield to that sense of horror. 'but where do he come from,
the little dark thing, harbour by a good man to his bane?'
mutter Superstition, as I doze into unconsciousness. and I
begin, half dream, to weary myself with imagine some fit
parentage for he; and, repeat my wake meditation, I track
his existence over again, with grim variation; at last, picture
his death and funeral: of which, all I can remember be, be
exceedingly vex at have the task of dictate an inscription
for his monument, and consult the sexton about it; and, as he
have no surname, and we could not tell his age, we be oblige to
content ourselves with the single word, 'Heathcliff.' that come
true: we be. if you enter the kirkyard, youwill read, on his
headstone, only that, and the date of his death.
Dawn restore I to common sense. I rise, and go into the
garden, as soon as I could see, to ascertain if there be any
footmark under his window. there be none. 'he have stay at
home,' I think, 'and hewill be all right to-day.' I prepare
breakfast for the household, as be my usual custom, but tell
Hareton and Catherine to get theirs ere the master come down, for
he lie late. they prefer take it out of door, under the
tree, and I set a little table to accommodate they.
on my re-entrance, I find Mr. Heathcliff below. he and Joseph
be converse about some farming business; he give clear, minute
direction concern the matter discuss, but he speak rapidly,
and turn his head continually aside, and have the same excited
expression, even more exaggerated. when Joseph quit the room he
take his seat in the place he generally choose, and I put a basin of
coffee before he. he draw it near, and then rest his arm on
the table, and look at the opposite wall, as I suppose,
survey one particular portion, up and down, with glitter,
restless eye, and with such eager interest that he stop
breathe during half a minute together.
'come now,' I exclaim, push some bread against his hand, 'eat
and drink that, while it be hot: it have be wait near an
hour.'
he donot notice I, and yet he smile. Iwould rather have see he
gnash his tooth than smile so.
'Mr. Heathcliff! master!' I cry, 'donot, for God's sake, stare as
if you see an unearthly vision.'
'donot, for God's sake, shout so loud,' he reply. 'turn round,
and tell I, be we by ourselves?'
'of course,' be my answer; 'of course we be.'
still, I involuntarily obey he, as if I be not quite sure.
with a sweep of his hand he clear a vacant space in front among
the breakfast thing, and leant forward to gaze more at his ease.
now, I perceive he be not look at the wall; for when I
regard he alone, it seem exactly that he gaze at something
within two yard' distance. and whatever it be, it communicate,
apparently, both pleasure and pain in exquisite extreme: at least
the anguished, yet rapture, expression of his countenance
suggest that idea. the fancied object be not fix, either:
his eye pursue it with unwearied diligence, and, even in speak
to I, be never wean away. I vainly remind he of his
protract abstinence from food: if he stir to touch anything
in compliance with my entreaty, if he stretch his hand out to
get a piece of bread, his finger clench before they reach it,
and remain on the table, forgetful of their aim.
I sit, a model of patience, try to attract his absorb
attention from its engrossing speculation; till he grow irritable,
and get up, ask why I would not allow he to have his own time
in take his meal? and say that on the next occasion I neednot
wait: I might set the thing down and go. have utter these
word he leave the house, slowly saunter down the garden path, and
disappear through the gate.
the hour creep anxiously by: another evening come. I do not
retire to rest till late, and when I do, I could not sleep. he
return after midnight, and, instead of go to bed, shut himself
into the room beneath. I listen, and toss about, and, finally,
dress and descend. it be too irksome to lie there, harass
my brain with a hundred idle misgiving.
I distinguish Mr. Heathcliff's step, restlessly measure the
floor, and he frequently break the silence by a deep inspiration,
resemble a groan. he mutter detach word also; the only one
I could catch be the name of Catherine, couple with some wild
term of endearment or suffering; and speak as one would speak to a
person present; low and earnest, and wring from the depth of his
soul. I have not courage to walk straight into the apartment; but I
desire to divert he from his reverie, and therefore fall foul of
the kitchen fire, stir it, and begin to scrape the cinder. it
draw he forth soon than I expect. he open the door
immediately, and say - 'nelly, come here - be it morning? come in
with your light.'
'it be strike four,' I answer. 'you want a candle to take up-
stair: you might have light one at this fire.'
'no, I donot wish to go up-stair,' he say. 'come in, and kindle
ME a fire, and do anything there be to do about the room.'
'I must blow the coal red first, before I can carry any,' I
reply, get a chair and the bellow
he roam to and fro, meantime, in a state approach distraction;
his heavy sigh succeed each other so thick as to leave no space
for common breathing between.
'when day break Iwill send for Green,' he say; 'I wish to make
some legal inquiry of he while I can bestow a thought on those
matter, and while I can act calmly. I have not write my will
yet; and how to leave my property I cannot determine. I wish I
could annihilate it from the face of the earth.'
'I would not talk so, Mr. Heathcliff,' I interpose. 'let your
will be a while: youwill be spar to repent of your many
injustice yet! I never expect that your nerve would be
disorder: they be, at present, marvellously so, however; and
almost entirely through your own fault. the way youhave pass
these three last day might knock up a Titan. do take some food,
and some repose. you need only look at yourself in a glass to see
how you require both. your cheek be hollow, and your eye blood-
shot, like a person starve with hunger and go blind with loss
of sleep.'
'it be not my fault that I cannot eat or rest,' he reply. 'I
assure you it be through no settle design. Iwill do both, as soon
as I possibly can. but you might as well bid a man struggle in
the water rest within arm' length of the shore! I must reach it
first, and then Iwill rest. well, never mind Mr. Green: as to
repenting of my injustice, Ihave do no injustice, and I repent of
nothing. Ibe too happy; and yet Ibe not happy enough. my soul's
bliss kill my body, but do not satisfy itself.'
'happy, master?' I cry. 'strange happiness! if you would hear
I without be angry, I might offer some advice that would make
you happy.'
'what be that?' he ask. 'give it.'
'you be aware, Mr. Heathcliff,' I say, 'that from the time you
be thirteen year old you have live a selfish, unchristian life;
and probably hardly have a Bible in your hand during all that
period. you must have forget the content of the book, and you
may not have space to search it now. could it be hurtful to send
for some one - some minister of any denomination, it do not
matter which - to explain it, and show you how very far you have
err from its precept; and how unfit you will be for its heaven,
unless a change take place before you die?'
'Ibe rather obliged than angry, Nelly,' he say, 'for you remind I
of the manner in which I desire to be bury. it be to be carry
to the churchyard in the evening. you and Hareton may, if you
please, accompany I: and mind, particularly, to notice that the
sexton obey my direction concern the two coffin! no minister
need come; nor need anything be say over I. - I tell you I have
nearly attain MY heaven; and that of other be altogether
unvalue and uncover by I.'
'and suppose you persevere in your obstinate fast, and die by
that mean, and they refuse to bury you in the precinct of the
kirk?' I say, shock at his godless indifference. 'how would you
like it?'
'they willnot do that,' he reply: 'if they do, you must have I
remove secretly; and if you neglect it you shall prove,
practically, that the dead be not annihilate!'
as soon as he hear the other member of the family stir he
retire to his den, and I breathe free. but in the afternoon,
while Joseph and Hareton be at their work, he come into the
kitchen again, and, with a wild look, bid I come and sit in the
house: he want somebody with he. I decline; tell he
plainly that his strange talk and manner frighten I, and I have
neither the nerve nor the will to be his companion alone.
'I believe you think I a fiend,' he say, with his dismal laugh:
'something too horrible to live under a decent roof.' then turn
to Catherine, who be there, and who draw behind I at his
approach, he add, half sneeringly, - 'will you come, chuck? Iwill
not hurt you. no! to you Ihave make myself bad than the devil.
well, there be one who willnot shrink from my company! by God! shebe
relentless. oh, damn it! itbe unutterably too much for flesh and
blood to bear - even mine.'
he solicit the society of no one more. at dusk he go into his
chamber. through the whole night, and far into the morning, we
hear he groan and murmur to himself. Hareton be anxious
to enter; but I bid he fetch Mr. Kenneth, and he should go in and
see he. when he come, and I request admittance and try to
open the door, I find it lock; and Heathcliff bid we be damned.
he be well, and would be leave alone; so the doctor go away.
the follow evening be very wet: indeed, it pour down till
day-dawn; and, as I take my morning walk round the house, I
observe the master's window swinging open, and the rain drive
straight in. he cannot be in bed, I think: those shower would
drench he through. he must either be up or out. but Iwill make no
more ado, Iwill go boldly and look.'
have succeed in obtain entrance with another key, I run to
unclose the panel, for the chamber be vacant; quickly push
they aside, I peep in. Mr. Heathcliff be there - lay on his
back. his eye meet mine so keen and fierce, I start; and then he
seem to smile. I could not think he dead: but his face and
throat be wash with rain; the bed-clothe drip, and he be
perfectly still. the lattice, flap to and fro, have graze one
hand that rest on the sill; no blood trickle from the break
skin, and when I put my finger to it, I could doubt no more: he
be dead and stark!
I hasp the window; I comb his black long hair from his
forehead; I try to close his eye: to extinguish, if possible,
that frightful, life-like gaze of exultation before any one else
behold it. they would not shut: they seem to sneer at my
attempt; and his part lip and sharp white tooth sneer too!
take with another fit of cowardice, I cry out for Joseph.
Joseph shuffle up and make a noise, but resolutely refuse to
meddle with he.
'Th' divil's harry off his soul,' he cry, 'and he may hev' his
carcass into t' bargin, for aught I care! Ech! what a wicked 'un
he look, girne at death!' and the old sinner grin in mockery.
I think he intend to cut a caper round the bed; but suddenly
compose himself, he fall on his knee, and raise his hand, and
return thank that the lawful master and the ancient stock be
restore to their right.
I feel stunned by the awful event; and my memory unavoidably
recur to former time with a sort of oppressive sadness. but
poor Hareton, the most wrong, be the only one who really
suffer much. he sit by the corpse all night, weep in bitter
earnest. he press its hand, and kiss the sarcastic, savage
face that every one else shrink from contemplating; and bemoan
he with that strong grief which spring naturally from a generous
heart, though it be tough as temper steel.
Mr. Kenneth be perplex to pronounce of what disorder the master
die. I conceal the fact of his have swallow nothing for
four day, fear it might lead to trouble, and then, I be
persuade, he do not abstain on purpose: it be the consequence
of his strange illness, not the cause.
we bury he, to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood, as he
wish. Earnshaw and I, the sexton, and six man to carry the
coffin, comprehend the whole attendance. the six man depart
when they have let it down into the grave: we stay to see it
cover. Hareton, with a streaming face, dig green sod, and lay
they over the brown mould himself: at present it be as smooth and
verdant as its companion mound - and I hope its tenant sleep as
soundly. but the country folk, if you ask they, would swear on
the Bible that he WALKS: there be those who speak to have meet
he near the church, and on the moor, and even within this house.
Idle tale, youwill say, and so say I. yet that old man by the
kitchen fire affirm he have see two on them look out of his
chamber window on every rainy night since his death:- and an odd
thing happen to I about a month ago. I be go to the Grange
one evening - a dark evening, threaten thunder - and, just at
the turn of the Heights, I encounter a little boy with a sheep
and two lamb before he; he be cry terribly; and I suppose
the lamb be skittish, and would not be guide.
'what be the matter, my little man?' I ask.
'therebe Heathcliff and a woman yonder, under t' nab,' he
blubber, 'un' I darnut pass them.'
I see nothing; but neither the sheep nor he would go on so I bid
he take the road lower down. he probably raise the phantom from
thinking, as he traverse the moor alone, on the nonsense he have
hear his parent and companion repeat. yet, still, I donot like
be out in the dark now; and I donot like be leave by myself in
this grim house: I cannot help it; I shall be glad when they leave
it, and shift to the Grange.
'they be go to the Grange, then?' I say.
'yes,' answer Mrs. Dean, 'as soon as they be marry, and that
will be on New Year's day.'
'and who will live here then?'
'why, Joseph will take care of the house, and, perhaps, a lad to
keep he company. they will live in the kitchen, and the rest will
be shut up.'
'for the use of such ghost as choose to inhabit it?' I observe.
'no, Mr. Lockwood,' say Nelly, shake her head. 'I believe the
dead be at peace: but it be not right to speak of they with
levity.'
at that moment the garden gate swing to; the rambler be
return.
'they be afraid of nothing,' I grumble, watch their approach
through the window. 'together, they would brave Satan and all his
legion.'
as they step on to the door-stone, and halt to take a last
look at the moon - or, more correctly, at each other by her light -
I feel irresistibly impel to escape they again; and, press a
remembrance into the hand of Mrs. Dean, and disregard she
expostulation at my rudeness, I vanish through the kitchen as
they open the house-door; and so should have confirm Joseph in
his opinion of his fellow-servant's gay indiscretion, have he not
fortunately recognise I for a respectable character by the sweet
ring of a sovereign at his foot.
my walk home be lengthen by a diversion in the direction of the
kirk. when beneath its wall, I perceive decay have make progress,
even in seven month: many a window show black gap deprive of
glass; and slate jut off here and there, beyond the right line
of the roof, to be gradually work off in come autumn storm.
I seek, and soon discover, the three headstone on the slope
next the moor: on middle one grey, and half bury in the heath;
Edgar Linton's only harmonize by the turf and moss creep up its
foot; Heathcliff's still bare.
I linger round they, under that benign sky: watch the moth
flutter among the heath and harebell, listen to the soft wind
breathe through the grass, and wonder how any one could ever
imagine unquiet slumber for the sleeper in that quiet earth.
