middlemarch
by
George Eliot
New York and Boston
H. M. Caldwell Company Publishers
to my dear Husband, George Henry Lewes, in this nineteenth year of our
blessed union.
PRELUDE
who that care much to know the history of man, and how the mysterious
mixture behave under the vary experiment of Time, have not dwelt,
at least briefly, on the life of Saint Theresa, have not smile with
some gentleness at the thought of the little girl walk forth one
morning hand-in-hand with her still small brother, to go and seek
martyrdom in the country of the Moors? out they toddle from rugged
Avila, wide-eyed and helpless-look as two fawn, but with human
heart, already beat to a national idea; until domestic reality meet
they in the shape of uncle, and turn they back from their great
resolve. that child-pilgrimage be a fit beginning. Theresa's
passionate, ideal nature demand an epic life: what be many-volume
romance of chivalry and the social conquest of a brilliant girl to
she? her flame quickly burn up that light fuel; and, feed from
within, soar after some illimitable satisfaction, some object which
would never justify weariness, which would reconcile self-despair with
the rapturous consciousness of life beyond self. she find her epos in
the reform of a religious order.
that spanish woman who live three hundred year ago, be certainly not
the last of her kind. many Theresas have be bear who find for
themselves no epic life wherein there be a constant unfolding of
far-resonant action; perhaps only a life of mistake, the offspring of
a certain spiritual grandeur ill-match with the meanness of
opportunity; perhaps a tragic failure which find no sacred poet and
sink unwept into oblivion. with dim light and tangle circumstance
they try to shape their thought and deed in noble agreement; but
after all, to common eye their struggle seem mere inconsistency and
formlessness; for these later-bear Theresas be help by no coherent
social faith and order which could perform the function of knowledge
for the ardently willing soul. their ardor alternate between a vague
ideal and the common yearning of womanhood; so that the one be
disapprove as extravagance, and the other condemn as a lapse.
some have feel that these blunder life be due to the inconvenient
indefiniteness with which the Supreme Power have fashion the nature
of woman: if there be one level of feminine incompetence as strict as
the ability to count three and no more, the social lot of woman might
be treat with scientific certitude. meanwhile the indefiniteness
remain, and the limit of variation be really much wide than any one
would imagine from the sameness of woman's coiffure and the favorite
love-story in prose and verse. here and there a cygnet be rear
uneasily among the duckling in the brown pond, and never find the
living stream in fellowship with its own oary-footed kind. here and
there be bear a Saint Theresa, foundress of nothing, whose love
heart-beat and sob after an unattained goodness tremble off and be
disperse among hindrance, instead of centre in some
long-recognizable deed.
BOOK I.
MISS BROOKE.
CHAPTER I.
"since I can do no good because a woman,
reach constantly at something that be near it.
--The Maid's Tragedy: BEAUMONT and FLETCHER.
Miss Brooke have that kind of beauty which seem to be throw into
relief by poor dress. her hand and wrist be so finely form that
she could wear sleeve not less bare of style than those in which the
Blessed Virgin appear to italian painter; and her profile as well as
her stature and bearing seem to gain the more dignity from her plain
garment, which by the side of provincial fashion give she the
impressiveness of a fine quotation from the Bible,--or from one of our
elder poets,--in a paragraph of to-day's newspaper. she be usually
speak of as be remarkably clever, but with the addition that her
sister Celia have more common-sense. nevertheless, Celia wear scarcely
more trimming; and it be only to close observer that her dress
differed from her sister's, and have a shade of coquetry in its
arrangement; for Miss Brooke's plain dressing be due to mixed
condition, in most of which her sister share. the pride of be
lady have something to do with it: the Brooke connection, though not
exactly aristocratic, be unquestionably "good:" if you inquire
backward for a generation or two, you would not find any yard-measuring
or parcel-tie forefather--anything low than an admiral or a
clergyman; and there be even an ancestor discernible as a Puritan
gentleman who serve under Cromwell, but afterwards conform, and
manage to come out of all political trouble as the proprietor of a
respectable family estate. young woman of such birth, live in a
quiet country-house, and attend a village church hardly large than
a parlor, naturally regard frippery as the ambition of a huckster's
daughter. then there be well-breed economy, which in those day make
show in dress the first item to be deduct from, when any margin be
require for expense more distinctive of rank. such reason would
have be enough to account for plain dress, quite apart from religious
feeling; but in Miss Brooke's case, religion alone would have
determine it; and Celia mildly acquiesce in all her sister's
sentiment, only infuse they with that common-sense which be able to
accept momentous doctrine without any eccentric agitation. Dorothea
know many passage of Pascal's Pensees and of Jeremy Taylor by heart;
and to she the destiny of mankind, see by the light of Christianity,
make the solicitude of feminine fashion appear an occupation for
Bedlam. she could not reconcile the anxiety of a spiritual life
involve eternal consequence, with a keen interest in gimp and
artificial protrusion of drapery. her mind be theoretic, and yearn
by its nature after some lofty conception of the world which might
frankly include the parish of Tipton and her own rule of conduct there;
she be enamour of intensity and greatness, and rash in embrace
whatever seem to she to have those aspect; likely to seek martyrdom,
to make retractation, and then to incur martyrdom after all in a
quarter where she have not seek it. certainly such element in the
character of a marriageable girl tend to interfere with her lot, and
hinder it from be decide accord to custom, by good look,
vanity, and merely canine affection. with all this, she, the elder of
the sister, be not yet twenty, and they have both be educate, since
they be about twelve year old and have lose their parent, on plan
at once narrow and promiscuous, first in an english family and
afterwards in a swiss family at Lausanne, their bachelor uncle and
guardian try in this way to remedy the disadvantage of their
orphan condition.
it be hardly a year since they have come to live at Tipton Grange with
their uncle, a man nearly sixty, of acquiescent temper, miscellaneous
opinion, and uncertain vote. he have travel in his young year,
and be hold in this part of the county to have contract a too
ramble habit of mind. Mr. Brooke's conclusion be as difficult to
predict as the weather: it be only safe to say that he would act with
benevolent intention, and that he would spend as little money as
possible in carry they out. for the most glutinously indefinite
mind enclose some hard grain of habit; and a man have be see lax
about all his own interest except the retention of his snuff-box,
concern which he be watchful, suspicious, and greedy of clutch.
in Mr. Brooke the hereditary strain of Puritan energy be clearly in
abeyance; but in his niece Dorothea it glow alike through fault and
virtue, turn sometimes into impatience of her uncle's talk or his
way of "let thing be" on his estate, and make she long all the
more for the time when she would be of age and have some command of
money for generous scheme. she be regard as an heiress; for not
only have the sister seven hundred a-year each from their parent, but
if Dorothea marry and have a son, that son would inherit Mr. Brooke's
estate, presumably worth about three thousand a-year--a rental which
seem wealth to provincial family, still discuss Mr. Peel's late
conduct on the catholic question, innocent of future gold-field, and
of that gorgeous plutocracy which have so nobly exalt the necessity
of genteel life.
and how should Dorothea not marry?--a girl so handsome and with such
prospect? nothing could hinder it but her love of extreme, and her
insistence on regulate life accord to notion which might cause a
wary man to hesitate before he make she an offer, or even might lead
she at last to refuse all offer. a young lady of some birth and
fortune, who kneel suddenly down on a brick floor by the side of a sick
laborer and pray fervidly as if she think herself live in the
time of the apostle--who have strange whim of fast like a Papist,
and of sit up at night to read old theological book! such a wife
might awaken you some fine morning with a new scheme for the
application of her income which would interfere with political economy
and the keeping of saddle-horse: a man would naturally think twice
before he risk himself in such fellowship. woman be expect to
have weak opinion; but the great safeguard of society and of domestic
life be, that opinion be not act on. sane people do what their
neighbor do, so that if any lunatic be at large, one might know
and avoid they.
the rural opinion about the new young lady, even among the cottager,
be generally in favor of Celia, as be so amiable and
innocent-look, while Miss Brooke's large eye seem, like she
religion, too unusual and striking. poor Dorothea! compare with she,
the innocent-look Celia be know and worldly-wise; so much
subtler be a human mind than the outside tissue which make a sort of
blazonry or clock-face for it.
yet those who approach Dorothea, though prejudice against she by
this alarming hearsay, find that she have a charm unaccountably
reconcilable with it. Most man think her bewitch when she be on
horseback. she love the fresh air and the various aspect of the
country, and when her eye and cheek glow with mingled pleasure she
look very little like a devotee. Riding be an indulgence which she
allow herself in spite of conscientious qualm; she feel that she
enjoy it in a pagan sensuous way, and always look forward to
renounce it.
she be open, ardent, and not in the least self-admiring; indeed, it
be pretty to see how her imagination adorn her sister Celia with
attraction altogether superior to her own, and if any gentleman
appear to come to the Grange from some other motive than that of
see Mr. Brooke, she conclude that he must be in love with Celia:
Sir James Chettam, for example, whom she constantly consider from
Celia's point of view, inwardly debate whether it would be good for
Celia to accept he. that he should be regard as a suitor to herself
would have seem to she a ridiculous irrelevance. Dorothea, with all
her eagerness to know the truth of life, retain very childlike idea
about marriage. she feel sure that she would have accept the
judicious Hooker, if she have be bear in time to save he from that
wretched mistake he make in matrimony; or John Milton when his
blindness have come on; or any of the other great man whose odd habit
it would have be glorious piety to endure; but an amiable handsome
baronet, who say "exactly" to her remark even when she express
uncertainty,--how could he affect she as a lover? the really
delightful marriage must be that where your husband be a sort of
father, and could teach you even Hebrew, if you wish it.
these peculiarity of Dorothea's character cause Mr. Brooke to be all
the more blame in neighboring family for not secure some
middle-aged lady as guide and companion to his niece. but he himself
dread so much the sort of superior woman likely to be available for
such a position, that he allow himself to be dissuade by Dorothea's
objection, and be in this case brave enough to defy the world--that
be to say, Mrs. Cadwallader the Rector's wife, and the small group of
gentry with whom he visit in the northeast corner of Loamshire. so
Miss Brooke preside in her uncle's household, and do not at all
dislike her new authority, with the homage that belong to it.
Sir James Chettam be go to dine at the Grange to-day with another
gentleman whom the girl have never see, and about whom Dorothea feel
some venerate expectation. this be the Reverend Edward Casaubon,
note in the county as a man of profound learning, understand for many
year to be engage on a great work concern religious history; also
as a man of wealth enough to give lustre to his piety, and have view
of his own which be to be more clearly ascertain on the publication
of his book. his very name carry an impressiveness hardly to be
measure without a precise chronology of scholarship.
early in the day Dorothea have return from the infant school which she
have set go in the village, and be take her usual place in the
pretty sit-room which divide the bedroom of the sister, bent on
finish a plan for some building (a kind of work which she delight
in), when Celia, who have be watch she with a hesitate desire to
propose something, said--
"Dorothea, dear, if you donot mind--if you be not very busy--suppose
we look at mamma's jewel to-day, and divide they? it be exactly
six month to-day since uncle give they to you, and you have not look
at they yet."
Celia's face have the shadow of a pouting expression in it, the full
presence of the pout be keep back by an habitual awe of Dorothea and
principle; two associate fact which might show a mysterious
electricity if you touch they incautiously. to her relief,
Dorothea's eye be full of laughter as she look up.
"what a wonderful little almanac you be, Celia! be it six calendar or
six lunar month?"
"it be the last day of September now, and it be the first of April
when uncle give they to you. you know, he say that he have forget
they till then. I believe you have never think of they since you
lock they up in the cabinet here."
"well, dear, we should never wear they, you know." Dorothea speak in a
full cordial tone, half caressing, half explanatory. she have her
pencil in her hand, and be make tiny side-plan on a margin.
Celia color, and look very grave. "I think, dear, we be want
in respect to mamma's memory, to put they by and take no notice of
they. and," she add, after hesitate a little, with a rise sob of
mortification, "necklace be quite usual now; and Madame Poincon, who
be strict in some thing even than you be, use to wear ornament.
and Christians generally--surely there be woman in heaven now who wear
jewel." Celia be conscious of some mental strength when she really
apply herself to argument.
"you would like to wear they?" exclaim Dorothea, an air of astonished
discovery animate her whole person with a dramatic action which she
have catch from that very Madame Poincon who wear the ornament. "of
course, then, let we have they out. why do you not tell I before?
but the key, the key!" she press her hand against the side of her
head and seem to despair of her memory.
"they be here," say Celia, with whom this explanation have be long
meditate and prearrange.
"pray open the large drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel-box."
the casket be soon open before they, and the various jewel spread
out, make a bright parterre on the table. it be no great
collection, but a few of the ornament be really of remarkable
beauty, the fine that be obvious at first be a necklace of purple
amethyst set in exquisite gold work, and a pearl cross with five
brilliant in it. Dorothea immediately take up the necklace and
fasten it round her sister's neck, where it fit almost as closely
as a bracelet; but the circle suit the Henrietta-Maria style of
Celia's head and neck, and she could see that it do, in the pier-glass
opposite.
"there, Celia! you can wear that with your indian muslin. but this
cross you must wear with your dark dress."
Celia be try not to smile with pleasure. "O Dodo, you must keep
the cross yourself."
"no, no, dear, no," say Dorothea, put up her hand with careless
deprecation.
"yes, indeed you must; it would suit you--in your black dress, now,"
say Celia, insistingly. "you _might_ wear that."
"not for the world, not for the world. a cross be the last thing I
would wear as a trinket." Dorothea shudder slightly.
"then you will think it wicke in I to wear it," say Celia, uneasily.
"no, dear, no," say Dorothea, stroke her sister's cheek. "soul
have complexion too: what will suit one will not suit another."
"but you might like to keep it for mamma's sake."
"no, I have other thing of mamma's--her sandal-wood box which I be so
fond of--plenty of thing. in fact, they be all your, dear. we need
discuss they no long. there--take away your property."
Celia feel a little hurt. there be a strong assumption of superiority
in this puritanic toleration, hardly less try to the blond flesh of
an unenthusiastic sister than a puritanic persecution.
"but how can I wear ornament if you, who be the eld sister, will
never wear they?"
"Nay, Celia, that be too much to ask, that I should wear trinket to
keep you in countenance. if I be to put on such a necklace as that,
I should feel as if I have be pirouette. the world would go round
with I, and I should not know how to walk."
Celia have unclasp the necklace and draw it off. "it would be a
little tight for your neck; something to lie down and hang would suit
you well," she say, with some satisfaction. the complete unfitness
of the necklace from all point of view for Dorothea, make Celia
happy in take it. she be open some ring-box, which disclose
a fine emerald with diamond, and just then the sun pass beyond a
cloud send a bright gleam over the table.
"how very beautiful these gem be!" say Dorothea, under a new current
of feeling, as sudden as the gleam. "it be strange how deeply color
seem to penetrate one, like scent. I suppose that be the reason why
gem be use as spiritual emblem in the Revelation of St. John. they
look like fragment of heaven. I think that emerald be more beautiful
than any of they."
"and there be a bracelet to match it," say Celia. "we do not notice
this at first."
"they be lovely," say Dorothea, slip the ring and bracelet on she
finely turn finger and wrist, and hold they towards the window on
a level with her eye. all the while her thought be try to justify
her delight in the color by merge they in her mystic religious joy.
"you _would_ like those, Dorothea," say Celia, rather falteringly,
begin to think with wonder that her sister show some weakness,
and also that emerald would suit her own complexion even well than
purple amethyst. "you must keep that ring and bracelet--if nothing
else. but see, these agate be very pretty and quiet."
"yes! I will keep these--this ring and bracelet," say Dorothea.
then, let her hand fall on the table, she say in another
tone--"Yet what miserable man find such thing, and work at they, and
sell they!" she pause again, and Celia think that her sister be
go to renounce the ornament, as in consistency she ought to do.
"yes, dear, I will keep these," say Dorothea, decidedly. "but take
all the rest away, and the casket."
she take up her pencil without remove the jewel, and still look
at they. she think of often have they by she, to feed her eye at
these little fountain of pure color.
"shall you wear they in company?" say Celia, who be watch she with
real curiosity as to what she would do.
Dorothea glance quickly at her sister. across all her imaginative
adornment of those whom she love, there dart now and then a keen
discernment, which be not without a scorching quality. if Miss Brooke
ever attain perfect meekness, it would not be for lack of inward fire.
"perhaps," she say, rather haughtily. "I cannot tell to what level I
may sink."
Celia blush, and be unhappy: she see that she have offend she
sister, and dare not say even anything pretty about the gift of the
ornament which she put back into the box and carry away. Dorothea
too be unhappy, as she go on with her plan-drawing, question the
purity of her own feeling and speech in the scene which have end with
that little explosion.
Celia's consciousness tell she that she have not be at all in the
wrong: it be quite natural and justifiable that she should have ask
that question, and she repeat to herself that Dorothea be
inconsistent: either she should have take her full share of the
jewel, or, after what she have say, she should have renounce they
altogether.
"I be sure--at least, I trust," think Celia, "that the wearing of a
necklace will not interfere with my prayer. and I do not see that I
should be bind by Dorothea's opinion now we be go into society,
though of course she herself ought to be bind by they. but Dorothea
be not always consistent."
thus Celia, mutely bend over her tapestry, until she hear she
sister call she.
"here, Kitty, come and look at my plan; I shall think I be a great
architect, if I have not get incompatible stair and fireplace."
as Celia bend over the paper, Dorothea put she cheek against her
sister's arm caressingly. Celia understand the action. Dorothea see
that she have be in the wrong, and Celia pardon she. since they
could remember, there have be a mixture of criticism and awe in the
attitude of Celia's mind towards her eld sister. the young have
always wear a yoke; but be there any yoked creature without its private
opinion?
CHAPTER II.
"'Dime; no ves aquel caballero que hacia nosotros viene
sobre un caballo rucio rodado que trae puesto en la cabeza
un yelmo de oro?' 'lo que veo y columbro,' respondio Sancho,
'no es sino un hombre sobre un as no pardo como el mio, que
trae sobre la cabeza una cosa que relumbra.' 'Pues ese es el
yelmo de Mambrino,' dijo Don Quijote."--cervante.
"'seest thou not yon cavalier who cometh toward we on a
dapple-gray steed, and weareth a golden helmet?' 'what I
see,' answer Sancho, 'be nothing but a man on a gray ass
like my own, who carry something shiny on his head.' 'just
so,' answer Don Quixote: 'and that resplendent object be
the helmet of Mambrino.'"
"Sir Humphry Davy?" say Mr. Brooke, over the soup, in his easy smiling
way, take up Sir James Chettam's remark that he be study Davy's
Agricultural Chemistry. "well, now, Sir Humphry Davy; I din with he
year ago at Cartwright's, and Wordsworth be there too--the poet
Wordsworth, you know. now there be something singular. I be at
Cambridge when Wordsworth be there, and I never meet he--and I din
with he twenty year afterwards at Cartwright's. therebe an oddity in
thing, now. but Davy be there: he be a poet too. or, as I may say,
Wordsworth be poet one, and Davy be poet two. that be true in every
sense, you know."
Dorothea feel a little more uneasy than usual. in the beginning of
dinner, the party be small and the room still, these mote from the
mass of a magistrate's mind fall too noticeably. she wonder how a
man like Mr. Casaubon would support such triviality. his manner, she
think, be very dignified; the set of his iron-gray hair and his
deep eye-socket make he resemble the portrait of Locke. he have the
spare form and the pale complexion which become a student; as different
as possible from the bloom Englishman of the red-whisker type
represent by Sir James Chettam.
"I be read the Agricultural Chemistry," say this excellent baronet,
"because I be go to take one of the farm into my own hand, and see
if something cannot be do in set a good pattern of farming among
my tenant. do you approve of that, Miss Brooke?"
"a great mistake, Chettam," interpose Mr. Brooke, "go into
electrify your land and that kind of thing, and make a parlor of
your cow-house. it willnot do. I go into science a great deal myself
at one time; but I see it would not do. it lead to everything; you
can let nothing alone. no, no--see that your tenant donot sell their
straw, and that kind of thing; and give they drain-tile, you know.
but your fancy farming will not do--the most expensive sort of whistle
you can buy: you may as well keep a pack of hound."
"surely," say Dorothea, "it be well to spend money in find out
how man can make the most of the land which support they all, than in
keep dog and horse only to gallop over it. it be not a sin to
make yourself poor in perform experiment for the good of all."
she speak with more energy than be expect of so young a lady, but Sir
James have appeal to she. he be accustom to do so, and she have
often think that she could urge he to many good action when he be
her brother-in-law.
Mr. Casaubon turn his eye very markedly on Dorothea while she be
speak, and seem to observe she newly.
"young lady donot understand political economy, you know," say Mr.
Brooke, smile towards Mr. Casaubon. "I remember when we be all
read Adam Smith. _there_ be a book, now. I take in all the new
idea at one time--human perfectibility, now. but some say, history
move in circle; and that may be very well argue; I have argue it
myself. the fact be, human reason may carry you a little too far--over
the hedge, in fact. it carry I a good way at one time; but I see it
would not do. I pull up; I pull up in time. but not too hard. I
have always be in favor of a little theory: we must have think;
else we shall be land back in the dark age. but talk of book,
there be Southey's 'Peninsular War.' I be read that of a morning.
you know Southey?"
"no" say Mr. Casaubon, not keep pace with Mr. Brooke's impetuous
reason, and think of the book only. "I have little leisure for such
literature just now. I have be use up my eyesight on old
character lately; the fact be, I want a reader for my evening; but I
be fastidious in voice, and I cannot endure listen to an imperfect
reader. it be a misfortune, in some sens: I feed too much on the
inward source; I live too much with the dead. my mind be something
like the ghost of an ancient, wander about the world and try
mentally to construct it as it use to be, in spite of ruin and
confusing change. but I find it necessary to use the utmost caution
about my eyesight."
this be the first time that Mr. Casaubon have speak at any length. he
deliver himself with precision, as if he have be call upon to make
a public statement; and the balanced sing-song neatness of his speech,
occasionally correspond to by a movement of his head, be the more
conspicuous from its contrast with good Mr. Brooke's scrappy
slovenliness. Dorothea say to herself that Mr. Casaubon be the most
interesting man she have ever see, not except even Monsieur Liret,
the Vaudois clergyman who have give conference on the history of the
Waldenses. to reconstruct a past world, doubtless with a view to the
high purpose of truth--what a work to be in any way present at, to
assist in, though only as a lamp-holder! this elevate thought lift
she above her annoyance at be twit with her ignorance of
political economy, that never-explain science which be thrust as an
extinguisher over all her light.
"but you be fond of riding, Miss Brooke," Sir James presently take an
opportunity of say. "I should have think you would enter a little
into the pleasure of hunting. I wish you would let I send over a
chestnut horse for you to try. it have be train for a lady. I see
you on Saturday canter over the hill on a nag not worthy of you. my
groom shall bring Corydon for you every day, if you will only mention
the time."
"thank you, you be very good. I mean to give up riding. I shall not
ride any more," say Dorothea, urge to this brusque resolution by a
little annoyance that Sir James would be solicit her attention when
she want to give it all to Mr. Casaubon.
"no, that be too hard," say Sir James, in a tone of reproach that
show strong interest. "your sister be give to self-mortification,
be she not?" he continue, turn to Celia, who sit at his right hand.
"I think she be," say Celia, feel afraid lest she should say
something that would not please her sister, and blush as prettily as
possible above her necklace. "she like give up."
"if that be true, Celia, my giving-up would be self-indulgence, not
self-mortification. but there may be good reason for choose not to
do what be very agreeable," say Dorothea.
Mr. Brooke be speak at the same time, but it be evident that Mr.
Casaubon be observe Dorothea, and she be aware of it.
"exactly," say Sir James. "you give up from some high, generous
motive."
"no, indeed, not exactly. I do not say that of myself," answer
Dorothea, redden. unlike Celia, she rarely blush, and only from
high delight or anger. at this moment she feel angry with the perverse
Sir James. why do he not pay attention to Celia, and leave she to
listen to Mr. Casaubon?--if that learn man would only talk, instead
of allow himself to be talk to by Mr. Brooke, who be just then
inform he that the Reformation either mean something or it do
not, that he himself be a protestant to the core, but that Catholicism
be a fact; and as to refuse an acre of your ground for a Romanist
chapel, all man need the bridle of religion, which, properly
speaking, be the dread of a Hereafter.
"I make a great study of theology at one time," say Mr. Brooke, as if
to explain the insight just manifest. "I know something of all
school. I know Wilberforce in his good day. do you know
Wilberforce?"
Mr. Casaubon say, "no."
"well, Wilberforce be perhaps not enough of a thinker; but if I go
into Parliament, as I have be ask to do, I should sit on the
independent bench, as Wilberforce do, and work at philanthropy."
Mr. Casaubon bow, and observe that it be a wide field.
"yes," say Mr. Brooke, with an easy smile, "but I have document. I
begin a long while ago to collect document. they want arrange, but
when a question have strike I, I have write to somebody and get an
answer. I have document at my back. but now, how do you arrange your
document?"
"in pigeon-hole partly," say Mr. Casaubon, with rather a startled air
of effort.
"ah, pigeon-hole will not do. I have try pigeon-hole, but
everything get mixed in pigeon-hole: I never know whether a paper be
in A or Z."
"I wish you would let I sort your paper for you, uncle," say
Dorothea. "I would letter they all, and then make a list of subject
under each letter."
Mr. Casaubon gravely smile approval, and say to Mr. Brooke, "you have
an excellent secretary at hand, you perceive."
"no, no," say Mr. Brooke, shake his head; "I cannot let young lady
meddle with my document. young lady be too flighty."
Dorothea feel hurt. Mr. Casaubon would think that her uncle have some
special reason for deliver this opinion, whereas the remark lie in
his mind as lightly as the broken wing of an insect among all the other
fragment there, and a chance current have send it alight on _her_.
when the two girl be in the drawing-room alone, Celia said--
"how very ugly Mr. Casaubon be!"
"Celia! he be one of the most distinguish-look man I ever see.
he be remarkably like the portrait of Locke. he have the same deep
eye-socket."
"have Locke those two white mole with hair on they?"
"oh, I dare say! when people of a certain sort look at he," say
Dorothea, walk away a little.
"Mr. Casaubon be so sallow."
"all the well. I suppose you admire a man with the complexion of a
cochon de lait."
"Dodo!" exclaim Celia, look after she in surprise. "I never hear
you make such a comparison before."
"why should I make it before the occasion come? it be a good
comparison: the match be perfect."
Miss Brooke be clearly forget herself, and Celia think so.
"I wonder you show temper, Dorothea."
"it be so painful in you, Celia, that you will look at human being as
if they be merely animal with a toilet, and never see the great soul
in a man's face."
"have Mr. Casaubon a great soul?" Celia be not without a touch of naive
malice.
"yes, I believe he have," say Dorothea, with the full voice of
decision. "everything I see in he correspond to his pamphlet on
Biblical Cosmology."
"he talk very little," say Celia
"there be no one for he to talk to."
Celia think privately, "Dorothea quite despise Sir James Chettam; I
believe she would not accept he." Celia feel that this be a pity.
she have never be deceive as to the object of the baronet's interest.
sometimes, indeed, she have reflect that Dodo would perhaps not make a
husband happy who have not her way of look at thing; and stifle in
the depth of her heart be the feeling that her sister be too
religious for family comfort. notion and scruple be like spilt
needle, make one afraid of treading, or sit down, or even eat.
when Miss Brooke be at the tea-table, Sir James come to sit down by
she, not have feel her mode of answer he at all offensive. why
should he? he think it probable that Miss Brooke like he, and
manner must be very marked indeed before they cease to be interpret
by preconception either confident or distrustful. she be thoroughly
charming to he, but of course he theorize a little about his
attachment. he be make of excellent human dough, and have the rare
merit of know that his talent, even if let loose, would not set the
small stream in the county on fire: hence he like the prospect of a
wife to whom he could say, "what shall we do?" about this or that; who
could help her husband out with reason, and would also have the
property qualification for do so. as to the excessive religiousness
allege against Miss Brooke, he have a very indefinite notion of what it
consist in, and think that it would die out with marriage. in
short, he feel himself to be in love in the right place, and be ready
to endure a great deal of predominance, which, after all, a man could
always put down when he like. Sir James have no idea that he should
ever like to put down the predominance of this handsome girl, in whose
cleverness he delight. why not? a man's mind--what there be of
it--have always the advantage of be masculine,--as the small
birch-tree be of a high kind than the most soar palm,--and even
his ignorance be of a sounder quality. Sir James might not have
originate this estimate; but a kind Providence furnish the limpest
personality with a little gunk or starch in the form of tradition.
"let I hope that you will rescind that resolution about the horse,
Miss Brooke," say the persevere admirer. "I assure you, rid be
the most healthy of exercise."
"I be aware of it," say Dorothea, coldly. "I think it would do Celia
good--if she would take to it."
"but you be such a perfect horsewoman."
"excuse I; I have have very little practice, and I should be easily
throw."
"then that be a reason for more practice. every lady ought to be a
perfect horsewoman, that she may accompany her husband."
"you see how widely we differ, Sir James. I have make up my mind that
I ought not to be a perfect horsewoman, and so I should never
correspond to your pattern of a lady." Dorothea look straight before
she, and speak with cold brusquerie, very much with the air of a
handsome boy, in amusing contrast with the solicitous amiability of her
admirer.
"I should like to know your reason for this cruel resolution. it be
not possible that you should think horsemanship wrong."
"it be quite possible that I should think it wrong for I."
"oh, why?" say Sir James, in a tender tone of remonstrance.
Mr. Casaubon have come up to the table, teacup in hand, and be
listen.
"we must not inquire too curiously into motif," he interpose, in his
measure way. "Miss Brooke know that they be apt to become feeble in
the utterance: the aroma be mix with the gross air. we must keep
the germinating grain away from the light."
Dorothea color with pleasure, and look up gratefully to the
speaker. here be a man who could understand the high inward life,
and with whom there could be some spiritual communion; nay, who could
illuminate principle with the wide knowledge a man whose learning
almost amount to a proof of whatever he believe!
Dorothea's inference may seem large; but really life could never have
go on at any period but for this liberal allowance of conclusion,
which have facilitate marriage under the difficulty of civilization.
have any one ever pinch into its pilulous smallness the cobweb of
pre-matrimonial acquaintanceship?
"certainly," say good Sir James. "Miss Brooke shall not be urge to
tell reason she would rather be silent upon. I be sure her reason
would do her honor."
he be not in the least jealous of the interest with which Dorothea have
look up at Mr. Casaubon: it never occur to he that a girl to whom
he be meditate an offer of marriage could care for a dry bookworm
towards fifty, except, indeed, in a religious sort of way, as for a
clergyman of some distinction.
however, since Miss Brooke have become engage in a conversation with
Mr. Casaubon about the Vaudois clergy, Sir James betake himself to
Celia, and talk to she about her sister; speak of a house in town,
and ask whether Miss Brooke dislike London. away from her sister,
Celia talk quite easily, and Sir James say to himself that the
second Miss Brooke be certainly very agreeable as well as pretty,
though not, as some people pretend, more clever and sensible than the
eld sister. he feel that he have choose the one who be in all
respect the superior; and a man naturally like to look forward to
have the good. he would be the very mawworm of bachelor who
pretend not to expect it.
CHAPTER III.
"say, goddess, what ensue, when Raphael,
the affable archangel . . .
Eve
the story hear attentive, and be fill
with admiration, and deep muse, to hear
of thing so high and strange."
--Paradise Lost, B. vii.
if it have really occur to Mr. Casaubon to think of Miss Brooke as a
suitable wife for he, the reason that might induce she to accept he
be already plant in her mind, and by the evening of the next day
the reason have bud and bloom. for they have have a long
conversation in the morning, while Celia, who do not like the company
of Mr. Casaubon's mole and sallowness, have escape to the vicarage to
play with the curate's ill-shod but merry child.
Dorothea by this time have look deep into the ungauged reservoir of
Mr. Casaubon's mind, see reflect there in vague labyrinthine
extension every quality she herself bring; have open much of her own
experience to he, and have understand from he the scope of his great
work, also of attractively labyrinthine extent. for he have be as
instructive as Milton's "affable archangel;" and with something of the
archangelic manner he tell she how he have undertake to show (what
indeed have be attempt before, but not with that thoroughness,
justice of comparison, and effectiveness of arrangement at which Mr.
Casaubon aim) that all the mythical system or erratic mythical
fragment in the world be corruption of a tradition originally
reveal. have once master the true position and take a firm
footing there, the vast field of mythical construction become
intelligible, nay, luminous with the reflect light of
correspondence. but to gather in this great harvest of truth be no
light or speedy work. his note already make a formidable range of
volume, but the crowning task would be to condense these voluminous
still-accumulate result and bring they, like the early vintage of
hippocratic book, to fit a little shelf. in explain this to
Dorothea, Mr. Casaubon express himself nearly as he would have do
to a fellow-student, for he have not two style of talk at command:
it be true that when he use a greek or latin phrase he always give the
English with scrupulous care, but he would probably have do this in
any case. a learn provincial clergyman be accustomed to think of his
acquaintance as of "lord, knyghte, and other noble and worthi man,
that conne Latyn but lytille."
Dorothea be altogether captivate by the wide embrace of this
conception. here be something beyond the shallow of lady' school
literature: here be a live Bossuet, whose work would reconcile
complete knowledge with devoted piety; here be a modern Augustine who
unite the glory of doctor and saint.
the sanctity seem no less clearly mark than the learning, for when
Dorothea be impel to open her mind on certain theme which she
could speak of to no one whom she have before see at Tipton, especially
on the secondary importance of ecclesiastical form and article of
belief compare with that spiritual religion, that submergence of self
in communion with divine perfection which seem to she to be express
in the good christian book of widely distant age, she find in Mr.
Casaubon a listener who understand she at once, who could assure she of
his own agreement with that view when duly temper with wise
conformity, and could mention historical example before unknown to she.
"he think with I," say Dorothea to herself, "or rather, he think a
whole world of which my thought be but a poor twopenny mirror. and his
feeling too, his whole experience--what a lake compare with my little
pool!"
Miss Brooke argue from word and disposition not less unhesitatingly
than other young lady of her age. sign be small measurable thing,
but interpretation be illimitable, and in girl of sweet, ardent
nature, every sign be apt to conjure up wonder, hope, belief, vast as a
sky, and color by a diffused thimbleful of matter in the shape of
knowledge. they be not always too grossly deceive; for Sinbad
himself may have fall by good-luck on a true description, and wrong
reasoning sometimes land poor mortal in right conclusion: start a
long way off the true point, and proceed by loop and zigzag, we
now and then arrive just where we ought to be. because Miss Brooke be
hasty in her trust, it be not therefore clear that Mr. Casaubon be
unworthy of it.
he stay a little long than he have intend, on a slight pressure of
invitation from Mr. Brooke, who offer no bait except his own
document on machine-break and rick-burning. Mr. Casaubon be call
into the library to look at these in a heap, while his host pick up
first one and then the other to read aloud from in a skip and
uncertain way, pass from one unfinished passage to another with a
"yes, now, but here!" and finally push they all aside to open the
journal of his youthful Continental travel.
"look here--here be all about Greece. Rhamnus, the ruin of
Rhamnus--you be a great Grecian, now. I donot know whether you have
give much study to the topography. I spend no end of time in make
out these thing--Helicon, now. here, now!--'We start the next
morning for Parnassus, the double-peak Parnassus.' all this volume be
about Greece, you know," Mr. Brooke wind up, rub his thumb
transversely along the edge of the leaf as he hold the book forward.
Mr. Casaubon make a dignified though somewhat sad audience; bow in
the right place, and avoid look at anything documentary as far as
possible, without show disregard or impatience; mindful that this
desultoriness be associate with the institution of the country, and
that the man who take he on this severe mental scamper be not only an
amiable host, but a landholder and custos rotulorum. be his endurance
aid also by the reflection that Mr. Brooke be the uncle of Dorothea?
certainly he seem more and more bent on make her talk to he, on
draw she out, as Celia remark to herself; and in look at her
his face be often light up by a smile like pale wintry sunshine. before
he leave the next morning, while take a pleasant walk with Miss Brooke
along the gravelled terrace, he have mention to she that he feel the
disadvantage of loneliness, the need of that cheerful companionship
with which the presence of youth can lighten or vary the serious toil
of maturity. and he deliver this statement with as much careful
precision as if he have be a diplomatic envoy whose word would be
attend with result. indeed, Mr. Casaubon be not use to expect
that he should have to repeat or revise his communication of a
practical or personal kind. the inclination which he have deliberately
state on the 2d of October he would think it enough to refer to by the
mention of that date; judge by the standard of his own memory, which
be a volume where a vide supra could serve instead of repetition, and
not the ordinary long-use blotting-book which only tell of forgotten
writing. but in this case Mr. Casaubon's confidence be not likely to
be falsify, for Dorothea hear and retain what he say with the
eager interest of a fresh young nature to which every variety in
experience be an epoch.
it be three o'clock in the beautiful breezy autumn day when Mr.
Casaubon drive off to his Rectory at Lowick, only five mile from
Tipton; and Dorothea, who have on her bonnet and shawl, hurry along
the shrubbery and across the park that she might wander through the
border wood with no other visible companionship than that of Monk,
the Great St. Bernard dog, who always take care of the young lady in
their walk. there have rise before she the girl's vision of a
possible future for herself to which she look forward with trembling
hope, and she want to wander on in that visionary future without
interruption. she walk briskly in the brisk air, the color rise in
her cheek, and her straw bonnet (which our contemporary might look
at with conjectural curiosity as at an obsolete form of basket) fall a
little backward. she would perhaps be hardly characterize enough if
it be omit that she wear her brown hair flatly braid and coil
behind so as to expose the outline of her head in a daring manner at a
time when public feeling require the meagreness of nature to be
dissimulate by tall barricade of frizzed curl and bow, never
surpass by any great race except the Feejeean. this be a trait of
Miss Brooke's asceticism. but there be nothing of an ascetic's
expression in her bright full eye, as she look before she, not
consciously see, but absorb into the intensity of her mood, the
solemn glory of the afternoon with its long swathe of light between
the far-off row of lime, whose shadow touch each other.
all people, young or old (that be, all people in those ante-reform
time), would have think she an interesting object if they have
refer the glow in her eye and cheek to the newly awaken ordinary
image of young love: the illusion of Chloe about Strephon have be
sufficiently consecrate in poetry, as the pathetic loveliness of all
spontaneous trust ought to be. Miss Pippin adore young Pumpkin, and
dream along endless vista of unwearye companionship, be a little
drama which never tire our father and mother, and have be put into
all costume. let but Pumpkin have a figure which would sustain the
disadvantage of the shortwaisted swallow-tail, and everybody feel it
not only natural but necessary to the perfection of womanhood, that a
sweet girl should be at once convince of his virtue, his exceptional
ability, and above all, his perfect sincerity. but perhaps no person
then live--certainly none in the neighborhood of Tipton--would have
have a sympathetic understanding for the dream of a girl whose notion
about marriage take their color entirely from an exalt enthusiasm
about the end of life, an enthusiasm which be light chiefly by its own
fire, and include neither the nicety of the trousseau, the pattern
of plate, nor even the honor and sweet joy of the bloom matron.
it have now enter Dorothea's mind that Mr. Casaubon might wish to make
she his wife, and the idea that he would do so touch she with a sort
of reverential gratitude. how good of he--nay, it would be almost as
if a wing messenger have suddenly stand beside her path and hold out
his hand towards she! for a long while she have be oppress by the
indefiniteness which hang in her mind, like a thick summer haze, over
all her desire to make her life greatly effective. what could she do,
what ought she to do?--she, hardly more than a bud woman, but yet
with an active conscience and a great mental need, not to be satisfy
by a girlish instruction comparable to the nibbling and judgment of a
discursive mouse. with some endowment of stupidity and conceit, she
might have think that a christian young lady of fortune should find
her ideal of life in village charity, patronage of the humbler
clergy, the perusal of "Female scripture Characters," unfold the
private experience of Sara under the Old Dispensation, and Dorcas under
the New, and the care of her soul over her embroidery in her own
boudoir--with a background of prospective marriage to a man who, if
less strict than herself, as be involve in affair religiously
inexplicable, might be pray for and seasonably exhort. from such
contentment poor Dorothea be shut out. the intensity of her religious
disposition, the coercion it exercise over her life, be but one
aspect of a nature altogether ardent, theoretic, and intellectually
consequent: and with such a nature struggle in the band of a narrow
teaching, hem in by a social life which seem nothing but a
labyrinth of petty course, a wall-in maze of small path that lead no
whither, the outcome be sure to strike other as at once exaggeration
and inconsistency. the thing which seem to she good, she want to
justify by the complete knowledge; and not to live in a pretended
admission of rule which be never act on. into this soul-hunger as
yet all her youthful passion be pour; the union which attract she
be one that would deliver she from her girlish subjection to her own
ignorance, and give she the freedom of voluntary submission to a guide
who would take she along the grandest path.
"I should learn everything then," she say to herself, still walk
quickly along the bridle road through the wood. "it would be my duty
to study that I might help he the well in his great work. there
would be nothing trivial about our life. every-day thing with we
would mean the great thing. it would be like marry Pascal. I
should learn to see the truth by the same light as great man have see
it by. and then I should know what to do, when I get old: I should
see how it be possible to lead a grand life here--now--in England. I
donot feel sure about do good in any way now: everything seem like
go on a mission to a people whose language I donot know;--unless it
be build good cottage--there can be no doubt about that. oh, I
hope I should be able to get the people well house in Lowick! I will
draw plenty of plan while I have time."
Dorothea check herself suddenly with self-rebuke for the presumptuous
way in which she be reckon on uncertain event, but she be spar
any inward effort to change the direction of her thought by the
appearance of a canter horseman round a turning of the road. the
well-groom chestnut horse and two beautiful setter could leave no
doubt that the rider be Sir James Chettam. he discern Dorothea,
jump off his horse at once, and, have deliver it to his groom,
advanced towards she with something white on his arm, at which the two
setter be bark in an excited manner.
"how delightful to meet you, Miss Brooke," he say, raise his hat and
show his sleekly wave blond hair. "it have hasten the pleasure I
be look forward to."
Miss Brooke be annoy at the interruption. this amiable baronet,
really a suitable husband for Celia, exaggerate the necessity of
make himself agreeable to the eld sister. even a prospective
brother-in-law may be an oppression if he will always be presuppose
too good an understanding with you, and agree with you even when you
contradict he. the thought that he have make the mistake of pay his
address to herself could not take shape: all her mental activity be
use up in persuasion of another kind. but he be positively
obtrusive at this moment, and his dimpled hand be quite
disagreeable. her rouse temper make her color deeply, as she return
his greeting with some haughtiness.
Sir James interpret the heighten color in the way most gratifying
to himself, and think he never see Miss Brooke look so handsome.
"I have bring a little petitioner," he say, "or rather, I have
bring he to see if he will be approve before his petition be
offer." he show the white object under his arm, which be a tiny
maltese puppy, one of nature's most naive toy.
"it be painful to I to see these creature that be breed merely as
pet," say Dorothea, whose opinion be form itself that very moment
(as opinion will) under the heat of irritation.
"oh, why?" say Sir James, as they walk forward.
"I believe all the petting that be give they do not make they happy.
they be too helpless: their life be too frail. a weasel or a mouse
that get its own living be more interesting. I like to think that the
animal about we have soul something like our own, and either carry on
their own little affair or can be companion to we, like Monk here.
those creature be parasitic."
"I be so glad I know that you do not like they," say good Sir James.
"I should never keep they for myself, but lady usually be fond of
these maltese dog. here, John, take this dog, will you?"
the objectionable puppy, whose nose and eye be equally black and
expressive, be thus get rid of, since Miss Brooke decide that it have
well not have be bear. but she feel it necessary to explain.
"you must not judge of Celia's feeling from mine. I think she like
these small pet. she have a tiny terrier once, which she be very fond
of. it make I unhappy, because I be afraid of treading on it. I be
rather short-sighted."
"you have your own opinion about everything, Miss Brooke, and it be
always a good opinion."
what answer be possible to such stupid complimenting?
"do you know, I envy you that," Sir James say, as they continue
walk at the rather brisk pace set by Dorothea.
"I donot quite understand what you mean."
"your power of form an opinion. I can form an opinion of person.
I know when I like people. but about other matter, do you know, I
have often a difficulty in decide. one hear very sensible thing
say on opposite side."
"or that seem sensible. perhaps we donot always discriminate between
sense and nonsense."
Dorothea feel that she be rather rude.
"exactly," say Sir James. "but you seem to have the power of
discrimination."
"on the contrary, I be often unable to decide. but that be from
ignorance. the right conclusion be there all the same, though I be
unable to see it."
"I think there be few who would see it more readily. do you know,
Lovegood be tell I yesterday that you have the good notion in the
world of a plan for cottage--quite wonderful for a young lady, he
think. you have a real _genus_, to use his expression. he say you
want Mr. Brooke to build a new set of cottage, but he seem to
think it hardly probable that your uncle would consent. do you know,
that be one of the thing I wish to do--I mean, on my own estate. I
should be so glad to carry out that plan of your, if you would let I
see it. of course, it be sink money; that be why people object to
it. laborer can never pay rent to make it answer. but, after all, it
be worth do."
"worth do! yes, indeed," say Dorothea, energetically, forget
her previous small vexation. "I think we deserve to be beat out of
our beautiful house with a scourge of small cord--all of we who let
tenant live in such sty as we see round we. life in cottage might
be happy than ours, if they be real house fit for human being
from whom we expect duty and affection."
"will you show I your plan?"
"yes, certainly. I dare say it be very faulty. but I have be
examine all the plan for cottage in Loudon's book, and pick out
what seem the good thing. oh what a happiness it would be to set the
pattern about here! I think instead of Lazarus at the gate, we should
put the pigsty cottage outside the park-gate."
Dorothea be in the good temper now. Sir James, as brother in-law,
building model cottage on his estate, and then, perhaps, other be
build at Lowick, and more and more elsewhere in imitation--it would be
as if the spirit of Oberlin have pass over the parish to make the
life of poverty beautiful!
Sir James see all the plan, and take one away to consult upon with
Lovegood. he also take away a complacent sense that he be make
great progress in Miss Brooke's good opinion. the maltese puppy be
not offer to Celia; an omission which Dorothea afterwards think of
with surprise; but she blame herself for it. she have be engross
Sir James. after all, it be a relief that there be no puppy to tread
upon.
Celia be present while the plan be be examine, and observe Sir
James's illusion. "he think that Dodo care about he, and she only
care about her plan. yet I be not certain that she would refuse he
if she think he would let she manage everything and carry out all her
notion. and how very uncomfortable Sir James would be! I cannot bear
notion."
it be Celia's private luxury to indulge in this dislike. she dare
not confess it to her sister in any direct statement, for that would be
lay herself open to a demonstration that she be somehow or other at
war with all goodness. but on safe opportunity, she have an indirect
mode of make her negative wisdom tell upon Dorothea, and call she
down from her rhapsodic mood by remind she that people be star,
not listen. Celia be not impulsive: what she have to say could
wait, and come from she always with the same quiet staccato evenness.
when people talk with energy and emphasis she watch their face and
feature merely. she never could understand how well-breed person
consent to sing and open their mouth in the ridiculous manner
requisite for that vocal exercise.
it be not many day before Mr. Casaubon pay a morning visit, on which
he be invite again for the following week to dine and stay the night.
thus Dorothea have three more conversation with he, and be convince
that her first impression have be just. he be all she have at first
imagine he to be: almost everything he have say seem like a
speciman from a mine, or the inscription on the door of a museum which
might open on the treasure of past age; and this trust in his mental
wealth be all the deep and more effective on her inclination because
it be now obvious that his visit be make for her sake. this
accomplished man condescend to think of a young girl, and take the
pain to talk to she, not with absurd compliment, but with an appeal to
her understanding, and sometimes with instructive correction. what
delightful companionship! Mr. Casaubon seem even unconscious that
triviality exist, and never hand round that small-talk of heavy
man which be as acceptable as stale bride-cake bring forth with an
odor of cupboard. he talk of what he be interested in, or else he
be silent and bow with sad civility. to Dorothea this be adorable
genuineness, and religious abstinence from that artificiality which
use up the soul in the effort of pretence. for she look as
reverently at Mr. Casaubon's religious elevation above herself as she
do at his intellect and learning. he assent to her expression of
devout feeling, and usually with an appropriate quotation; he allow
himself to say that he have go through some spiritual conflict in his
youth; in short, Dorothea see that here she might reckon on
understanding, sympathy, and guidance. on one--only one--of her
favorite theme she be disappoint. Mr. Casaubon apparently do not
care about building cottage, and divert the talk to the extremely
narrow accommodation which be to be have in the dwelling of the
ancient Egyptians, as if to check a too high standard. after he be
go, Dorothea dwell with some agitation on this indifference of his;
and her mind be much exercise with argument draw from the vary
condition of climate which modify human need, and from the admit
wickedness of pagan despot. should she not urge these argument on
Mr. Casaubon when he come again? but further reflection tell she that
she be presumptuous in demand his attention to such a subject; he
would not disapprove of she occupy herself with it in leisure
moment, as other woman expect to occupy themselves with their dress
and embroidery--would not forbid it when--Dorothea feel rather ashamed
as she detect herself in these speculation. but her uncle have be
invite to go to Lowick to stay a couple of day: be it reasonable to
suppose that Mr. Casaubon delight in Mr. Brooke's society for its own
sake, either with or without document?
meanwhile that little disappointment make she delight the more in Sir
James Chettam's readiness to set on foot the desire improvement. he
come much oftener than Mr. Casaubon, and Dorothea cease to find he
disagreeable since he show himself so entirely in earnest; for he have
already enter with much practical ability into Lovegood's estimate,
and be charmingly docile. she propose to build a couple of cottage,
and transfer two family from their old cabin, which could then be
pull down, so that new one could be build on the old site. Sir
James say "exactly," and she bear the word remarkably well.
certainly these man who have so few spontaneous idea might be very
useful member of society under good feminine direction, if they be
fortunate in choose their sister-in-law! it be difficult to say
whether there be or be not a little wilfulness in her continue
blind to the possibility that another sort of choice be in question in
relation to she. but her life be just now full of hope and action:
she be not only think of her plan, but get down learn book
from the library and read many thing hastily (that she might be a
little less ignorant in talk to Mr. Casaubon), all the while be
visit with conscientious questioning whether she be not exalt
these poor doing above measure and contemplate they with that
self-satisfaction which be the last doom of ignorance and folly.
CHAPTER IV.
1st gent. our deed be fetter that we forge ourselves.
2d Gent. ay, truly: but I think it be the world
that bring the iron.
"Sir James seem determined to do everything you wish," say Celia, as
they be drive home from an inspection of the new building-site.
"he be a good creature, and more sensible than any one would imagine,"
say Dorothea, inconsiderately.
"you mean that he appear silly."
"no, no," say Dorothea, recollect herself, and lay her hand on
her sister's a moment, "but he do not talk equally well on all
subject."
"I should think none but disagreeable people do," say Celia, in her
usual purring way. "they must be very dreadful to live with. only
think! at breakfast, and always."
Dorothea laugh. "o Kitty, you be a wonderful creature!" she pinch
Celia's chin, be in the mood now to think she very win and
lovely--fit hereafter to be an eternal cherub, and if it be not
doctrinally wrong to say so, hardly more in need of salvation than a
squirrel. "of course people need not be always talk well. only one
tell the quality of their mind when they try to talk well."
"you mean that Sir James try and fail."
"I be speak generally. why do you catechise I about Sir James?
it be not the object of his life to please I."
"now, Dodo, can you really believe that?"
"certainly. he think of I as a future sister--that be all." Dorothea
have never hint this before, wait, from a certain shyness on such
subject which be mutual between the sister, until it should be
introduce by some decisive event. Celia blush, but say at once--
"pray do not make that mistake any long, Dodo. when Tantripp be
brush my hair the other day, she say that Sir James's man know from
Mrs. Cadwallader's maid that Sir James be to marry the eld Miss
Brooke."
"how can you let Tantripp talk such gossip to you, Celia?" say
Dorothea, indignantly, not the less angry because detail asleep in her
memory be now awaken to confirm the unwelcome revelation. "you
must have ask her question. it be degrade."
"I see no harm at all in Tantripp's talk to I. it be well to
hear what people say. you see what mistake you make by take up
notion. I be quite sure that Sir James mean to make you an offer;
and he believe that you will accept he, especially since you have
be so pleased with he about the plan. and uncle too--I know he
expect it. every one can see that Sir James be very much in love with
you."
the revulsion be so strong and painful in Dorothea's mind that the
tear well up and flow abundantly. all her dear plan be
embitter, and she think with disgust of Sir James's conceiving that
she recognize he as her lover. there be vexation too on account of
Celia.
"how could he expect it?" she burst forth in her most impetuous manner.
"I have never agree with he about anything but the cottage: I be
barely polite to he before."
"but you have be so pleased with he since then; he have begin to feel
quite sure that you be fond of he."
"Fond of he, Celia! how can you choose such odious expression?" say
Dorothea, passionately.
"dear I, Dorothea, I suppose it would be right for you to be fond of a
man whom you accept for a husband."
"it be offensive to I to say that Sir James could think I be fond of
he. besides, it be not the right word for the feeling I must have
towards the man I would accept as a husband."
"well, I be sorry for Sir James. I think it right to tell you,
because you go on as you always do, never look just where you be,
and treading in the wrong place. you always see what nobody else see;
it be impossible to satisfy you; yet you never see what be quite plain.
thatbe your way, Dodo." something certainly give Celia unusual courage;
and she be not spar the sister of whom she be occasionally in awe.
who can tell what just criticism Murr the Cat may be pass on we
being of wide speculation?
"it be very painful," say Dorothea, feel scourge. "I can have no
more to do with the cottage. I must be uncivil to he. I must tell
he I will have nothing to do with they. it be very painful." her eye
fill again with tear.
"wait a little. think about it. you know he be go away for a day
or two to see his sister. there will be nobody besides Lovegood."
Celia could not help relent. "Poor Dodo," she go on, in an
amiable staccato. "it be very hard: it be your favorite _fad_ to draw
plan."
"_fad_ to draw plan! do you think I only care about my
fellow-creature' house in that childish way? I may well make
mistake. how can one ever do anything nobly christian, live among
people with such petty thought?"
no more be say; Dorothea be too much jarred to recover her temper
and behave so as to show that she admit any error in herself. she
be dispose rather to accuse the intolerable narrowness and the
purblind conscience of the society around she: and Celia be no long
the eternal cherub, but a thorn in her spirit, a pink-and-white
nullifidian, bad than any discouraging presence in the "Pilgrim's
Progress." the _fad_ of draw plan! what be life worth--what great
faith be possible when the whole effect of one's action could be
wither up into such parch rubbish as that? when she get out of the
carriage, her cheek be pale and her eyelid red. she be an image
of sorrow, and her uncle who meet she in the hall would have be
alarm, if Celia have not be close to she look so pretty and
compose, that he at once conclude Dorothea's tear to have their
origin in her excessive religiousness. he have return, during their
absence, from a journey to the county town, about a petition for the
pardon of some criminal.
"well, my dear," he say, kindly, as they go up to kiss he, "I hope
nothing disagreeable have happen while I have be away."
"no, uncle," say Celia, "we have be to freshitt to look at the
cottage. we think you would have be at home to lunch."
"I come by Lowick to lunch--you donot know I come by Lowick. and I
have bring a couple of pamphlet for you, Dorothea--in the library,
you know; they lie on the table in the library."
it seem as if an electric stream go through Dorothea, thrill she
from despair into expectation. they be pamphlet about the early
Church. the oppression of Celia, Tantripp, and Sir James be shake
off, and she walk straight to the library. Celia go up-stair. Mr.
Brooke be detain by a message, but when he re-enter the library,
he find Dorothea seat and already deep in one of the pamphlet which
have some marginal manuscript of Mr. casaubon's,--take it in as
eagerly as she might have take in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a
dry, hot, dreary walk.
she be get away from Tipton and Freshitt, and her own sad
liability to tread in the wrong place on her way to the New Jerusalem.
Mr. Brooke sit down in his arm-chair, stretch his leg towards the
wood-fire, which have fall into a wondrous mass of glow dice
between the dog, and rub his hand gently, look very mildly
towards Dorothea, but with a neutral leisurely air, as if he have
nothing particular to say. Dorothea close her pamphlet, as soon as
she be aware of her uncle's presence, and rise as if to go. usually
she would have be interested about her uncle's merciful errand on
behalf of the criminal, but her late agitation have make she
absent-minded.
"I come back by Lowick, you know," say Mr. Brooke, not as if with any
intention to arrest her departure, but apparently from his usual
tendency to say what he have say before. this fundamental principle of
human speech be markedly exhibit in Mr. Brooke. "I lunch there
and see Casaubon's library, and that kind of thing. therebe a sharp
air, drive. willnot you sit down, my dear? you look cold."
Dorothea feel quite inclined to accept the invitation. some time,
when her uncle's easy way of take thing do not happen to be
exasperate, it be rather soothing. she throw off her mantle and
bonnet, and sit down opposite to he, enjoy the glow, but lift up
her beautiful hand for a screen. they be not thin hand, or small
hand; but powerful, feminine, maternal hand. she seem to be
hold they up in propitiation for her passionate desire to know and
to think, which in the unfriendly medium of Tipton and Freshitt have
issue in cry and red eyelid.
she bethink herself now of the condemn criminal. "what news have
you bring about the sheep-stealer, uncle?"
"what, poor bunch?--well, it seem we cannot get he off--he be to be
hang."
Dorothea's brow take an expression of reprobation and pity.
"Hanged, you know," say Mr. Brooke, with a quiet nod. "Poor Romilly!
he would have help we. I know Romilly. Casaubon donot know
Romilly. he be a little bury in book, you know, Casaubon be."
"when a man have great study and be write a great work, he must of
course give up see much of the world. how can he go about make
acquaintance?"
"thatbe true. but a man mop, you know. I have always be a
bachelor too, but I have that sort of disposition that I never mop;
it be my way to go about everywhere and take in everything. I never
mop: but I can see that Casaubon do, you know. he want a
companion--a companion, you know."
"it would be a great honor to any one to be his companion," say
Dorothea, energetically.
"you like he, eh?" say Mr. Brooke, without show any surprise, or
other emotion. "well, now, Ihave know Casaubon ten year, ever since
he come to Lowick. but I never get anything out of he--any idea, you
know. however, he be a tiptop man and may be a bishop--that kind of
thing, you know, if Peel stay in. and he have a very high opinion of
you, my dear."
Dorothea could not speak.
"the fact be, he have a very high opinion indeed of you. and he speak
uncommonly well--do Casaubon. he have defer to I, you not be
of age. in short, I have promise to speak to you, though I tell he I
think there be not much chance. I be bind to tell he that. I
say, my niece be very young, and that kind of thing. but I donot
think it necessary to go into everything. however, the long and the
short of it be, that he have ask my permission to make you an offer of
marriage--of marriage, you know," say Mr. Brooke, with his explanatory
nod. "I think it well to tell you, my dear."
no one could have detect any anxiety in Mr. Brooke's manner, but he
do really wish to know something of his niece's mind, that, if there
be any need for advice, he might give it in time. what feel he,
as a magistrate who have take in so many idea, could make room for,
be unmixedly kind. since Dorothea do not speak immediately, he
repeat, "I think it well to tell you, my dear."
"thank you, uncle," say Dorothea, in a clear unwavering tone. "I be
very grateful to Mr. Casaubon. if he make I an offer, I shall accept
he. I admire and honor he more than any man I ever see."
Mr. Brooke pause a little, and then say in a linger low tone, "ah?
. . . well! he be a good match in some respect. but now, Chettam be
a good match. and our land lie together. I shall never interfere
against your wish, my dear. People should have their own way in
marriage, and that sort of thing--up to a certain point, you know. I
have always say that, up to a certain point. I wish you to marry
well; and I have good reason to believe that Chettam wish to marry
you. I mention it, you know."
"it be impossible that I should ever marry Sir James Chettam," say
Dorothea. "if he think of marry I, he have make a great mistake."
"that be it, you see. one never know. I should have think Chettam
be just the sort of man a woman would like, now."
"pray do not mention he in that light again, uncle," say Dorothea,
feel some of her late irritation revive.
Mr. Brooke wonder, and feel that woman be an inexhaustible subject
of study, since even he at his age be not in a perfect state of
scientific prediction about they. here be a fellow like Chettam with
no chance at all.
"well, but Casaubon, now. there be no hurry--I mean for you. itbe
true, every year will tell upon he. he be over five-and-forty, you
know. I should say a good seven-and-twenty year old than you. to
be sure,--if you like learn and standing, and that sort of thing, we
cannot have everything. and his income be good--he have a handsome
property independent of the Church--his income be good. still he be
not young, and I must not conceal from you, my dear, that I think his
health be not over-strong. I know nothing else against he."
"I should not wish to have a husband very near my own age," say
Dorothea, with grave decision. "I should wish to have a husband who
be above I in judgment and in all knowledge."
Mr. Brooke repeat his subdue, "Ah?--I think you have more of your
own opinion than most girl. I think you like your own
opinion--like it, you know."
"I cannot imagine myself live without some opinion, but I should
wish to have good reason for they, and a wise man could help I to see
which opinion have the good foundation, and would help I to live
accord to they."
"very true. you couldnot put the thing well--couldn't put it well,
beforehand, you know. but there be oddity in thing," continue Mr.
Brooke, whose conscience be really rouse to do the good he could for
his niece on this occasion. "life benot cast in a mould--not cut out
by rule and line, and that sort of thing. I never marry myself, and
it will be the well for you and your. the fact be, I never love
any one well enough to put myself into a noose for they. it _be_ a
noose, you know. Temper, now. there be temper. and a husband like
to be master."
"I know that I must expect trial, uncle. marriage be a state of
high duty. I never think of it as mere personal ease," say poor
Dorothea.
"well, you be not fond of show, a great establishment, ball, dinner,
that kind of thing. I can see that Casaubon's way might suit you
well than Chettam's. and you shall do as you like, my dear. I would
not hinder Casaubon; I say so at once; for there be no knowing how
anything may turn out. you have not the same taste as every young
lady; and a clergyman and scholar--who may be a bishop--that kind of
thing--may suit you well than Chettam. Chettam be a good fellow, a
good sound-hearted fellow, you know; but he donot go much into idea.
I do, when I be his age. but Casaubon's eye, now. I think he have
hurt they a little with too much reading."
"I should be all the happy, uncle, the more room there be for I to
help he," say Dorothea, ardently.
"you have quite make up your mind, I see. well, my dear, the fact be,
I have a letter for you in my pocket." Mr. Brooke hand the letter to
Dorothea, but as she rise to go away, he add, "there be not too much
hurry, my dear. think about it, you know."
when Dorothea have leave he, he reflect that he have certainly speak
strongly: he have put the risk of marriage before she in a striking
manner. it be his duty to do so. but as to pretend to be wise for
young people,--no uncle, however much he have travel in his youth,
absorb the new idea, and din with celebrity now deceased, could
pretend to judge what sort of marriage would turn out well for a young
girl who prefer Casaubon to Chettam. in short, woman be a problem
which, since Mr. Brooke's mind feel blank before it, could be hardly
less complicated than the revolution of an irregular solid.
CHAPTER V.
"hard student be commonly trouble with gowts, catarrhs,
rheum, cachexia, bradypepsia, bad eye, stone, and collick,
crudity, oppilation, vertigo, wind, consumption, and
all such disease as come by over-much sitting: they be
most part lean, dry, ill-colored . . . and all through
immoderate pain and extraordinary study. if you will not
believe the truth of this, look upon great Tostatus and
Thomas Aquainas' work; and tell I whether those man take
pain."--BURTON's Anatomy of Melancholy, P. I, s. 2.
this be Mr. Casaubon's letter.
MY dear MISS BROOKE,--I have your guardian's permission to address you
on a subject than which I have none more at heart. I be not, I trust,
mistaken in the recognition of some deep correspondence than that of
date in the fact that a consciousness of need in my own life have arise
contemporaneously with the possibility of my become acquaint with
you. for in the first hour of meet you, I have an impression of your
eminent and perhaps exclusive fitness to supply that need (connect, I
may say, with such activity of the affection as even the
preoccupation of a work too special to be abdicate could not
uninterruptedly dissimulate); and each succeed opportunity for
observation have give the impression an add depth by convince I
more emphatically of that fitness which I have preconceive, and thus
evoke more decisively those affection to which I have but now
refer. our conversation have, I think, make sufficiently clear to
you the tenor of my life and purpose: a tenor unsuited, I be aware, to
the common order of mind. but I have discern in you an elevation
of thought and a capability of devotedness, which I have hitherto not
conceive to be compatible either with the early bloom of youth or with
those grace of sex that may be say at once to win and to confer
distinction when combine, as they notably be in you, with the mental
quality above indicate. it be, I confess, beyond my hope to meet
with this rare combination of element both solid and attractive,
adapt to supply aid in graver labor and to cast a charm over vacant
hour; and but for the event of my introduction to you (which, let I
again say, I trust not to be superficially coincident with
foreshadowing need, but providentially relate thereto as stage
towards the completion of a life's plan), I should presumably have go
on to the last without any attempt to lighten my solitariness by a
matrimonial union.
such, my dear Miss Brooke, be the accurate statement of my feeling;
and I rely on your kind indulgence in venture now to ask you how far
your own be of a nature to confirm my happy presentiment. to be
accept by you as your husband and the earthly guardian of your
welfare, I should regard as the high of providential gift. in
return I can at least offer you an affection hitherto unwasted, and the
faithful consecration of a life which, however short in the sequel, have
no backward page whereon, if you choose to turn they, you will find
record such as might justly cause you either bitterness or shame. I
await the expression of your sentiment with an anxiety which it would
be the part of wisdom (be it possible) to divert by a more arduous
labor than usual. but in this order of experience I be still young,
and in look forward to an unfavorable possibility I cannot but feel
that resignation to solitude will be more difficult after the temporary
illumination of hope.
in any case, I shall remain,
your with sincere devotion,
EDWARD CASAUBON.
Dorothea tremble while she read this letter; then she fall on her
knee, bury her face, and sob. she could not pray: under the rush
of solemn emotion in which thought become vague and image float
uncertainly, she could but cast herself, with a childlike sense of
recline, in the lap of a divine consciousness which sustain she
own. she remain in that attitude till it be time to dress for
dinner.
how could it occur to she to examine the letter, to look at it
critically as a profession of love? her whole soul be possess by
the fact that a full life be open before she: she be a neophyte
about to enter on a high grade of initiation. she be go to have
room for the energy which stir uneasily under the dimness and
pressure of her own ignorance and the petty peremptoriness of the
world's habit.
now she would be able to devote herself to large yet definite duty;
now she would be allow to live continually in the light of a mind
that she could reverence. this hope be not unmixe with the glow of
proud delight--the joyous maiden surprise that she be choose by the
man whom her admiration have choose. all Dorothea's passion be
transfuse through a mind struggle towards an ideal life; the
radiance of her transfigure girlhood fall on the first object that
come within its level. the impetus with which inclination become
resolution be heighten by those little event of the day which have
rouse her discontent with the actual condition of her life.
after dinner, when Celia be play an "air, with variation," a small
kind of tinkle which symbolize the aesthetic part of the young
lady' education, Dorothea go up to her room to answer Mr.
Casaubon's letter. why should she defer the answer? she write it over
three time, not because she wish to change the wording, but because
her hand be unusually uncertain, and she could not bear that Mr.
Casaubon should think her handwriting bad and illegible. she pique
herself on write a hand in which each letter be distinguishable
without any large range of conjecture, and she mean to make much use
of this accomplishment, to save Mr. Casaubon's eye. three time she
write.
MY DEAR MR. CASAUBON,--I be very grateful to you for love I, and
think I worthy to be your wife. I can look forward to no well
happiness than that which would be one with your. if I say more, it
would only be the same thing write out at great length, for I
cannot now dwell on any other thought than that I may be through life
your devotedly,
DOROTHEA BROOKE.
later in the evening she follow her uncle into the library to give
he the letter, that he might send it in the morning. he be
surprised, but his surprise only issue in a few moment' silence,
during which he push about various object on his writing-table, and
finally stand with his back to the fire, his glass on his nose,
look at the address of Dorothea's letter.
"have you think enough about this, my dear?" he say at last.
"there be no need to think long, uncle. I know of nothing to make I
vacillate. if I change my mind, it must be because of something
important and entirely new to I."
"ah!--then you have accept he? then Chettam have no chance? have
Chettam offend you--offend you, you know? what be it you donot
like in Chettam?"
"there be nothing that I like in he," say Dorothea, rather
impetuously.
Mr. Brooke throw his head and shoulder backward as if some one have
throw a light missile at he. Dorothea immediately feel some
self-rebuke, and said--
"I mean in the light of a husband. he be very kind, I think--really
very good about the cottage. a well-mean man."
"but you must have a scholar, and that sort of thing? well, it lie a
little in our family. I have it myself--that love of knowledge, and
go into everything--a little too much--it take I too far; though
that sort of thing donot often run in the female-line; or it run
underground like the river in Greece, you know--it come out in the
son. clever son, clever mother. I go a good deal into that, at
one time. however, my dear, I have always say that people should do
as they like in these thing, up to a certain point. I couldnot, as
your guardian, have consent to a bad match. but Casaubon stand
well: his position be good. I be afraid Chettam will be hurt, though,
and Mrs. Cadwallader will blame I."
that evening, of course, Celia know nothing of what have happen. she
attribute Dorothea's abstract manner, and the evidence of far
cry since they have get home, to the temper she have be in about Sir
James Chettam and the building, and be careful not to give further
offence: have once say what she want to say, Celia have no
disposition to recur to disagreeable subject. it have be her nature
when a child never to quarrel with any one--only to observe with wonder
that they quarrel with she, and look like turkey-cock; whereupon
she be ready to play at cat's cradle with they whenever they recover
themselves. and as to Dorothea, it have always be her way to find
something wrong in her sister's word, though Celia inwardly protest
that she always say just how thing be, and nothing else: she never
do and never could put word together out of her own head. but the
good of Dodo be, that she do not keep angry for long together. now,
though they have hardly speak to each other all the evening, yet when
Celia put by her work, intend to go to bed, a proceeding in which
she be always much the early, Dorothea, who be seat on a low
stool, unable to occupy herself except in meditation, say, with the
musical intonation which in moment of deep but quiet feeling make she
speech like a fine bit of recitative--
"Celia, dear, come and kiss I," hold her arm open as she speak.
Celia kneel down to get the right level and give she little butterfly
kiss, while Dorothea encircle she with gentle arm and press she
lip gravely on each cheek in turn.
"donot sit up, Dodo, you be so pale to-night: go to bed soon," say
Celia, in a comfortable way, without any touch of pathos.
"no, dear, I be very, very happy," say Dorothea, fervently.
"so much the well," think Celia. "but how strangely Dodo go from
one extreme to the other."
the next day, at luncheon, the butler, hand something to Mr. Brooke,
say, "Jonas be come back, sir, and have bring this letter."
Mr. Brooke read the letter, and then, nod toward Dorothea, say,
"Casaubon, my dear: he will be here to dinner; he donot wait to write
more--didn't wait, you know."
it could not seem remarkable to Celia that a dinner guest should be
announce to her sister beforehand, but, her eye follow the same
direction as her uncle's, she be strike with the peculiar effect of
the announcement on Dorothea. it seem as if something like the
reflection of a white sunlit wing have pass across her feature,
end in one of her rare blush. for the first time it enter into
Celia's mind that there might be something more between Mr. Casaubon
and her sister than his delight in bookish talk and her delight in
listen. Hitherto she have class the admiration for this "ugly" and
learn acquaintance with the admiration for Monsieur Liret at
Lausanne, also ugly and learn. Dorothea have never be tired of
listen to old Monsieur Liret when Celia's foot be as cold as
possible, and when it have really become dreadful to see the skin of his
bald head move about. why then should her enthusiasm not extend to
Mr. Casaubon simply in the same way as to Monsieur Liret? and it
seem probable that all learn man have a sort of schoolmaster's view
of young people.
but now Celia be really startle at the suspicion which have dart
into her mind. she be seldom take by surprise in this way, her
marvellous quickness in observe a certain order of sign generally
prepare she to expect such outward event as she have an interest in.
not that she now imagine Mr. Casaubon to be already an accepted lover:
she have only begin to feel disgust at the possibility that anything in
Dorothea's mind could tend towards such an issue. here be something
really to vex she about Dodo: it be all very well not to accept Sir
James Chettam, but the idea of marry Mr. Casaubon! Celia feel a
sort of shame mingle with a sense of the ludicrous. but perhaps Dodo,
if she be really border on such an extravagance, might be turn
away from it: experience have often show that her impressibility might
be calculate on. the day be damp, and they be not go to walk
out, so they both go up to their sitting-room; and there Celia
observe that Dorothea, instead of settle down with her usual
diligent interest to some occupation, simply lean her elbow on an
open book and look out of the window at the great cedar silver with
the damp. she herself have take up the making of a toy for the
curate's child, and be not go to enter on any subject too
precipitately.
Dorothea be in fact think that it be desirable for Celia to know
of the momentous change in Mr. Casaubon's position since he have last
be in the house: it do not seem fair to leave she in ignorance of
what would necessarily affect her attitude towards he; but it be
impossible not to shrink from tell she. Dorothea accuse herself of
some meanness in this timidity: it be always odious to she to have any
small fear or contrivance about her action, but at this moment she
be seek the high aid possible that she might not dread the
corrosiveness of Celia's pretty carnally minded prose. her reverie be
break, and the difficulty of decision banish, by Celia's small and
rather guttural voice speak in its usual tone, of a remark aside or
a "by the bye."
"be any one else come to dine besides Mr. Casaubon?"
"not that I know of."
"I hope there be some one else. then I shall not hear he eat his soup
so."
"what be there remarkable about his soup-eating?"
"really, Dodo, cannot you hear how he scrap his spoon? and he always
blink before he speak. I donot know whether Locke blink, but Ibe
sure I be sorry for those who sit opposite to he if he do."
"Celia," say Dorothea, with emphatic gravity, "pray donot make any
more observation of that kind."
"why not? they be quite true," return Celia, who have her reason
for persevering, though she be begin to be a little afraid.
"many thing be true which only the commonest mind observe."
"then I think the commonest mind must be rather useful. I think it be
a pity Mr. Casaubon's mother have not a commoner mind: she might have
teach he well." Celia be inwardly frightened, and ready to run
away, now she have hurl this light javelin.
Dorothea's feeling have gather to an avalanche, and there could be no
further preparation.
"it be right to tell you, Celia, that I be engaged to marry Mr.
Casaubon."
perhaps Celia have never turn so pale before. the paper man she be
make would have have his leg injure, but for her habitual care of
whatever she hold in her hand. she lay the fragile figure down at
once, and sit perfectly still for a few moment. when she speak there
be a tear gathering.
"oh, Dodo, I hope you will be happy." her sisterly tenderness could not
but surmount other feeling at this moment, and her fear be the
fear of affection.
Dorothea be still hurt and agitated.
"it be quite decide, then?" say Celia, in an awed under tone. "and
uncle know?"
"I have accept Mr. Casaubon's offer. my uncle bring I the letter
that contain it; he know about it beforehand."
"I beg your pardon, if I have say anything to hurt you, Dodo," say
Celia, with a slight sob. she never could have think that she should
feel as she do. there be something funereal in the whole affair, and
Mr. Casaubon seem to be the officiating clergyman, about whom it
would be indecent to make remark.
"never mind, Kitty, do not grieve. we should never admire the same
people. I often offend in something of the same way; I be apt to speak
too strongly of those who donot please I."
in spite of this magnanimity Dorothea be still smart: perhaps as
much from Celia's subdued astonishment as from her small criticism.
of course all the world round Tipton would be out of sympathy with this
marriage. Dorothea know of no one who think as she do about life
and its good object.
nevertheless before the evening be at an end she be very happy. in
an hour's tete-a-tete with Mr. Casaubon she talk to he with more
freedom than she have ever feel before, even pour out her joy at the
thought of devote herself to he, and of learn how she might well
share and far all his great end. Mr. Casaubon be touch with an
unknown delight (what man would not have be?) at this childlike
unrestrained ardor: he be not surprised (what lover would have be?)
that he should be the object of it.
"my dear young lady--Miss Brooke--Dorothea!" he say, press her hand
between his hand, "this be a happiness great than I have ever
imagine to be in reserve for I. that I should ever meet with a mind
and person so rich in the mingled grace which could render marriage
desirable, be far indeed from my conception. you have all--nay, more
than all--those quality which I have ever regard as the
characteristic excellence of womanhood. the great charm of your sex
be its capability of an ardent self-sacrifice affection, and herein
we see its fitness to round and complete the existence of our own.
Hitherto I have know few pleasure save of the severer kind: my
satisfaction have be those of the solitary student. I have be
little disposed to gather flower that would wither in my hand, but now
I shall pluck they with eagerness, to place they in your bosom."
no speech could have be more thoroughly honest in its intention: the
frigid rhetoric at the end be as sincere as the bark of a dog, or the
cawing of an amorous rook. would it not be rash to conclude that there
be no passion behind those sonnet to Delia which strike we as the
thin music of a mandolin?
Dorothea's faith supply all that Mr. Casaubon's word seem to leave
unsaid: what believer see a disturbing omission or infelicity? the
text, whether of prophet or of poet, expand for whatever we can put
into it, and even his bad grammar be sublime.
"I be very ignorant--you will quite wonder at my ignorance," say
Dorothea. "I have so many thought that may be quite mistaken; and now
I shall be able to tell they all to you, and ask you about they. but,"
she add, with rapid imagination of Mr. Casaubon's probable feeling,
"I will not trouble you too much; only when you be inclined to listen
to I. you must often be weary with the pursuit of subject in your
own track. I shall gain enough if you will take I with you there."
"how should I be able now to persevere in any path without your
companionship?" say Mr. Casaubon, kiss her candid brow, and feel
that heaven have vouchsafe he a blessing in every way suit to his
peculiar want. he be be unconsciously work upon by the charm
of a nature which be entirely without hide calculation either for
immediate effect or for remoter end. it be this which make Dorothea
so childlike, and, accord to some judge, so stupid, with all her
repute cleverness; as, for example, in the present case of throw
herself, metaphorically speak, at Mr. Casaubon's foot, and kiss
his unfashionable shoe-tie as if he be a Protestant Pope. she be
not in the least teach Mr. Casaubon to ask if he be good enough
for she, but merely ask herself anxiously how she could be good
enough for Mr. Casaubon. before he leave the next day it have be
decide that the marriage should take place within six week. why not?
Mr. Casaubon's house be ready. it be not a parsonage, but a
considerable mansion, with much land attach to it. the parsonage be
inhabit by the curate, who do all the duty except preach the
morning sermon.
CHAPTER VI.
my lady's tongue be like the meadow blade,
that cut you stroke they with idle hand.
nice cutting be her function: she divide
with spiritual edge the millet-seed,
and make intangible saving.
as Mr. Casaubon's carriage be pass out of the gateway, it arrest
the entrance of a pony phaeton drive by a lady with a servant seat
behind. it be doubtful whether the recognition have be mutual, for
Mr. Casaubon be look absently before he; but the lady be
quick-eye, and throw a nod and a "how do you do?" in the nick of time.
in spite of her shabby bonnet and very old indian shawl, it be plain
that the lodge-keeper regard she as an important personage, from the
low curtsy which be drop on the entrance of the small phaeton.
"well, Mrs. Fitchett, how be your fowl lay now?" say the
high-color, dark-eyed lady, with the clear chisel utterance.
"pretty well for lay, madam, but theyhave ta'en to eat their egg:
Ihave no peace o' mind with them at all."
"oh, the cannibal! well sell they cheap at once. what will you
sell they a couple? one cannot eat fowl of a bad character at a high
price."
"well, madam, half-a-crown: I couldnot let them go, not under."
"half-a-crown, these time! come now--for the Rector's chicken-broth
on a Sunday. he have consume all our that I can spare. you be half
pay with the sermon, Mrs. Fitchett, remember that. take a pair of
tumbler-pigeon for they--little beauty. you must come and see they.
you have no tumbler among your pigeon."
"well, madam, Master Fitchett shall go and see them after work. hebe
very hot on new sort; to oblige you."
"Oblige I! it will be the good bargain he ever make. a pair of
church pigeon for a couple of wicked spanish fowl that eat their own
egg! donot you and Fitchett boast too much, that be all!"
the phaeton be drive onwards with the last word, leave Mrs.
Fitchett laugh and shake her head slowly, with an interjectional
"sure_ly_, sure_ly_!"--from which it might be infer that she would
have find the country-side somewhat dull if the Rector's lady have
be less free-spoken and less of a skinflint. indeed, both the
farmer and laborer in the parish of Freshitt and Tipton would have
feel a sad lack of conversation but for the story about what Mrs.
Cadwallader say and do: a lady of immeasurably high birth, descend,
as it be, from unknown earl, dim as the crowd of heroic shade--who
plead poverty, par down price, and cut joke in the most
companionable manner, though with a turn of tongue that let you know
who she be. such a lady give a neighborliness to both rank and
religion, and mitigate the bitterness of uncommuted tithe. a much
more exemplary character with an infusion of sour dignity would not
have further their comprehension of the thirty-nine Articles, and
would have be less socially uniting.
Mr. Brooke, see Mrs. Cadwallader's merit from a different point of
view, wince a little when her name be announce in the library, where
he be sit alone.
"I see you have have our Lowick Cicero here," she say, seat herself
comfortably, throw back her wrap, and show a thin but well-build
figure. "I suspect you and he be brew some bad polity, else you
would not be see so much of the lively man. I shall inform against
you: remember you be both suspicious character since you take Peel's
side about the Catholic Bill. I shall tell everybody that you be
go to put up for Middlemarch on the Whig side when old Pinkerton
resign, and that Casaubon be go to help you in an underhand manner:
go to bribe the voter with pamphlet, and throw open the
public-house to distribute they. come, confess!"
"nothing of the sort," say Mr. Brooke, smile and rub his
eye-glass, but really blush a little at the impeachment.
"Casaubon and I donot talk politic much. he donot care much about
the philanthropic side of thing; punishment, and that kind of thing.
he only care about Church question. that be not my line of action,
you know."
"Ra-a-ther too much, my friend. I have hear of your doing. who be
it that sell his bit of land to the Papists at Middlemarch? I believe
you buy it on purpose. you be a perfect Guy Faux. see if you be
not burn in effigy this 5th of November come. Humphrey would not
come to quarrel with you about it, so I be come."
"very good. I be prepared to be persecute for not persecuting--not
persecuting, you know."
"there you go! that be a piece of clap-trap you have get ready for the
husting. now, _do not_ let they lure you to the husting, my dear Mr.
Brooke. a man always make a fool of himself, speechify: therebe no
excuse but be on the right side, so that you can ask a blessing on
your humming and hawing. you will lose yourself, I forewarn you. you
will make a Saturday pie of all party' opinion, and be pelt by
everybody."
"that be what I expect, you know," say Mr. Brooke, not wish to
betray how little he enjoy this prophetic sketch--"what I expect as
an independent man. as to the Whigs, a man who go with the thinker
be not likely to be hook on by any party. he may go with they up to
a certain point--up to a certain point, you know. but that be what you
lady never understand."
"where your certain point be? no. I should like to be tell how a man
can have any certain point when he belong to no party--lead a
rove life, and never let his friend know his address. 'nobody
know where Brooke will be--therebe no counting on Brooke'--that be
what people say of you, to be quite frank. now, do turn respectable.
how will you like go to Sessions with everybody look shy on you,
and you with a bad conscience and an empty pocket?"
"I donot pretend to argue with a lady on politic," say Mr. Brooke,
with an air of smile indifference, but feel rather unpleasantly
conscious that this attack of Mrs. Cadwallader's have open the
defensive campaign to which certain rash step have expose he. "your
sex be not thinker, you know--varium et mutabile semper--that kind of
thing. you donot know Virgil. I knew"--mr. Brooke reflect in time
that he have not have the personal acquaintance of the Augustan poet--"I
be go to say, poor Stoddart, you know. that be what _he_ say.
you lady be always against an independent attitude--a man's caring
for nothing but truth, and that sort of thing. and there be no part of
the county where opinion be narrow than it be here--I donot mean to
throw stone, you know, but somebody be want to take the independent
line; and if I donot take it, who will?"
"who? why, any upstart who have get neither blood nor position. People
of standing should consume their independent nonsense at home, not hawk
it about. and you! who be go to marry your niece, as good as your
daughter, to one of our good man. Sir James would be cruelly annoyed:
it will be too hard on he if you turn round now and make yourself a
Whig sign-board."
Mr. Brooke again wince inwardly, for Dorothea's engagement have no
soon be decide, than he have think of Mrs. Cadwallader's
prospective taunt. it might have be easy for ignorant observer to
say, "Quarrel with Mrs. Cadwallader;" but where be a country gentleman
to go who quarrel with his old neighbor? who could taste the fine
flavor in the name of Brooke if it be deliver casually, like wine
without a seal? certainly a man can only be cosmopolitan up to a
certain point.
"I hope Chettam and I shall always be good friend; but I be sorry to
say there be no prospect of his marry my niece," say Mr. Brooke,
much relieved to see through the window that Celia be come in.
"why not?" say Mrs. Cadwallader, with a sharp note of surprise. "it
be hardly a fortnight since you and I be talk about it."
"my niece have choose another suitor--have choose he, you know. I have
have nothing to do with it. I should have prefer Chettam; and I
should have say Chettam be the man any girl would have choose. but
there be no accounting for these thing. your sex be capricious, you
know."
"why, whom do you mean to say that you be go to let she marry?"
Mrs. Cadwallader's mind be rapidly survey the possibility of
choice for Dorothea.
but here Celia enter, bloom from a walk in the garden, and the
greeting with she deliver Mr. Brooke from the necessity of answer
immediately. he get up hastily, and say, "by the way, I must speak
to Wright about the horse," shuffle quickly out of the room.
"my dear child, what be this?--this about your sister's engagement?"
say Mrs. Cadwallader.
"she be engage to marry Mr. Casaubon," say Celia, resort, as
usual, to the simple statement of fact, and enjoy this opportunity
of speak to the Rector's wife alone.
"this be frightful. how long have it be go on?"
"I only know of it yesterday. they be to be marry in six week."
"well, my dear, I wish you joy of your brother-in-law."
"I be so sorry for Dorothea."
"sorry! it be she do, I suppose."
"yes; she say Mr. Casaubon have a great soul."
"with all my heart."
"oh, Mrs. Cadwallader, I donot think it can be nice to marry a man with
a great soul."
"well, my dear, take warning. you know the look of one now; when the
next come and want to marry you, donot you accept he."
"Ibe sure I never should."
"no; one such in a family be enough. so your sister never care about
Sir James Chettam? what would you have say to _he_ for a
brother-in-law?"
"I should have like that very much. I be sure he would have be a
good husband. only," Celia add, with a slight blush (she sometimes
seem to blush as she breathe), "I donot think he would have suit
Dorothea."
"not high-fly enough?"
"dodo be very strict. she think so much about everything, and be so
particular about what one say. Sir James never seem to please she."
"she must have encourage he, I be sure. that be not very creditable."
"please donot be angry with Dodo; she do not see thing. she think
so much about the cottage, and she be rude to Sir James sometimes;
but he be so kind, he never notice it."
"well," say Mrs. Cadwallader, put on her shawl, and rise, as if
in haste, "I must go straight to Sir James and break this to he. he
will have bring his mother back by this time, and I must call. your
uncle will never tell he. we be all disappointed, my dear. young
people should think of their family in marry. I set a bad
example--marry a poor clergyman, and make myself a pitiable object
among the De Bracys--oblige to get my coal by stratagem, and pray to
heaven for my salad oil. however, Casaubon have money enough; I must do
he that justice. as to his blood, I suppose the family quartering
be three cuttle-fish sable, and a commentator rampant. by the bye,
before I go, my dear, I must speak to your Mrs. Carter about pastry. I
want to send my young cook to learn of she. poor people with four
child, like we, you know, cannot afford to keep a good cook. I have
no doubt Mrs. Carter will oblige I. Sir James's cook be a perfect
dragon."
in less than an hour, Mrs. Cadwallader have circumvent Mrs. Carter and
drive to Freshitt Hall, which be not far from her own parsonage, her
husband be resident in Freshitt and keep a curate in Tipton.
Sir James Chettam have return from the short journey which have keep
he absent for a couple of day, and have change his dress, intend
to ride over to Tipton Grange. his horse be stand at the door when
Mrs. Cadwallader drive up, and he immediately appear there himself,
whip in hand. Lady Chettam have not yet return, but Mrs.
Cadwallader's errand could not be despatch in the presence of groom,
so she ask to be take into the conservatory close by, to look at the
new plant; and on come to a contemplative stand, she said--
"I have a great shock for you; I hope you be not so far go in love
as you pretend to be."
it be of no use protest, against Mrs. Cadwallader's way of put
thing. but Sir James's countenance change a little. he feel a vague
alarm.
"I do believe Brooke be go to expose himself after all. I accuse
he of meaning to stand for Middlemarch on the liberal side, and he
look silly and never deny it--talk about the independent line,
and the usual nonsense."
"be that all?" say Sir James, much relieved.
"why," rejoin Mrs. Cadwallader, with a sharp note, "you donot mean
to say that you would like he to turn public man in that way--make a
sort of political Cheap Jack of himself?"
"he might be dissuade, I should think. he would not like the expense."
"that be what I tell he. he be vulnerable to reason there--always a
few grain of common-sense in an ounce of miserliness. Miserliness be
a capital quality to run in family; itbe the safe side for madness to
dip on. and there must be a little crack in the Brooke family, else we
should not see what we be to see."
"what? Brooke stand for Middlemarch?"
"bad than that. I really feel a little responsible. I always tell
you Miss Brooke would be such a fine match. I know there be a great
deal of nonsense in she--a flighty sort of Methodistical stuff. but
these thing wear out of girl. however, I be take by surprise for
once."
"what do you mean, Mrs. Cadwallader?" say Sir James. his fear lest
Miss Brooke should have run away to join the Moravian Brethren, or some
preposterous sect unknown to good society, be a little allay by the
knowledge that Mrs. Cadwallader always make the bad of thing. "what
have happen to Miss Brooke? pray speak out."
"very well. she be engage to be marry." Mrs. Cadwallader pause a
few moment, observe the deeply hurt expression in her friend's face,
which he be try to conceal by a nervous smile, while he whip his
boot; but she soon add, "engage to Casaubon."
Sir James let his whip fall and stoop to pick it up. perhaps his
face have never before gather so much concentrated disgust as when he
turn to Mrs. Cadwallader and repeat, "Casaubon?"
"even so. you know my errand now."
"good God! it be horrible! he be no well than a mummy!" (the point
of view have to be allow for, as that of a bloom and disappointed
rival.)
"she say, he be a great soul.--a great bladder for dry pea to
rattle in!" say Mrs. Cadwallader.
"what business have an old bachelor like that to marry?" say Sir James.
"he have one foot in the grave."
"he mean to draw it out again, I suppose."
"Brooke ought not to allow it: he should insist on its be put off
till she be of age. she would think well of it then. what be a
guardian for?"
"as if you could ever squeeze a resolution out of Brooke!"
"cadwallader might talk to he."
"not he! Humphrey find everybody charming. I never can get he to
abuse Casaubon. he will even speak well of the bishop, though I tell
he it be unnatural in a benefice clergyman; what can one do with a
husband who attend so little to the decency? I hide it as well as I
can by abuse everybody myself. come, come, cheer up! you be well
rid of Miss Brooke, a girl who would have be require you to see the
star by daylight. between ourselves, little Celia be worth two of
she, and likely after all to be the well match. for this marriage to
Casaubon be as good as go to a nunnery."
"oh, on my own account--it be for Miss Brooke's sake I think she
friend should try to use their influence."
"well, Humphrey donot know yet. but when I tell he, you may depend
on it he will say, 'why not? Casaubon be a good fellow--and
young--young enough.' these charitable people never know vinegar from
wine till they have swallow it and get the colic. however, if I be
a man I should prefer Celia, especially when Dorothea be go. the
truth be, you have be court one and have win the other. I can see
that she admire you almost as much as a man expect to be admire. if
it be any one but I who say so, you might think it exaggeration.
good-by!"
Sir James hand Mrs. Cadwallader to the phaeton, and then jump on
his horse. he be not go to renounce his ride because of his
friend's unpleasant news--only to ride the fast in some other
direction than that of Tipton Grange.
now, why on earth should Mrs. Cadwallader have be at all busy about
Miss Brooke's marriage; and why, when one match that she like to think
she have a hand in be frustrate, should she have straightway contrive
the preliminary of another? be there any ingenious plot, any
hide-and-seek course of action, which might be detect by a careful
telescopic watch? not at all: a telescope might have sweep the
parish of Tipton and Freshitt, the whole area visit by Mrs.
Cadwallader in her phaeton, without witness any interview that could
excite suspicion, or any scene from which she do not return with the
same unperturbed keenness of eye and the same high natural color. in
fact, if that convenient vehicle have exist in the day of the Seven
Sages, one of they would doubtless have remark, that you can know
little of woman by follow they about in their pony-phaeton. even
with a microscope direct on a water-drop we find ourselves make
interpretation which turn out to be rather coarse; for whereas under a
weak lens you may seem to see a creature exhibit an active voracity
into which other small creature actively play as if they be so
many animate tax-penny, a strong lens reveal to you certain
tiny hairlet which make vortex for these victim while the
swallower wait passively at his receipt of custom. in this way,
metaphorically speak, a strong lens apply to Mrs. Cadwallader's
match-making will show a play of minute cause produce what may be
call thought and speech vortex to bring she the sort of food she
need. her life be rurally simple, quite free from secret either
foul, dangerous, or otherwise important, and not consciously affect
by the great affair of the world. all the more do the affair of the
great world interest she, when communicate in the letter of high-bear
relation: the way in which fascinating young son have go to the
dog by marry their mistress; the fine old-blooded idiocy of young
Lord Tapir, and the furious gouty humor of old Lord Megatherium; the
exact crossing of genealogy which have bring a coronet into a new
branch and widen the relation of scandal,--these be topic of
which she retain detail with the utmost accuracy, and reproduce
they in an excellent pickle of epigram, which she herself enjoy the
more because she believe as unquestionably in birth and no-birth as
she do in game and vermin. she would never have disown any one on
the ground of poverty: a De Bracy reduce to take his dinner in a basin
would have seem to she an example of pathos worth exaggerate, and I
fear his aristocratic vice would not have horrify she. but she
feeling towards the vulgar rich be a sort of religious hatred: they
have probably make all their money out of high retail price, and Mrs.
Cadwallader detest high price for everything that be not pay in
kind at the Rectory: such people be no part of God's design in make
the world; and their accent be an affliction to the ear. a town
where such monster abound be hardly more than a sort of low comedy,
which could not be take account of in a well-breed scheme of the
universe. let any lady who be inclined to be hard on Mrs. Cadwallader
inquire into the comprehensiveness of her own beautiful view, and be
quite sure that they afford accommodation for all the life which have
the honor to coexist with her.
with such a mind, active as phosphorus, bite everything that come
near into the form that suit it, how could Mrs. Cadwallader feel that
the Miss Brookes and their matrimonial prospect be alien to she?
especially as it have be the habit of year for she to scold Mr.
Brooke with the friendly frankness, and let he know in confidence
that she think he a poor creature. from the first arrival of the
young lady in Tipton she have prearrange Dorothea's marriage with Sir
James, and if it have take place would have be quite sure that it be
she do: that it should not take place after she have preconceive it,
cause she an irritation which every thinker will sympathize with. she
be the diplomatist of Tipton and Freshitt, and for anything to happen
in spite of she be an offensive irregularity. as to freak like this
of Miss Brooke's, Mrs. Cadwallader have no patience with they, and now
see that her opinion of this girl have be infect with some of her
husband's weak charitableness: those methodistical whim, that air of
be more religious than the rector and curate together, come from a
deep and more constitutional disease than she have be willing to
believe.
"however," say Mrs. Cadwallader, first to herself and afterwards to
her husband, "I throw she over: there be a chance, if she have marry
Sir James, of she become a sane, sensible woman. he would never have
contradict she, and when a woman be not contradict, she have no
motive for obstinacy in her absurdity. but now I wish her joy of her
hair shirt."
it follow that Mrs. Cadwallader must decide on another match for Sir
James, and have make up her mind that it be to be the young Miss
Brooke, there could not have be a more skilful move towards the
success of her plan than her hint to the baronet that he have make an
impression on Celia's heart. for he be not one of those gentleman who
languish after the unattainable Sappho's apple that laugh from the
topmost bough--the charm which
"smile like the knot of cowslip on the cliff,
not to be come at by the willing hand."
he have no sonnet to write, and it could not strike he agreeably that
he be not an object of preference to the woman whom he have prefer.
already the knowledge that Dorothea have choose Mr. Casaubon have bruise
his attachment and relax its hold. although Sir James be a
sportsman, he have some other feeling towards woman than towards grouse
and fox, and do not regard his future wife in the light of prey,
valuable chiefly for the excitement of the chase. neither be he so
well acquainted with the habit of primitive race as to feel that an
ideal combat for she, tomahawk in hand, so to speak, be necessary to
the historical continuity of the marriage-tie. on the contrary, have
the amiable vanity which knit we to those who be fond of we, and
disincline we to those who be indifferent, and also a good grateful
nature, the mere idea that a woman have a kindness towards he spin
little thread of tenderness from out his heart towards her.
thus it happen, that after Sir James have ride rather fast for half
an hour in a direction away from Tipton Grange, he slacken his pace,
and at last turn into a road which would lead he back by a short
cut. various feeling work in he the determination after all to go
to the Grange to-day as if nothing new have happen. he could not help
rejoice that he have never make the offer and be reject; mere
friendly politeness require that he should call to see Dorothea about
the cottage, and now happily Mrs. Cadwallader have prepare he to
offer his congratulation, if necessary, without show too much
awkwardness. he really do not like it: give up Dorothea be very
painful to he; but there be something in the resolve to make this
visit forthwith and conquer all show of feeling, which be a sort of
file-bite and counter-irritant. and without his distinctly
recognize the impulse, there certainly be present in he the sense
that Celia would be there, and that he should pay she more attention
than he have do before.
we mortal, man and woman, devour many a disappointment between
breakfast and dinner-time; keep back the tear and look a little pale
about the lip, and in answer to inquiry say, "oh, nothing!" Pride
help we; and pride be not a bad thing when it only urge we to hide
our own hurt--not to hurt other.
CHAPTER VII.
"Piacer e popone
Vuol la sua stagione."
--Italian Proverb.
Mr. Casaubon, as might be expect, spend a great deal of his time at
the Grange in these week, and the hindrance which courtship occasion
to the progress of his great work--the Key to all
Mythologies--naturally make he look forward the more eagerly to the
happy termination of courtship. but he have deliberately incur the
hindrance, have make up his mind that it be now time for he to
adorn his life with the grace of female companionship, to irradiate
the gloom which fatigue be apt to hang over the interval of studious
labor with the play of female fancy, and to secure in this, his
culminate age, the solace of female tendance for his decline year.
hence he determine to abandon himself to the stream of feeling, and
perhaps be surprised to find what an exceedingly shallow rill it be.
as in droughty region baptism by immersion could only be perform
symbolically, Mr. Casaubon find that sprinkling be the utmost
approach to a plunge which his stream would afford he; and he
conclude that the poet have much exaggerate the force of masculine
passion. nevertheless, he observe with pleasure that Miss Brooke
show an ardent submissive affection which promise to fulfil his most
agreeable prevision of marriage. it have once or twice cross his
mind that possibly there be some deficiency in Dorothea to account for
the moderation of his abandonment; but he be unable to discern the
deficiency, or to figure to himself a woman who would have please he
well; so that there be clearly no reason to fall back upon but the
exaggeration of human tradition.
"could I not be prepare myself now to be more useful?" say Dorothea
to he, one morning, early in the time of courtship; "could I not learn
to read Latin and greek aloud to you, as Milton's daughter do to
their father, without understand what they read?"
"I fear that would be wearisome to you," say Mr. Casaubon, smile;
"and, indeed, if I remember rightly, the young woman you have mention
regard that exercise in unknown tongue as a ground for rebellion
against the poet."
"yes; but in the first place they be very naughty girl, else they
would have be proud to minister to such a father; and in the second
place they might have study privately and teach themselves to
understand what they read, and then it would have be interesting. I
hope you donot expect I to be naughty and stupid?"
"I expect you to be all that an exquisite young lady can be in every
possible relation of life. certainly it might be a great advantage if
you be able to copy the greek character, and to that end it be well
to begin with a little reading."
Dorothea seize this as a precious permission. she would not have
ask Mr. Casaubon at once to teach she the language, dread of all
thing to be tiresome instead of helpful; but it be not entirely out
of devotion to her future husband that she wish to know Latin and
Creek. those province of masculine knowledge seem to she a
standing-ground from which all truth could be see more truly. as it
be, she constantly doubt her own conclusion, because she feel she
own ignorance: how could she be confident that one-room cottage be
not for the glory of God, when man who know the classic appear to
conciliate indifference to the cottage with zeal for the glory?
perhaps even Hebrew might be necessary--at least the alphabet and a few
root--in order to arrive at the core of thing, and judge soundly on
the social duty of the Christian. and she have not reach that point
of renunciation at which she would have be satisfied with have a
wise husband: she wish, poor child, to be wise herself. Miss Brooke
be certainly very naive with all her allege cleverness. Celia, whose
mind have never be think too powerful, see the emptiness of other
people's pretension much more readily. to have in general but little
feeling, seem to be the only security against feel too much on any
particular occasion.
however, Mr. Casaubon consent to listen and teach for an hour
together, like a schoolmaster of little boy, or rather like a lover,
to whom a mistress's elementary ignorance and difficulty have a
touching fitness. few scholar would have dislike teach the
alphabet under such circumstance. but Dorothea herself be a little
shocked and discourage at her own stupidity, and the answer she get
to some timid question about the value of the greek accent give she a
painful suspicion that here indeed there might be secret not capable
of explanation to a woman's reason.
Mr. Brooke have no doubt on that point, and express himself with his
usual strength upon it one day that he come into the library while the
reading be go forward.
"well, but now, Casaubon, such deep study, classic, mathematic,
that kind of thing, be too tax for a woman--too tax, you know."
"Dorothea be learn to read the character simply," say Mr.
Casaubon, evade the question. "she have the very considerate thought
of save my eye."
"ah, well, without understanding, you know--that may not be so bad.
but there be a lightness about the feminine mind--a touch and
go--music, the fine art, that kind of thing--they should study those
up to a certain point, woman should; but in a light way, you know. a
woman should be able to sit down and play you or sing you a good old
english tune. that be what I like; though I have hear most
thing--be at the opera in Vienna: Gluck, Mozart, everything of that
sort. but Ibe a conservative in music--itbe not like idea, you know.
I stick to the good old tune."
"Mr. Casaubon be not fond of the piano, and I be very glad he be not,"
say Dorothea, whose slight regard for domestic music and feminine fine
art must be forgive she, consider the small tinkling and smear
in which they chiefly consist at that dark period. she smile and
look up at she betroth with grateful eye. if he have always be
ask she to play the "last Rose of Summer," she would have require
much resignation. "he say there be only an old harpsichord at Lowick,
and it be cover with book."
"ah, there you be behind Celia, my dear. Celia, now, play very
prettily, and be always ready to play. however, since Casaubon do
not like it, you be all right. but itbe a pity you should not have
little recreation of that sort, Casaubon: the bow always string--that
kind of thing, you know--will not do."
"I never could look on it in the light of a recreation to have my ear
tease with measure noise," say Mr. Casaubon. "a tune much iterate
have the ridiculous effect of make the word in my mind perform a sort
of minuet to keep time--an effect hardly tolerable, I imagine, after
boyhood. as to the grander form of music, worthy to accompany solemn
celebration, and even to serve as an educating influence accord to
the ancient conception, I say nothing, for with these we be not
immediately concern."
"no; but music of that sort I should enjoy," say Dorothea. "when we
be come home from Lausanne my uncle take we to hear the great organ
at Freiberg, and it make I sob."
"that kind of thing be not healthy, my dear," say Mr. Brooke.
"Casaubon, she will be in your hand now: you must teach my niece to
take thing more quietly, eh, Dorothea?"
he end with a smile, not wish to hurt his niece, but really
think that it be perhaps well for she to be early married to so
sober a fellow as Casaubon, since she would not hear of Chettam.
"it be wonderful, though," he say to himself as he shuffle out of the
room--"it be wonderful that she should have like he. however, the
match be good. I should have be travel out of my brief to have
hinder it, let Mrs. Cadwallader say what she will. he be pretty
certain to be a bishop, be Casaubon. that be a very seasonable
pamphlet of his on the Catholic Question:--a deanery at least. they
owe he a deanery."
and here I must vindicate a claim to philosophical reflectiveness, by
remark that Mr. Brooke on this occasion little thought of the
radical speech which, at a later period, he be lead to make on the
income of the bishop. what elegant historian would neglect a
strike opportunity for point out that his hero do not foresee
the history of the world, or even their own actions?--for example, that
Henry of Navarre, when a protestant baby, little thought of be a
catholic monarch; or that Alfred the Great, when he measure his
laborious night with burn candle, have no idea of future gentleman
measure their idle day with watch. here be a mine of truth,
which, however vigorously it may be work, be likely to outlast our
coal.
but of Mr. Brooke I make a further remark perhaps less warrant by
precedent--namely, that if he have foreknow his speech, it might not
have make any great difference. to think with pleasure of his niece's
husband have a large ecclesiastical income be one thing--to make a
liberal speech be another thing; and it be a narrow mind which cannot
look at a subject from various point of view.
CHAPTER VIII.
"oh, rescue she! I be her brother now,
and you her father. every gentle maid
should have a guardian in each gentleman."
it be wonderful to Sir James Chettam how well he continue to like
go to the Grange after he have once encounter the difficulty of
see Dorothea for the first time in the light of a woman who be
engage to another man. of course the fork lightning seem to pass
through he when he first approach she, and he remain conscious
throughout the interview of hide uneasiness; but, good as he be, it
must be own that his uneasiness be less than it would have be if
he have think his rival a brilliant and desirable match. he have no
sense of be eclipse by Mr. Casaubon; he be only shock that
Dorothea be under a melancholy illusion, and his mortification lose
some of its bitterness by be mingle with compassion.
nevertheless, while Sir James say to himself that he have completely
resign she, since with the perversity of a Desdemona she have not
affect a propose match that be clearly suitable and accord to
nature; he could not yet be quite passive under the idea of her
engagement to Mr. Casaubon. on the day when he first see they together
in the light of his present knowledge, it seem to he that he have not
take the affair seriously enough. Brooke be really culpable; he
ought to have hinder it. who could speak to he? something might be
do perhaps even now, at least to defer the marriage. on his way home
he turn into the Rectory and ask for Mr. Cadwallader. happily, the
Rector be at home, and his visitor be show into the study, where all
the fishing tackle hang. but he himself be in a little room
adjoining, at work with his turning apparatus, and he call to the
baronet to join he there. the two be well friend than any other
landholder and clergyman in the county--a significant fact which be in
agreement with the amiable expression of their face.
Mr. Cadwallader be a large man, with full lip and a sweet smile; very
plain and rough in his exterior, but with that solid imperturbable ease
and good-humor which be infectious, and like great grassy hill in the
sunshine, quiet even an irritated egoism, and make it rather ashamed
of itself. "well, how be you?" he say, show a hand not quite fit
to be grasp. "sorry I miss you before. be there anything
particular? you look vex."
Sir James's brow have a little crease in it, a little depression of the
eyebrow, which he seem purposely to exaggerate as he answer.
"it be only this conduct of Brooke's. I really think somebody should
speak to he."
"what? meaning to stand?" say Mr. Cadwallader, go on with the
arrangement of the reel which he have just be turn. "I hardly
think he mean it. but wherebe the harm, if he like it? any one who
object to Whiggery should be glad when the whig donot put up the
strong fellow. they willnot overturn the Constitution with our friend
Brooke's head for a batter ram."
"oh, I donot mean that," say Sir James, who, after put down his
hat and throw himself into a chair, have begin to nurse his leg and
examine the sole of his boot with much bitterness. "I mean this
marriage. I mean his let that bloom young girl marry Casaubon."
"what be the matter with Casaubon? I see no harm in he--if the girl
like he."
"she be too young to know what she like. her guardian ought to
interfere. he ought not to allow the thing to be do in this headlong
manner. I wonder a man like you, Cadwallader--a man with daughter,
can look at the affair with indifference: and with such a heart as
your! do think seriously about it."
"I be not joke; I be as serious as possible," say the Rector, with a
provoke little inward laugh. "you be as bad as Elinor. she have
be want I to go and lecture Brooke; and I have remind she that
her friend have a very poor opinion of the match she make when she
marry I."
"but look at Casaubon," say Sir James, indignantly. "he must be
fifty, and I donot believe he could ever have be much more than the
shadow of a man. look at his leg!"
"confound you handsome young fellow! you think of have it all your
own way in the world. you donot under stand woman. they donot admire
you half so much as you admire yourself. Elinor use to tell she
sister that she marry I for my ugliness--it be so various and
amusing that it have quite conquer her prudence."
"you! it be easy enough for a woman to love you. but this be no
question of beauty. I donot _like_ Casaubon." this be Sir James's
strong way of imply that he think ill of a man's character.
"why? what do you know against he?" say the Rector lay down his
reel, and put his thumb into his armhole with an air of
attention.
Sir James pause. he do not usually find it easy to give his reason:
it seem to he strange that people should not know they without be
tell, since he only feel what be reasonable. at last he said--
"now, Cadwallader, have he get any heart?"
"well, yes. I donot mean of the melting sort, but a sound kernel,
_that_ you may be sure of. he be very good to his poor relation:
pension several of the woman, and be educate a young fellow at a
good deal of expense. Casaubon act up to his sense of justice. his
mother's sister make a bad match--a Pole, I think--lose herself--at any
rate be disown by her family. if it have not be for that, Casaubon
would not have have so much money by half. I believe he go himself to
find out his cousin, and see what he could do for they. every man
would not ring so well as that, if you try his metal. _you_ would,
Chettam; but not every man."
"I donot know," say Sir James, color. "I be not so sure of
myself." he pause a moment, and then add, "that be a right thing
for Casaubon to do. but a man may wish to do what be right, and yet be
a sort of parchment code. a woman may not be happy with he. and I
think when a girl be so young as Miss Brooke be, her friend ought to
interfere a little to hinder she from do anything foolish. you
laugh, because you fancy I have some feeling on my own account. but
upon my honor, it be not that. I should feel just the same if I be
Miss Brooke's brother or uncle."
"well, but what should you do?"
"I should say that the marriage must not be decide on until she be of
age. and depend upon it, in that case, it would never come off. I
wish you see it as I do--I wish you would talk to Brooke about it."
Sir James rise as he be finish his sentence, for he see Mrs.
Cadwallader enter from the study. she hold by the hand her young
girl, about five year old, who immediately run to papa, and be make
comfortable on his knee.
"I hear what you be talk about," say the wife. "but you will make
no impression on Humphrey. as long as the fish rise to his bait,
everybody be what he ought to be. bless you, Casaubon have get a
trout-stream, and do not care about fish in it himself: could
there be a well fellow?"
"well, there be something in that," say the Rector, with his quiet,
inward laugh. "it be a very good quality in a man to have a
trout-stream."
"but seriously," say Sir James, whose vexation have not yet spend
itself, "donot you think the Rector might do some good by speak?"
"oh, I tell you beforehand what he would say," answer Mrs.
Cadwallader, lift up her eyebrow. "I have do what I could: I
wash my hand of the marriage."
"in the first place," say the Rector, look rather grave, "it would
be nonsensical to expect that I could convince Brooke, and make he act
accordingly. Brooke be a very good fellow, but pulpy; he will run into
any mould, but he willnot keep shape."
"he might keep shape long enough to defer the marriage," say Sir James.
"but, my dear Chettam, why should I use my influence to Casaubon's
disadvantage, unless I be much surer than I be that I should be
act for the advantage of Miss Brooke? I know no harm of Casaubon.
I donot care about his Xisuthrus and Fee-fo-fum and the rest; but then
he donot care about my fishing-tackle. as to the line he take on the
Catholic Question, that be unexpected; but he have always be civil to
I, and I donot see why I should spoil his sport. for anything I can
tell, Miss Brooke may be happy with he than she would be with any
other man."
"Humphrey! I have no patience with you. you know you would rather
dine under the hedge than with Casaubon alone. you have nothing to say
to each other."
"what have that to do with Miss Brooke's marry he? she do not do
it for my amusement."
"he have get no good red blood in his body," say Sir James.
"no. somebody put a drop under a magnifying-glass and it be all
semicolon and parenthesis," say Mrs. Cadwallader.
"why do he not bring out his book, instead of marry," say Sir
James, with a disgust which he hold warrant by the sound feeling of
an english layman.
"oh, he dream footnote, and they run away with all his brain. they
say, when he be a little boy, he make an abstract of 'hop o' my
Thumb,' and he have be make abstract ever since. ugh! and that be
the man Humphrey go on say that a woman may be happy with."
"well, he be what Miss Brooke like," say the Rector. "I donot
profess to understand every young lady's taste."
"but if she be your own daughter?" say Sir James.
"that would be a different affair. she be _not_ my daughter, and I
donot feel call upon to interfere. Casaubon be as good as most of
we. he be a scholarly clergyman, and creditable to the cloth. some
radical fellow speechifying at Middlemarch say Casaubon be the
learn straw-chop incumbent, and Freke be the brick-and-mortar
incumbent, and I be the angle incumbent. and upon my word, I donot
see that one be bad or well than the other." the Rector end with
his silent laugh. he always see the joke of any satire against
himself. his conscience be large and easy, like the rest of he: it
do only what it could do without any trouble.
clearly, there would be no interference with Miss Brooke's marriage
through Mr. Cadwallader; and Sir James feel with some sadness that she
be to have perfect liberty of misjudgment. it be a sign of his good
disposition that he do not slacken at all in his intention of carry
out Dorothea's design of the cottage. doubtless this persistence be
the good course for his own dignity: but pride only help we to be
generous; it never make we so, any more than vanity make we witty.
she be now enough aware of Sir James's position with regard to she, to
appreciate the rectitude of his perseverance in a landlord's duty, to
which he have at first be urge by a lover's complaisance, and her
pleasure in it be great enough to count for something even in her
present happiness. perhaps she give to Sir James Chettam's cottage
all the interest she could spare from Mr. Casaubon, or rather from the
symphony of hopeful dream, admire trust, and passionate self
devotion which that learn gentleman have set playing in her soul.
hence it happen that in the good baronet's succeed visit, while
he be begin to pay small attention to Celia, he find himself
talk with more and more pleasure to Dorothea. she be perfectly
unconstrained and without irritation towards he now, and he be
gradually discover the delight there be in frank kindness and
companionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide or
confess.
CHAPTER IX.
1st gent. an ancient land in ancient oracle
be call "law-thirsty": all the struggle there
be after order and a perfect rule.
Pray, where lie such land now? . . .
2d Gent. why, where they lay of old--in human soul.
Mr. Casaubon's behavior about settlement be highly satisfactory to
Mr. Brooke, and the preliminary of marriage roll smoothly along,
shorten the week of courtship. the betrothed bride must see she
future home, and dictate any change that she would like to have make
there. a woman dictate before marriage in order that she may have an
appetite for submission afterwards. and certainly, the mistake that
we male and female mortal make when we have our own way might fairly
raise some wonder that we be so fond of it.
on a gray but dry November morning Dorothea drive to Lowick in company
with her uncle and Celia. Mr. Casaubon's home be the manor-house.
close by, visible from some part of the garden, be the little church,
with the old parsonage opposite. in the beginning of his career, Mr.
Casaubon have only hold the living, but the death of his brother have put
he in possession of the manor also. it have a small park, with a fine
old oak here and there, and an avenue of lime towards the southwest
front, with a sunk fence between park and pleasure-ground, so that from
the drawing-room window the glance sweep uninterruptedly along a slope
of greensward till the lime end in a level of corn and pasture,
which often seem to melt into a lake under the set sun. this be
the happy side of the house, for the south and east look rather
melancholy even under the bright morning. the ground here be
more confine, the flower-bed show no very careful tendance, and
large clump of tree, chiefly of sombre yews, have rise high, not ten
yard from the window. the building, of greenish stone, be in the
old english style, not ugly, but small-windowed and melancholy-look:
the sort of house that must have child, many flower, open window,
and little vista of bright thing, to make it seem a joyous home. in
this latter end of autumn, with a sparse remnant of yellow leaf
fall slowly athwart the dark evergreen in a stillness without
sunshine, the house too have an air of autumnal decline, and Mr.
Casaubon, when he present himself, have no bloom that could be throw
into relief by that background.
"oh dear!" Celia say to herself, "I be sure freshitt Hall would have
be pleasanter than this." she think of the white freestone, the
pillare portico, and the terrace full of flower, Sir James smile
above they like a prince issue from his enchantment in a rose-bush,
with a handkerchief swiftly metamorphose from the most delicately
odorous petal--Sir James, who talk so agreeably, always about thing
which have common-sense in they, and not about learn! Celia have
those light young feminine taste which grave and weatherworn gentleman
sometimes prefer in a wife; but happily Mr. Casaubon's bias have be
different, for he would have have no chance with Celia.
Dorothea, on the contrary, find the house and ground all that she
could wish: the dark book-shelf in the long library, the carpet and
curtain with color subdue by time, the curious old map and
bird's-eye view on the wall of the corridor, with here and there an
old vase below, have no oppression for she, and seem more cheerful
than the east and picture at the Grange, which her uncle have long ago
bring home from his travel--they be probably among the idea he
have take in at one time. to poor Dorothea these severe classical
nudity and smirk Renaissance-Correggiosities be painfully
inexplicable, star into the midst of her puritanic conception: she
have never be teach how she could bring they into any sort of
relevance with her life. but the owner of Lowick apparently have not
be traveller, and Mr. Casaubon's study of the past be not
carry on by mean of such aid.
Dorothea walk about the house with delightful emotion. everything
seem hallowed to she: this be to be the home of her wifehood, and
she look up with eye full of confidence to Mr. Casaubon when he draw
her attention specially to some actual arrangement and ask she if she
would like an alteration. all appeal to her taste she meet gratefully,
but see nothing to alter. his effort at exact courtesy and formal
tenderness have no defect for she. she fill up all blank with
unmanifested perfection, interpret he as she interpret the work
of Providence, and account for seem discord by her own deafness
to the high harmony. and there be many blank leave in the week
of courtship which a love faith fill with happy assurance.
"now, my dear Dorothea, I wish you to favor I by point out which
room you would like to have as your boudoir," say Mr. Casaubon,
show that his view of the womanly nature be sufficiently large to
include that requirement.
"it be very kind of you to think of that," say Dorothea, "but I assure
you I would rather have all those matter decide for I. I shall be
much happy to take everything as it be--just as you have be use to
have it, or as you will yourself choose it to be. I have no motive for
wish anything else."
"oh, Dodo," say Celia, "will you not have the bow-windowe room
up-stair?"
Mr. Casaubon lead the way thither. the bow-window look down the
avenue of lime; the furniture be all of a faded blue, and there be
miniature of lady and gentleman with powdered hair hang in a
group. a piece of tapestry over a door also show a blue-green world
with a pale stag in it. the chair and table be thin-legged and
easy to upset. it be a room where one might fancy the ghost of a
tight-laced lady revisit the scene of her embroidery. a light
bookcase contain duodecimo volume of polite literature in calf,
complete the furniture.
"yes," say Mr. Brooke, "this would be a pretty room with some new
hanging, sofa, and that sort of thing. a little bare now."
"no, uncle," say Dorothea, eagerly. "pray do not speak of alter
anything. there be so many other thing in the world that want
altering--I like to take these thing as they be. and you like they
as they be, donot you?" she add, look at Mr. Casaubon. "perhaps
this be your mother's room when she be young."
"it be," he say, with his slow bend of the head.
"this be your mother," say Dorothea, who have turn to examine the
group of miniature. "it be like the tiny one you bring I; only, I
should think, a well portrait. and this one opposite, who be this?"
"her eld sister. they be, like you and your sister, the only two
child of their parent, who hang above they, you see."
"the sister be pretty," say Celia, imply that she think less
favorably of Mr. Casaubon's mother. it be a new opening to Celia's
imagination, that he come of a family who have all be young in their
time--the lady wear necklace.
"it be a peculiar face," say Dorothea, look closely. "those deep
gray eye rather near together--and the delicate irregular nose with a
sort of ripple in it--and all the powdered curl hang backward.
altogether it seem to I peculiar rather than pretty. there be not
even a family likeness between she and your mother."
"no. and they be not alike in their lot."
"you do not mention she to I," say Dorothea.
"my aunt make an unfortunate marriage. I never see she."
Dorothea wonder a little, but feel that it would be indelicate just
then to ask for any information which Mr. Casaubon do not proffer, and
she turn to the window to admire the view. the sun have lately
pierce the gray, and the avenue of lime cast shadow.
"shall we not walk in the garden now?" say Dorothea.
"and you would like to see the church, you know," say Mr. Brooke. "it
be a droll little church. and the village. it all lie in a
nut-shell. by the way, it will suit you, Dorothea; for the cottage be
like a row of alm-house--little garden, gilly-flower, that sort of
thing."
"yes, please," say Dorothea, look at Mr. Casaubon, "I should like
to see all that." she have get nothing from he more graphic about the
Lowick cottage than that they be "not bad."
they be soon on a gravel walk which lead chiefly between grassy
border and clump of tree, this be the near way to the church,
Mr. Casaubon say. at the little gate lead into the churchyard
there be a pause while Mr. Casaubon go to the parsonage close by to
fetch a key. Celia, who have be hang a little in the rear, come up
presently, when she see that Mr. Casaubon be go away, and say in
her easy staccato, which always seem to contradict the suspicion of
any malicious intent--
"do you know, Dorothea, I see some one quite young come up one of the
walk."
"be that astonishing, Celia?"
"there may be a young gardener, you know--why not?" say Mr. Brooke.
"I tell Casaubon he should change his gardener."
"no, not a gardener," say Celia; "a gentleman with a sketch-book. he
have light-brown curl. I only see his back. but he be quite young."
"the curate's son, perhaps," say Mr. Brooke. "ah, there be Casaubon
again, and Tucker with he. he be go to introduce Tucker. you
donot know Tucker yet."
Mr. Tucker be the middle-aged curate, one of the "inferior clergy,"
who be usually not want in son. but after the introduction, the
conversation do not lead to any question about his family, and the
startling apparition of youthfulness be forget by every one but
Celia. she inwardly decline to believe that the light-brown curl and
slim figure could have any relationship to Mr. Tucker, who be just as
old and musty-looking as she would have expect Mr. Casaubon's curate
to be; doubtless an excellent man who would go to heaven (for Celia
wish not to be unprincipled), but the corner of his mouth be so
unpleasant. Celia think with some dismalness of the time she should
have to spend as bridesmaid at Lowick, while the curate have probably no
pretty little child whom she could like, irrespective of principle.
Mr. Tucker be invaluable in their walk; and perhaps Mr. Casaubon have
not be without foresight on this head, the curate be able to
answer all Dorothea's question about the villager and the other
parishioner. everybody, he assure she, be well off in Lowick: not a
cottager in those double cottage at a low rent but keep a pig, and the
strip of garden at the back be well tend. the small boy wear
excellent corduroy, the girl go out as tidy servant, or do a
little straw-plaiting at home: no loom here, no Dissent; and though
the public disposition be rather towards lay by money than towards
spirituality, there be not much vice. the speckled fowl be so
numerous that Mr. Brooke observe, "your farmer leave some barley for
the woman to glean, I see. the poor folk here might have a fowl in
their pot, as the good french king use to wish for all his people.
the French eat a good many fowl--skinny fowl, you know."
"I think it be a very cheap wish of his," say Dorothea, indignantly.
"be king such monster that a wish like that must be reckon a royal
virtue?"
"and if he wish they a skinny fowl," say Celia, "that would not be
nice. but perhaps he wish they to have fat fowl."
"yes, but the word have drop out of the text, or perhaps be
subauditum; that be, present in the king's mind, but not utter," say
Mr. Casaubon, smile and bend his head towards Celia, who
immediately drop backward a little, because she could not bear Mr.
Casaubon to blink at she.
Dorothea sink into silence on the way back to the house. she feel some
disappointment, of which she be yet ashamed, that there be nothing
for she to do in Lowick; and in the next few minute her mind have
glance over the possibility, which she would have prefer, of
find that her home would be in a parish which have a large share of
the world's misery, so that she might have have more active duty in
it. then, recur to the future actually before she, she make a
picture of more complete devotion to Mr. Casaubon's aim in which she
would await new duty. many such might reveal themselves to the
high knowledge gain by she in that companionship.
Mr. Tucker soon leave they, have some clerical work which would not
allow he to lunch at the Hall; and as they be re-enter the garden
through the little gate, Mr. Casaubon said--
"you seem a little sad, Dorothea. I trust you be pleased with what
you have see."
"I be feel something which be perhaps foolish and wrong," answer
Dorothea, with her usual openness--"almost wish that the people
want more to be do for they here. I have know so few way of
make my life good for anything. of course, my notion of usefulness
must be narrow. I must learn new way of help people."
"Doubtless," say Mr. Casaubon. "each position have its corresponding
duty. your, I trust, as the mistress of Lowick, will not leave any
yearn unfulfilled."
"indeed, I believe that," say Dorothea, earnestly. "do not suppose
that I be sad."
"that be well. but, if you be not tired, we will take another way to
the house than that by which we come."
Dorothea be not at all tired, and a little circuit be make towards a
fine yew-tree, the chief hereditary glory of the ground on this side
of the house. as they approach it, a figure, conspicuous on a dark
background of evergreen, be seat on a bench, sketch the old
tree. Mr. Brooke, who be walk in front with Celia, turn his
head, and said--
"who be that youngster, Casaubon?"
they have come very near when Mr. Casaubon answered--
"that be a young relative of mine, a second cousin: the grandson, in
fact," he add, look at Dorothea, "of the lady whose portrait you
have be notice, my aunt Julia."
the young man have lay down his sketch-book and risen. his bushy
light-brown curl, as well as his youthfulness, identify he at once
with Celia's apparition.
"Dorothea, let I introduce to you my cousin, Mr. Ladislaw. will, this
be Miss Brooke."
the cousin be so close now, that, when he lift his hat, Dorothea
could see a pair of gray eve rather near together, a delicate
irregular nose with a little ripple in it, and hair fall backward;
but there be a mouth and chin of a more prominent, threaten aspect
than belong to the type of the grandmother's miniature. Young
Ladislaw do not feel it necessary to smile, as if he be charm with
this introduction to his future second cousin and her relative; but
wear rather a pouting air of discontent.
"you be an artist, I see," say Mr. Brooke, take up the sketch-book
and turn it over in his unceremonious fashion.
"no, I only sketch a little. there be nothing fit to be see there,"
say young Ladislaw, color, perhaps with temper rather than modesty.
"oh, come, this be a nice bit, now. I do a little in this way myself
at one time, you know. look here, now; this be what I call a nice
thing, do with what we use to call _brio_." Mr. Brooke hold out
towards the two girl a large colored sketch of stony ground and tree,
with a pool.
"I be no judge of these thing," say Dorothea, not coldly, but with an
eager deprecation of the appeal to she. "you know, uncle, I never see
the beauty of those picture which you say be so much praise. they
be a language I do not understand. I suppose there be some relation
between picture and nature which I be too ignorant to feel--just as
you see what a greek sentence stand for which mean nothing to I."
Dorothea look up at Mr. Casaubon, who bow his head towards she,
while Mr. Brooke say, smile nonchalantly--
"bless I, now, how different people be! but you have a bad style of
teaching, you know--else this be just the thing for girl--sketch,
fine art and so on. but you take to draw plan; you donot
understand morbidezza, and that kind of thing. you will come to my
house, I hope, and I will show you what I do in this way," he
continue, turn to young Ladislaw, who have to be recall from his
preoccupation in observe Dorothea. Ladislaw have make up his mind
that she must be an unpleasant girl, since she be go to marry
Casaubon, and what she say of her stupidity about picture would have
confirm that opinion even if he have believe she. as it be, he take
her word for a covert judgment, and be certain that she think his
sketch detestable. there be too much cleverness in her apology: she
be laugh both at her uncle and himself. but what a voice! it be
like the voice of a soul that have once live in an AEolian harp. this
must be one of Nature's inconsistency. there could be no sort of
passion in a girl who would marry Casaubon. but he turn from she,
and bow his thank for Mr. Brooke's invitation.
"we will turn over my italian engraving together," continue that
good-natured man. "I have no end of those thing, that I have lay by
for year. one get rusty in this part of the country, you know. not
you, Casaubon; you stick to your study; but my good idea get
undermost--out of use, you know. you clever young man must guard
against indolence. I be too indolent, you know: else I might have
be anywhere at one time."
"that be a seasonable admonition," say Mr. Casaubon; "but now we will
pass on to the house, lest the young lady should be tired of
stand."
when their back be turn, young Ladislaw sit down to go on with his
sketching, and as he do so his face break into an expression of
amusement which increase as he go on drawing, till at last he throw
back his head and laugh aloud. partly it be the reception of his
own artistic production that tickle he; partly the notion of his
grave cousin as the lover of that girl; and partly Mr. Brooke's
definition of the place he might have hold but for the impediment of
indolence. Mr. Will Ladislaw's sense of the ludicrous light up his
feature very agreeably: it be the pure enjoyment of comicality, and
have no mixture of sneer and self-exaltation.
"what be your nephew go to do with himself, Casaubon?" say Mr.
Brooke, as they go on.
"my cousin, you mean--not my nephew."
"yes, yes, cousin. but in the way of a career, you know."
"the answer to that question be painfully doubtful. on leave Rugby
he decline to go to an english university, where I would gladly have
place he, and choose what I must consider the anomalous course of
study at Heidelberg. and now he want to go abroad again, without
any special object, save the vague purpose of what he call culture,
preparation for he know not what. he decline to choose a profession."
"he have no mean but what you furnish, I suppose."
"I have always give he and his friend reason to understand that I
would furnish in moderation what be necessary for provide he with a
scholarly education, and launch he respectably. I be-therefore
bind to fulfil the expectation so raise," say Mr. Casaubon, put
his conduct in the light of mere rectitude: a trait of delicacy which
Dorothea notice with admiration.
"he have a thirst for travel; perhaps he may turn out a Bruce or a
Mungo Park," say Mr. Brooke. "I have a notion of that myself at one
time."
"no, he have no bent towards exploration, or the enlargement of our
geognosis: that would be a special purpose which I could recognize with
some approbation, though without felicitate he on a career which so
often end in premature and violent death. but so far be he from
have any desire for a more accurate knowledge of the earth's surface,
that he say he should prefer not to know the source of the Nile, and
that there should be some unknown region preserve as hunt ground
for the poetic imagination."
"well, there be something in that, you know," say Mr. Brooke, who have
certainly an impartial mind.
"it be, I fear, nothing more than a part of his general inaccuracy and
indisposition to thoroughness of all kind, which would be a bad augury
for he in any profession, civil or sacred, even be he so far
submissive to ordinary rule as to choose one."
"perhaps he have conscientious scruple found on his own unfitness,"
say Dorothea, who be interesting herself in find a favorable
explanation. "because the law and medicine should be very serious
profession to undertake, should they not? People's life and fortune
depend on they."
"Doubtless; but I fear that my young relative Will Ladislaw be chiefly
determine in his aversion to these calling by a dislike to steady
application, and to that kind of acquirement which be needful
instrumentally, but be not charming or immediately invite to
self-indulgent taste. I have insist to he on what Aristotle have
state with admirable brevity, that for the achievement of any work
regard as an end there must be a prior exercise of many energy or
acquire facility of a secondary order, demand patience. I have
point to my own manuscript volume, which represent the toil of year
preparatory to a work not yet accomplish. but in vain. to careful
reasoning of this kind he reply by call himself Pegasus, and every
form of prescribe work 'harness.'"
Celia laugh. she be surprised to find that Mr. Casaubon could say
something quite amusing.
"well, you know, he may turn out a Byron, a Chatterton, a
Churchill--that sort of thing--therebe no telling," say Mr. Brooke.
"shall you let he go to Italy, or wherever else he want to go?"
"yes; I have agree to furnish he with moderate supply for a year or
so; he ask no more. I shall let he be try by the test of freedom."
"that be very kind of you," say Dorothea, look up at Mr. Casaubon
with delight. "it be noble. after all, people may really have in they
some vocation which be not quite plain to themselves, may they not?
they may seem idle and weak because they be grow. we should be
very patient with each other, I think."
"I suppose it be be engage to be married that have make you think
patience good," say Celia, as soon as she and Dorothea be alone
together, take off their wrapping.
"you mean that I be very impatient, Celia."
"yes; when people donot do and say just what you like." Celia have
become less afraid of "say thing" to Dorothea since this
engagement: cleverness seem to her more pitiable than ever.
CHAPTER X.
"he have catch a great cold, have he have no other clothe
to wear than the skin of a bear not yet kill."--fuller.
Young Ladislaw do not pay that visit to which Mr. Brooke have invite
he, and only six day afterwards Mr. Casaubon mention that his young
relative have start for the continent, seem by this cold vagueness
to waive inquiry. indeed, will have decline to fix on any more precise
destination than the entire area of Europe. Genius, he hold, be
necessarily intolerant of fetter: on the one hand it must have the
utmost play for its spontaneity; on the other, it may confidently await
those message from the universe which summon it to its peculiar work,
only place itself in an attitude of receptivity towards all sublime
chance. the attitude of receptivity be various, and will have
sincerely try many of they. he be not excessively fond of wine, but
he have several time take too much, simply as an experiment in that
form of ecstasy; he have fast till he be faint, and then sup on
lobster; he have make himself ill with dos of opium. nothing greatly
original have result from these measure; and the effect of the opium
have convince he that there be an entire dissimilarity between his
constitution and De Quincey's. the superadded circumstance which would
evolve the genius have not yet come; the universe have not yet beckon.
even Caesar's fortune at one time be, but a grand presentiment. we
know what a masquerade all development be, and what effective shape
may be disguise in helpless embryos.--In fact, the world be full of
hopeful analogy and handsome dubious egg call possibility. will
see clearly enough the pitiable instance of long incubation produce
no chick, and but for gratitude would have laugh at Casaubon, whose
plod application, row of note-book, and small taper of learn
theory explore the toss ruin of the world, seem to enforce a
moral entirely encouraging to Will's generous reliance on the
intention of the universe with regard to himself. he hold that
reliance to be a mark of genius; and certainly it be no mark to the
contrary; genius consist neither in self-conceit nor in humility,
but in a power to make or do, not anything in general, but something in
particular. let he start for the continent, then, without our
pronouncing on his future. among all form of mistake, prophecy be the
most gratuitous.
but at present this caution against a too hasty judgment interest I
more in relation to Mr. Casaubon than to his young cousin. if to
Dorothea Mr. Casaubon have be the mere occasion which have set alight
the fine inflammable material of her youthful illusion, do it follow
that he be fairly represent in the mind of those less impassioned
personage who have hitherto deliver their judgment concern he?
I protest against any absolute conclusion, any prejudice derive from
Mrs. Cadwallader's contempt for a neighboring clergyman's allege
greatness of soul, or Sir James Chettam's poor opinion of his rival's
legs,--from Mr. Brooke's failure to elicit a companion's idea, or from
Celia's criticism of a middle-aged scholar's personal appearance. I be
not sure that the great man of his age, if ever that solitary
superlative exist, could escape these unfavorable reflection of
himself in various small mirror; and even Milton, look for his
portrait in a spoon, must submit to have the facial angle of a bumpkin.
moreover, if Mr. Casaubon, speak for himself, have rather a chill
rhetoric, it be not therefore certain that there be no good work or
fine feeling in he. do not an immortal physicist and interpreter of
hieroglyph write detestable verse? have the theory of the solar
system be advance by graceful manner and conversational tact?
suppose we turn from outside estimate of a man, to wonder, with keener
interest, what be the report of his own consciousness about his doing
or capacity: with what hindrance he be carry on his daily labor;
what fade of hope, or what deep fixity of self-delusion the year
be mark off within he; and with what spirit he wrestle against
universal pressure, which will one day be too heavy for he, and bring
his heart to its final pause. doubtless his lot be important in his
own eye; and the chief reason that we think he ask too large a place
in our consideration must be our want of room for he, since we refer
he to the Divine regard with perfect confidence; nay, it be even hold
sublime for our neighbor to expect the utmost there, however little he
may have get from we. Mr. Casaubon, too, be the centre of his own
world; if he be liable to think that other be providentially make
for he, and especially to consider they in the light of their fitness
for the author of a "key to all Mythologies," this trait be not quite
alien to we, and, like the other mendicant hope of mortal, claim
some of our pity.
certainly this affair of his marriage with Miss Brooke touch he more
nearly than it do any one of the person who have hitherto show their
disapproval of it, and in the present stage of thing I feel more
tenderly towards his experience of success than towards the
disappointment of the amiable Sir James. for in truth, as the day
fix for his marriage come nearer, Mr. Casaubon do not find his
spirit rise; nor do the contemplation of that matrimonial garden
scene, where, as all experience show, the path be to be border
with flower, prove persistently more enchanting to he than the
accustomed vault where he walk taper in hand. he do not confess to
himself, still less could he have breathe to another, his surprise
that though he have win a lovely and noble-hearted girl he have not win
delight,--which he have also regard as an object to be find by
search. it be true that he know all the classical passage imply
the contrary; but know classical passage, we find, be a mode of
motion, which explain why they leave so little extra force for their
personal application.
Poor Mr. Casaubon have imagine that his long studious bachelorhood have
store up for he a compound interest of enjoyment, and that large
draft on his affection would not fail to be honor; for we all of
we, grave or light, get our thought entangle in metaphor, and act
fatally on the strength of they. and now he be in danger of be
sadden by the very conviction that his circumstance be unusually
happy: there be nothing external by which he could account for a
certain blankness of sensibility which come over he just when his
expectant gladness should have be most lively, just when he exchange
the accustomed dulness of his Lowick library for his visit to the
Grange. here be a weary experience in which he be as utterly
condemn to loneliness as in the despair which sometimes threaten
he while toil in the morass of authorship without seem near to
the goal. and his be that bad loneliness which would shrink from
sympathy. he could not but wish that Dorothea should think he not
less happy than the world would expect her successful suitor to be; and
in relation to his authorship he lean on her young trust and
veneration, he like to draw forth her fresh interest in listening, as
a means of encouragement to himself: in talk to she he present all
his performance and intention with the reflect confidence of the
pedagogue, and rid himself for the time of that chill ideal audience
which crowd his laborious uncreative hour with the vaporous pressure
of Tartarean shade.
for to Dorothea, after that toy-box history of the world adapt to
young lady which have make the chief part of her education, Mr.
Casaubon's talk about his great book be full of new vista; and this
sense of revelation, this surprise of a near introduction to Stoics
and Alexandrians, as people who have idea not totally unlike her own,
keep in abeyance for the time her usual eagerness for a bind theory
which could bring her own life and doctrine into strict connection with
that amazing past, and give the remotest source of knowledge some
bear on her action. that more complete teaching would come--Mr.
Casaubon would tell she all that: she be look forward to high
initiation in idea, as she be look forward to marriage, and
blend her dim conception of both. it would be a great mistake to
suppose that Dorothea would have care about any share in Mr.
Casaubon's learning as mere accomplishment; for though opinion in the
neighborhood of Freshitt and Tipton have pronounce her clever, that
epithet would not have describe she to circle in whose more precise
vocabulary cleverness imply mere aptitude for know and do,
apart from character. all her eagerness for acquirement lie within
that full current of sympathetic motive in which her idea and impulse
be habitually sweep along. she do not want to deck herself with
knowledge--to wear it loose from the nerve and blood that feed she
action; and if she have write a book she must have do it as Saint
Theresa do, under the command of an authority that constrain her
conscience. but something she yearn for by which her life might be
fill with action at once rational and ardent; and since the time be
go by for guide vision and spiritual director, since prayer
heighten yearning but not instruction, what lamp be there but
knowledge? surely learn man keep the only oil; and who more learn
than Mr. Casaubon?
thus in these brief week Dorothea's joyous grateful expectation be
unbroken, and however her lover might occasionally be conscious of
flatness, he could never refer it to any slackening of her affectionate
interest.
the season be mild enough to encourage the project of extend the
wedding journey as far as Rome, and Mr. Casaubon be anxious for this
because he wish to inspect some manuscript in the Vatican.
"I still regret that your sister be not to accompany we," he say one
morning, some time after it have be ascertain that Celia object to
go, and that Dorothea do not wish for her companionship. "you will
have many lonely hour, Dorotheas, for I shall be constrain to make
the utmost use of my time during our stay in Rome, and I should feel
more at liberty if you have a companion."
the word "I should feel more at liberty" grate on Dorothea. for the
first time in speak to Mr. Casaubon she color from annoyance.
"you must have misunderstood I very much," she say, "if you think I
should not enter into the value of your time--if you think that I
should not willingly give up whatever interfere with your use it to
the good purpose."
"that be very amiable in you, my dear Dorothea," say Mr. Casaubon, not
in the least noticing that she be hurt; "but if you have a lady as your
companion, I could put you both under the care of a cicerone, and we
could thus achieve two purpose in the same space of time."
"I beg you will not refer to this again," say Dorothea, rather
haughtily. but immediately she fear that she be wrong, and turn
towards he she lay her hand on his, add in a different tone, "pray
do not be anxious about I. I shall have so much to think of when I be
alone. and Tantripp will be a sufficient companion, just to take care
of I. I could not bear to have Celia: she would be miserable."
it be time to dress. there be to be a dinner-party that day, the
last of the party which be hold at the Grange as proper
preliminary to the wedding, and Dorothea be glad of a reason for
move away at once on the sound of the bell, as if she need more
than her usual amount of preparation. she be ashamed of be
irritated from some cause she could not define even to herself; for
though she have no intention to be untruthful, her reply have not touch
the real hurt within she. Mr. Casaubon's word have be quite
reasonable, yet they have bring a vague instantaneous sense of
aloofness on his part.
"surely I be in a strangely selfish weak state of mind," she say to
herself. "how can I have a husband who be so much above I without
know that he need I less than I need he?"
have convince herself that Mr. Casaubon be altogether right, she
recover her equanimity, and be an agreeable image of serene dignity
when she come into the drawing-room in her silver-gray dress--the
simple line of her dark-brown hair part over her brow and coil
massively behind, in keep with the entire absence from her manner
and expression of all search after mere effect. sometimes when
Dorothea be in company, there seem to be as complete an air of
repose about she as if she have be a picture of Santa Barbara look
out from her tower into the clear air; but these interval of quietude
make the energy of her speech and emotion the more remark when some
outward appeal have touch she.
she be naturally the subject of many observation this evening, for
the dinner-party be large and rather more miscellaneous as to the male
portion than any which have be hold at the Grange since Mr. Brooke's
niece have reside with he, so that the talking be do in duos and
trio more or less inharmonious. there be the newly elect mayor of
Middlemarch, who happen to be a manufacturer; the philanthropic
banker his brother-in-law, who predominate so much in the town that
some call he a Methodist, other a hypocrite, accord to the
resource of their vocabulary; and there be various professional man.
in fact, Mrs. Cadwallader say that Brooke be begin to treat the
Middlemarchers, and that she prefer the farmer at the tithe-dinner,
who drink her health unpretentiously, and be not ashamed of their
grandfather' furniture. for in that part of the country, before
reform have do its notable part in develop the political
consciousness, there be a clear distinction of rank and a dimmer
distinction of party; so that Mr. Brooke's miscellaneous invitation
seem to belong to that general laxity which come from his inordinate
travel and habit of take too much in the form of idea.
already, as Miss Brooke pass out of the dining-room, opportunity be
find for some interjectional "aside."
"a fine woman, Miss Brooke! an uncommonly fine woman, by God!" say Mr.
Standish, the old lawyer, who have be so long concerned with the
land gentry that he have become land himself, and use that oath in
a deep-mouthed manner as a sort of armorial bearing, stamp the
speech of a man who hold a good position.
Mr. Bulstrode, the banker, seem to be address, but that gentleman
dislike coarseness and profanity, and merely bow. the remark be
take up by Mr. Chichely, a middle-aged bachelor and course
celebrity, who have a complexion something like an Easter egg, a few
hair carefully arrange, and a carriage imply the consciousness of
a distinguished appearance.
"yes, but not my style of woman: I like a woman who lay herself out a
little more to please we. there should be a little filigree about a
woman--something of the coquette. a man like a sort of challenge.
the more of a dead set she make at you the well."
"therebe some truth in that," say Mr. Standish, dispose to be genial.
"and, by God, itbe usually the way with they. I suppose it answer
some wise end: Providence make they so, eh, Bulstrode?"
"I should be dispose to refer coquetry to another source," say Mr.
Bulstrode. "I should rather refer it to the devil."
"ay, to be sure, there should be a little devil in a woman," say Mr.
Chichely, whose study of the fair sex seem to have be detrimental
to his theology. "and I like they blond, with a certain gait, and a
swan neck. between ourselves, the mayor's daughter be more to my taste
than Miss Brooke or Miss Celia either. if I be a marry man I
should choose Miss Vincy before either of they."
"well, make up, make up," say Mr. Standish, jocosely; "you see the
middle-aged fellow early the day."
Mr. Chichely shake his head with much meaning: he be not go to
incur the certainty of be accept by the woman he would choose.
the Miss Vincy who have the honor of be Mr. Chichely's ideal be of
course not present; for Mr. Brooke, always object to go too far,
would not have choose that his niece should meet the daughter of a
Middlemarch manufacturer, unless it be on a public occasion. the
feminine part of the company include none whom Lady Chettam or Mrs.
Cadwallader could object to; for Mrs. Renfrew, the colonel's widow, be
not only unexceptionable in point of breeding, but also interesting on
the ground of her complaint, which puzzle the doctor, and seem
clearly a case wherein the fulness of professional knowledge might need
the supplement of quackery. Lady Chettam, who attribute her own
remarkable health to home-make bitter unite with constant medical
attendance, enter with much exercise of the imagination into Mrs.
Renfrew's account of symptom, and into the amazing futility in her
case of all, strengthen medicine.
"where can all the strength of those medicine go, my dear?" say the
mild but stately dowager, turn to Mrs. Cadwallader reflectively,
when Mrs. Renfrew's attention be call away.
"it strengthen the disease," say the Rector's wife, much too
well-bear not to be an amateur in medicine. "everything depend on the
constitution: some people make fat, some blood, and some bile--thatbe
my view of the matter; and whatever they take be a sort of grist to the
mill."
"then she ought to take medicine that would reduce--reduce the
disease, you know, if you be right, my dear. and I think what you say
be reasonable."
"certainly it be reasonable. you have two sort of potato, feed on
the same soil. one of they grow more and more watery--"
"ah! like this poor Mrs. Renfrew--that be what I think. Dropsy! there
be no swelling yet--it be inward. I should say she ought to take
dry medicine, shouldnot you?--or a dry hot-air bath. many thing
might be try, of a dry nature."
"let she try a certain person's pamphlet," say Mrs. Cadwallader in an
undertone, see the gentleman enter. "he do not want dry."
"who, my dear?" say Lady Chettam, a charming woman, not so quick as to
nullify the pleasure of explanation.
"the bridegroom--Casaubon. he have certainly be dry up fast since
the engagement: the flame of passion, I suppose."
"I should think he be far from have a good constitution," say Lady
Chettam, with a still deep undertone. "and then his study--so very
dry, as you say."
"really, by the side of Sir James, he look like a death's head skin
over for the occasion. mark my word: in a year from this time that
girl will hate he. she look up to he as an oracle now, and
by-and-by she will be at the other extreme. all flightiness!"
"how very shocking! I fear she be headstrong. but tell I--you know
all about he--be there anything very bad? what be the truth?"
"the truth? he be as bad as the wrong physic--nasty to take, and sure
to disagree."
"there could not be anything bad than that," say Lady Chettam, with
so vivid a conception of the physic that she seem to have learn
something exact about Mr. Casaubon's disadvantage. "however, James
will hear nothing against Miss Brooke. he say she be the mirror of
woman still."
"that be a generous make-believe of his. depend upon it, he like
little Celia well, and she appreciate he. I hope you like my
little Celia?"
"certainly; she be fonder of geranium, and seem more docile, though
not so fine a figure. but we be talk of physic. tell I about
this new young surgeon, Mr. Lydgate. I be tell he be wonderfully
clever: he certainly look it--a fine brow indeed."
"he be a gentleman. I hear he talk to Humphrey. he talk well."
"yes. Mr. Brooke say he be one of the Lydgates of Northumberland,
really well connected. one do not expect it in a practitioner of
that kind. for my own part, I like a medical man more on a footing
with the servant; they be often all the cleverer. I assure you I
find poor Hicks's judgment unfailing; I never know he wrong. he be
coarse and butcher-like, but he know my constitution. it be a loss to
I his go off so suddenly. dear I, what a very animate
conversation Miss Brooke seem to be have with this Mr. Lydgate!"
"she be talk cottage and hospital with he," say Mrs.
Cadwallader, whose ear and power of interpretation be quick. "I
believe he be a sort of philanthropist, so Brooke be sure to take he
up."
"James," say Lady Chettam when her son come near, "bring Mr. Lydgate
and introduce he to I. I want to test he."
the affable dowager declare herself delight with this opportunity of
make Mr. Lydgate's acquaintance, have hear of his success in
treat fever on a new plan.
Mr. Lydgate have the medical accomplishment of look perfectly grave
whatever nonsense be talk to he, and his dark steady eye give he
impressiveness as a listener. he be as little as possible like the
lament Hicks, especially in a certain careless refinement about his
toilet and utterance. yet Lady Chettam gather much confidence in
he. he confirm her view of her own constitution as be peculiar,
by admit that all constitution might be call peculiar, and he
do not deny that hers might be more peculiar than other. he do not
approve of a too lower system, include reckless cupping, nor, on
the other hand, of incessant port wine and bark. he say "I think so"
with an air of so much deference accompany the insight of agreement,
that she form the most cordial opinion of his talent.
"I be quite pleased with your protege," she say to Mr. Brooke before
go away.
"my protege?--dear me!--who be that?" say Mr. Brooke.
"this young Lydgate, the new doctor.-He seem to I to understand his
profession admirably."
"oh, Lydgate! he be not my protege, you know; only I know an uncle of
his who send I a letter about he. however, I think he be likely to
be first-rate--have study in Paris, know Broussais; have idea, you
know--want to raise the profession."
"lydgate have lot of idea, quite new, about ventilation and diet, that
sort of thing," resume Mr. Brooke, after he have hand out Lady
Chettam, and have return to be civil to a group of Middlemarchers.
"hang it, do you think that be quite sound?--upsette the old
treatment, which have make Englishmen what they re?" say Mr. Standish.
"medical knowledge be at a low ebb among we," say Mr. Bulstrode, who
speak in a subdued tone, and have rather a sickly air. "I, for my part,
hail the advent of Mr. Lydgate. I hope to find good reason for
confide the new hospital to his management."
"that be all very fine," reply Mr. Standish, who be not fond of Mr.
Bulstrode; "if you like he to try experiment on your hospital
patient, and kill a few people for charity I have no objection. but I
be not go to hand money out of my purse to have experiment try on
I. I like treatment that have be test a little."
"well, you know, Standish, every dose you take be an experiment-an
experiment, you know," say Mr. Brooke, nod towards the lawyer.
"oh, if you talk in that sense!" say Mr. Standish, with as much
disgust at such non-legal quibbling as a man can well betray towards a
valuable client.
"I should be glad of any treatment that would cure I without reduce
I to a skeleton, like poor Grainger," say Mr. Vincy, the mayor, a
florid man, who would have serve for a study of flesh in strike
contrast with the franciscan tint of Mr. Bulstrode. "itbe an
uncommonly dangerous thing to be leave without any padding against the
shaft of disease, as somebody said,--and I think it a very good
expression myself."
Mr. Lydgate, of course, be out of hearing. he have quit the party
early, and would have think it altogether tedious but for the novelty
of certain introduction, especially the introduction to Miss Brooke,
whose youthful bloom, with her approach marriage to that fade
scholar, and her interest in matter socially useful, give she the
piquancy of an unusual combination.
"she be a good creature--that fine girl--but a little too earnest," he
think. "it be troublesome to talk to such woman. they be always
want reason, yet they be too ignorant to understand the merit of
any question, and usually fall hack on their moral sense to settle
thing after their own taste."
evidently Miss Brooke be not Mr. Lydgate's style of woman any more
than Mr. Chichely's. consider, indeed, in relation to the latter,
whose mie be mature, she be altogether a mistake, and calculate to
shock his trust in final cause, include the adaptation of fine young
woman to purpleface bachelor. but Lydgate be less ripe, and might
possibly have experience before he which would modify his opinion as
to the most excellent thing in woman.
Miss Brooke, however, be not again see by either of these gentleman
under her maiden name. not long after that dinner-party she have become
Mrs. Casaubon, and be on her way to Rome.
CHAPTER XI.
"but deed and language such as man do use,
and person such as comedy would choose,
when she would show an image of the time,
and sport with human folly, not with crime."
--BEN jonson.
Lydgate, in fact, be already conscious of be fascinate by a woman
strikingly different from Miss Brooke: he do not in the least suppose
that he have lose his balance and fall in love, but he have say of
that particular woman, "she be grace itself; she be perfectly lovely
and accomplish. that be what a woman ought to be: she ought to
produce the effect of exquisite music." plain woman he regard as he
do the other severe fact of life, to be face with philosophy and
investigate by science. but Rosamond Vincy seem to have the true
melodic charm; and when a man have see the woman whom he would have
choose if he have intend to marry speedily, his remain a bachelor
will usually depend on her resolution rather than on his. lydgate
believe that he should not marry for several year: not marry until he
have trodden out a good clear path for himself away from the broad road
which be quite ready make. he have see Miss Vincy above his horizon
almost as long as it have take Mr. Casaubon to become engaged and
marry: but this learn gentleman be possess of a fortune; he have
assemble his voluminous note, and have make that sort of reputation
which precede performance,--often the large part of a man's fame. he
take a wife, as we have see, to adorn the remain quadrant of his
course, and be a little moon that would cause hardly a calculable
perturbation. but Lydgate be young, poor, ambitious. he have his
half-century before he instead of behind he, and he have come to
Middlemarch bent on do many thing that be not directly fit to
make his fortune or even secure he a good income. to a man under such
circumstance, take a wife be something more than a question of
adornment, however highly he may rate this; and Lydgate be dispose to
give it the first place among wifely function. to his taste, guide
by a single conversation, here be the point on which Miss Brooke would
be find want, notwithstanding her undeniable beauty. she do not
look at thing from the proper feminine angle. the society of such
woman be about as relax as go from your work to teach the second
form, instead of recline in a paradise with sweet laugh for
bird-note, and blue eye for a heaven.
certainly nothing at present could seem much less important to lydgate
than the turn of Miss Brooke's mind, or to Miss Brooke than the
quality of the woman who have attract this young surgeon. but any
one watch keenly the stealthy convergence of human lot, see a slow
preparation of effect from one life on another, which tell like a
calculate irony on the indifference or the frozen stare with which we
look at our unintroduced neighbor. destiny stand by sarcastic with
our dramatis personae fold in her hand.
old provincial society have its share of this subtle movement: have not
only its striking downfall, its brilliant young professional dandy
who end by live up an entry with a drab and six child for their
establishment, but also those less mark vicissitude which be
constantly shift the boundary of social intercourse, and beget
new consciousness of interdependence. some slip a little downward,
some get high footing: people deny aspirate, gain wealth, and
fastidious gentleman stand for borough; some be catch in political
current, some in ecclesiastical, and perhaps find themselves
surprisingly group in consequence; while a few personage or family
that stand with rocky firmness amid all this fluctuation, be slowly
present new aspect in spite of solidity, and alter with the
double change of self and beholder. municipal town and rural parish
gradually make fresh thread of connection--gradually, as the old
stocking give way to the saving-bank, and the worship of the solar
guinea become extinct; while squire and baronet, and even lord who
have once live blamelessly afar from the civic mind, gather the
faultiness of close acquaintanceship. settler, too, come from
distant county, some with an alarming novelty of skill, other with
an offensive advantage in cunning. in fact, much the same sort of
movement and mixture go on in old England as we find in old
Herodotus, who also, in tell what have be, think it well to take
a woman's lot for his starting-point; though Io, as a maiden apparently
beguile by attractive merchandise, be the reverse of Miss Brooke, and
in this respect perhaps bear more resemblance to Rosamond Vincy, who
have excellent taste in costume, with that nymph-like figure and pure
blindness which give the large range to choice in the flow and color
of drapery. but these thing make only part of her charm. she be
admit to be the flower of Mrs. Lemon's school, the chief school in
the county, where the teaching include all that be demand in the
accomplish female--even to extra, such as the getting in and out of
a carriage. Mrs. Lemon herself have always hold up Miss Vincy as an
example: no pupil, she say, exceed that young lady for mental
acquisition and propriety of speech, while her musical execution be
quite exceptional. we cannot help the way in which people speak of we,
and probably if Mrs. Lemon have undertake to describe Juliet or Imogen,
these heroine would not have seem poetical. the first vision of
Rosamond would have be enough with most judge to dispel any
prejudice excite by Mrs. Lemon's praise.
Lydgate could not be long in Middlemarch without have that agreeable
vision, or even without make the acquaintance of the Vincy family;
for though Mr. Peacock, whose practice he have pay something to enter
on, have not be their doctor (Mrs. Vincy not like the lowering
system adopt by he), he have many patient among their connection
and acquaintance. for who of any consequence in Middlemarch be not
connect or at least acquaint with the Vincys? they be old
manufacturer, and have keep a good house for three generation, in
which there have naturally be much intermarry with neighbor more
or less decidedly genteel. Mr. Vincy's sister have make a wealthy match
in accept Mr. Bulstrode, who, however, as a man not bear in the
town, and altogether of dimly know origin, be consider to have do
well in unite himself with a real Middlemarch family; on the other
hand, Mr. Vincy have descend a little, have take an innkeeper's
daughter. but on this side too there be a cheering sense of money;
for Mrs. Vincy's sister have be second wife to rich old Mr.
Featherstone, and have die childless year ago, so that her nephew and
niece might be suppose to touch the affection of the widower. and
it happen that Mr. Bulstrode and Mr. Featherstone, two of Peacock's
most important patient, have, from different cause, give an
especially good reception to his successor, who have raise some
partisanship as well as discussion. Mr. Wrench, medical attendant to
the Vincy family, very early have ground for think lightly of
Lydgate's professional discretion, and there be no report about he
which be not retail at the Vincys', where visitor be frequent.
Mr. Vincy be more inclined to general good-fellowship than to take
side, but there be no need for he to be hasty in make any new man
acquaintance. Rosamond silently wish that her father would invite
Mr. Lydgate. she be tired of the face and figure she have always
be use to--the various irregular profile and gait and turn of
phrase distinguish those Middlemarch young man whom she have know as
boy. she have be at school with girl of high position, whose
brother, she feel sure, it would have be possible for she to be more
interested in, than in these inevitable middlemarch companion. but
she would not have choose to mention her wish to her father; and he,
for his part, be in no hurry on the subject. an alderman about to be
mayor must by-and-by enlarge his dinner-party, but at present there
be plenty of guest at his well-spread table.
that table often remain cover with the relic of the family
breakfast long after Mr. Vincy have go with his second son to the
warehouse, and when Miss Morgan be already far on in morning lesson
with the young girl in the schoolroom. it await the family
laggard, who find any sort of inconvenience (to other) less
disagreeable than get up when he be call. this be the case one
morning of the October in which we have lately see Mr. Casaubon
visit the Grange; and though the room be a little overheat with
the fire, which have send the spaniel pant to a remote corner,
Rosamond, for some reason, continue to sit at her embroidery long
than usual, now and then give herself a little shake, and lay she
work on her knee to contemplate it with an air of hesitate weariness.
her mamma, who have return from an excursion to the kitchen, sit on
the other side of the small work-table with an air of more entire
placidity, until, the clock again give notice that it be go to
strike, she look up from the lace-mending which be occupy her
plump fingers and rang the bell.
"Knock at Mr. Fred's door again, Pritchard, and tell he it have strike
half-past ten."
this be say without any change in the radiant good-humor of Mrs.
Vincy's face, in which forty-five year have delve neither angle nor
parallel; and push back her pink capstring, she let her work rest
on her lap, while she look admiringly at her daughter.
"Mamma," say Rosamond, "when Fred come down I wish you would not let
he have red herring. I cannot bear the smell of they all over the
house at this hour of the morning."
"oh, my dear, you be so hard on your brother! it be the only fault I
have to find with you. you be the sweetest temper in the world, but
you be so tetchy with your brother."
"not tetchy, mamma: you never hear I speak in an unladylike way."
"well, but you want to deny they thing."
"brother be so unpleasant."
"oh, my dear, you must allow for young man. be thankful if they have
good heart. a woman must learn to put up with little thing. you
will be marry some day."
"not to any one who be like Fred."
"donot decry your own brother, my dear. few young man have less
against they, although he couldnot take his degree--i'm sure I cannot
understand why, for he seem to I most clever. and you know yourself
he be think equal to the good society at college. so particular as
you be, my dear, I wonder you be not glad to have such a gentlemanly
young man for a brother. you be always find fault with Bob because
he be not Fred."
"oh no, mamma, only because he be Bob."
"well, my dear, you will not find any Middlemarch young man who have not
something against he."
"But"--here Rosamond's face break into a smile which suddenly reveal
two dimple. she herself think unfavorably of these dimple and
smile little in general society. "but I shall not marry any
Middlemarch young man."
"so it seem, my love, for you have as good as refuse the pick of
they; and if therebe well to be have, Ibe sure therebe no girl well
deserve it."
"excuse I, mamma--I wish you would not say, 'the pick of they.'"
"why, what else be they?"
"I mean, mamma, it be rather a vulgar expression."
"very likely, my dear; I never be a good speaker. what should I say?"
"the good of they."
"why, that seem just as plain and common. if I have have time to think,
I should have say, 'the most superior young man.' but with your
education you must know."
"what must Rosy know, mother?" say Mr. Fred, who have slide in
unobserve through the half-open door while the lady be bend
over their work, and now go up to the fire stand with his back
towards it, warm the sol of his slipper.
"whether itbe right to say 'superior young man,'" say Mrs. Vincy,
ring the bell.
"oh, there be so many superior tea and sugar now. Superior be
get to be shopkeeper' slang."
"be you begin to dislike slang, then?" say Rosamond, with mild
gravity.
"only the wrong sort. all choice of word be slang. it mark a class."
"there be correct English: that be not slang."
"I beg your pardon: correct English be the slang of prig who write
history and essay. and the strong slang of all be the slang of
poet."
"you will say anything, Fred, to gain your point."
"well, tell I whether it be slang or poetry to call an ox a
leg-plaiter."
"of course you can call it poetry if you like."
"aha, Miss Rosy, you donot know Homer from slang. I shall invent a new
game; I shall write bit of slang and poetry on slip, and give they to
you to separate."
"dear I, how amusing it be to hear young people talk!" say Mrs.
Vincy, with cheerful admiration.
"have you get nothing else for my breakfast, Pritchard?" say Fred, to
the servant who bring in coffee and butter toast; while he walk
round the table survey the ham, potted beef, and other cold
remnant, with an air of silent rejection, and polite forbearance from
sign of disgust.
"should you like egg, sir?"
"Eggs, no! bring I a grill bone."
"really, Fred," say Rosamond, when the servant have leave the room, "if
you must have hot thing for breakfast, I wish you would come down
early. you can get up at six o'clock to go out hunting; I cannot
understand why you find it so difficult to get up on other morning."
"that be your want of understanding, Rosy. I can get up to go hunting
because I like it."
"what would you think of I if I come down two hour after every one
else and order grill bone?"
"I should think you be an uncommonly fast young lady," say Fred,
eat his toast with the utmost composure.
"I cannot see why brother be to make themselves disagreeable, any
more than sister."
"I donot make myself disagreeable; it be you who find I so.
Disagreeable be a word that describe your feeling and not my action."
"I think it describe the smell of grill bone."
"not at all. it describe a sensation in your little nose associate
with certain finicking notion which be the classic of Mrs. Lemon's
school. look at my mother you donot see she object to everything
except what she do herself. she be my notion of a pleasant woman."
"bless you both, my dear, and donot quarrel," say Mrs. Vincy, with
motherly cordiality. "Come, Fred, tell we all about the new doctor.
how be your uncle please with he?"
"pretty well, I think. he ask Lydgate all sort of question and then
screw up his face while he hear the answer, as if they be pinch
his toe. thatbe his way. ah, here come my grill bone."
"but how come you to stay out so late, my dear? you only say you be
go to your uncle's."
"oh, I din at Plymdale's. we have whist. Lydgate be there too."
"and what do you think of he? he be very gentlemanly, I suppose.
they say he be of excellent family--his relation quite county people."
"yes," say Fred. "there be a Lydgate at John's who spend no end of
money. I find this man be a second cousin of his. but rich man may
have very poor devil for second cousin."
"it always make a difference, though, to be of good family," say
Rosamond, with a tone of decision which show that she have think on
this subject. Rosamond feel that she might have be happy if she
have not be the daughter of a Middlemarch manufacturer. she dislike
anything which remind she that her mother's father have be an
innkeeper. certainly any one remember the fact might think that
Mrs. Vincy have the air of a very handsome good-humor landlady,
accustom to the most capricious order of gentleman.
"I think it be odd his name be Tertius," say the bright-face
matron, "but of course itbe a name in the family. but now, tell we
exactly what sort of man he be."
"oh, tallish, dark, clever--talk well--rather a prig, I think."
"I never can make out what you mean by a prig," say Rosamond.
"a fellow who want to show that he have opinion."
"why, my dear, doctor must have opinion," say Mrs. Vincy. "what be
they there for else?"
"yes, mother, the opinion they be pay for. but a prig be a fellow
who be always make you a present of his opinion."
"I suppose Mary Garth admire Mr. Lydgate," say Rosamond, not without
a touch of innuendo.
"really, I cannot say." say Fred, rather glumly, as he leave the table,
and take up a novel which he have bring down with he, throw himself
into an arm-chair. "if you be jealous of she, go oftener to Stone
Court yourself and eclipse she."
"I wish you would not be so vulgar, Fred. if you have finish, pray
re the bell."
"it be true, though--what your brother say, Rosamond," Mrs. Vincy
begin, when the servant have clear the table. "it be a thousand
pity you havenot patience to go and see your uncle more, so proud of
you as he be, and want you to live with he. therebe no knowing what
he might have do for you as well as for Fred. God know, Ibe fond of
have you at home with I, but I can part with my child for their
good. and now it stand to reason that your uncle Featherstone will do
something for Mary Garth."
"Mary Garth can bear be at Stone Court, because she like that
well than be a governess," say Rosamond, fold up her work. "I
would rather not have anything leave to I if I must earn it by endure
much of my uncle's cough and his ugly relation."
"he cannot be long for this world, my dear; I wouldnot hasten his end,
but what with asthma and that inward complaint, let we hope there be
something well for he in another. and I have no ill-will toward's
Mary Garth, but therebe justice to be think of. and Mr.
Featherstone's first wife bring he no money, as my sister do. her
niece and nephew cannot have so much claim as my sister's. and I must
say I think Mary Garth a dreadful plain girl--more fit for a governess."
"every one would not agree with you there, mother," say Fred, who
seem to be able to read and listen too.
"well, my dear," say Mrs. Vincy, wheel skilfully, "if she _have_
some fortune leave her,--a man marry his wife's relation, and the
Garths be so poor, and live in such a small way. but I shall leave
you to your study, my dear; for I must go and do some shopping."
"Fred's study be not very deep," say Rosamond, rise with her
mamma, "he be only read a novel."
"well, well, by-and-by hewill go to his latin and thing," say Mrs.
Vincy, soothingly, stroke her son's head. "therebe a fire in the
smoking-room on purpose. itbe your father's wish, you know--Fred, my
dear--and I always tell he you will be good, and go to college again
to take your degree."
Fred draw his mother's hand down to his lip, but say nothing.
"I suppose you be not go out rid to-day?" say Rosamond,
linger a little after her mamma be go.
"no; why?"
"papa say I may have the chestnut to ride now."
"you can go with I to-morrow, if you like. only I be go to Stone
Court, remember."
"I want to ride so much, it be indifferent to I where we go." Rosamond
really wish to go to Stone Court, of all other place.
"oh, I say, rosy," say Fred, as she be pass out of the room, "if
you be go to the piano, let I come and play some air with you."
"pray do not ask I this morning."
"why not this morning?"
"really, Fred, I wish you would leave off play the flute. a man
look very silly play the flute. and you play so out of tune."
"when next any one make love to you, Miss Rosamond, I will tell he
how oblige you be."
"why should you expect I to oblige you by hear you play the flute,
any more than I should expect you to oblige I by not play it?"
"and why should you expect I to take you out rid?"
this question lead to an adjustment, for Rosamond have set her mind on
that particular ride.
so Fred be gratify with nearly an hour's practice of "Ar hyd y nos,"
"ye bank and brae," and other favorite air from his "Instructor on
the flute;" a wheezy performance, into which he throw much ambition and
an irrepressible hopefulness.
CHAPTER XII.
"he have more tow on his distaffe
than Gerveis know."
--CHAUCER.
the ride to Stone Court, which Fred and Rosamond take the next morning,
lie through a pretty bit of midland landscape, almost all meadow and
pasture, with hedgerow still allow to grow in bushy beauty and to
spread out coral fruit for the bird. little detail give each field a
particular physiognomy, dear to the eye that have look on they from
childhood: the pool in the corner where the grass be dank and tree
lean whisperingly; the great oak shadow a bare place in
mid-pasture; the high bank where the ash-tree grow; the sudden slope
of the old marl-pit make a red background for the burdock; the
huddle roof and rick of the homestead without a traceable way of
approach; the gray gate and fence against the depth of the border
wood; and the stray hovel, its old, old thatch full of mossy hill and
valley with wondrous modulation of light and shadow such as we travel
far to see in later life, and see large, but not more beautiful.
these be the thing that make the gamut of joy in landscape to
midland-breed soul--the thing they toddle among, or perhaps learn
by heart stand between their father's knee while he drive leisurely.
but the road, even the byroad, be excellent; for Lowick, as we have
see, be not a parish of muddy lane and poor tenant; and it be into
Lowick parish that Fred and Rosamond enter after a couple of mile'
riding. another mile would bring they to Stone Court, and at the end
of the first half, the house be already visible, look as if it have
be arrest in its growth toward a stone mansion by an unexpected
budding of farm-building on its left flank, which have hinder it from
become anything more than the substantial dwelling of a gentleman
farmer. it be not the less agreeable an object in the distance for
the cluster of pinnacle corn-rick which balance the fine row of
walnut on the right.
presently it be possible to discern something that might be a gig on
the circular drive before the front door.
"dear I," say Rosamond, "I hope none of my uncle's horrible relation
be there."
"they be, though. that be Mrs. Waule's gig--the last yellow gig leave,
I should think. when I see Mrs. Waule in it, I understand how yellow
can have be wear for mourning. that gig seem to I more funereal
than a hearse. but then Mrs. Waule always have black crape on. how
do she manage it, rosy? her friend cannot always be die."
"I donot know at all. and she be not in the least evangelical," say
Rosamond, reflectively, as if that religious point of view would have
fully account for perpetual crape. "and, not poor," she add, after
a moment's pause.
"no, by George! they be as rich as Jews, those Waules and
Featherstones; I mean, for people like they, who donot want to spend
anything. and yet they hang about my uncle like vulture, and be
afraid of a farthing go away from their side of the family. but I
believe he hat they all."
the Mrs. Waule who be so far from be admirable in the eye of these
distant connection, have happen to say this very morning (not at all
with a defiant air, but in a low, muffled, neutral tone, as of a voice
hear through cotton wool) that she do not wish "to enjoy their good
opinion." she be seat, as she observe, on her own brother's hearth,
and have be Jane Featherstone five-and-twenty year before she have
be Jane Waule, which entitle she to speak when her own brother's
name have be make free with by those who have no right to it.
"what be you drive at there?" say Mr. Featherstone, hold his
stick between his knee and settle his wig, while he give she a
momentary sharp glance, which seem to react on he like a draught of
cold air and set he cough.
Mrs. Waule have to defer her answer till he be quiet again, till Mary
Garth have supply he with fresh syrup, and he have begin to rub the
gold knob of his stick, look bitterly at the fire. it be a bright
fire, but it make no difference to the chill-look purplish tint of
Mrs. Waule's face, which be as neutral as her voice; have mere
chink for eye, and lip that hardly move in speak.
"the doctor cannot master that cough, brother. itbe just like what I
have; for Ibe your own sister, constitution and everything. but, as I
be say, itbe a pity Mrs. Vincy's family cannot be well conduct."
"Tchah! you say nothing o' the sort. you say somebody have make free
with my name."
"and no more than can be prove, if what everybody say be true. my
brother Solomon tell I itbe the talk up and down in Middlemarch how
unsteady young Vincy be, and have be forever gamble at billiard
since home he come."
"nonsense! whatbe a game at billiard? itbe a good gentlemanly game;
and young Vincy be not a clodhopper. if your son John take to
billiard, now, hewould make a fool of himself."
"your nephew John never take to billiard or any other game, brother,
and be far from lose hundred of pound, which, if what everybody
say be true, must be find somewhere else than out of Mr. Vincy the
father's pocket. for they say hebe be lose money for year, though
nobody would think so, to see he go course and keep open house as
they do. and Ihave hear say Mr. Bulstrode condemn Mrs. Vincy beyond
anything for her flightiness, and spoil her child so."!
"whatbe Bulstrode to I? I donot bank with he."
"well, Mrs. Bulstrode be Mr. Vincy's own sister, and they do say that
Mr. Vincy mostly trade on the Bank money; and you may see yourself,
brother, when a woman past forty have pink string always fly, and
that light way of laugh at everything, itbe very unbecoming. but
indulge your child be one thing, and find money to pay their
debt be another. and itbe openly say that young Vincy have raise
money on his expectation. I donot say what expectation. Miss Garth
hear I, and be welcome to tell again. I know young people hang
together."
"no, thank you, Mrs. Waule," say Mary Garth. "I dislike hearing
scandal too much to wish to repeat it."
Mr. Featherstone rub the knob of his stick and make a brief
convulsive show of laughter, which have much the same genuineness as an
old whist-player's chuckle over a bad hand. still look at the fire,
he said--
"and who pretend to say Fred Vincy havenot get expectation? such a
fine, spirited fellow be like enough to have them."
there be a slight pause before Mrs. Waule reply, and when she do
so, her voice seem to be slightly moisten with tear, though she
face be still dry.
"whether or no, brother, it be naturally painful to I and my brother
Solomon to hear your name make free with, and your complaint be such
as may carry you off sudden, and people who be no more featherstone
than the Merry-Andrew at the fair, openly reckon on your property
come to _they_. and I your own sister, and Solomon your own
brother! and if thatbe to be it, what have it please the Almighty to
make family for?" here Mrs. Waule's tear fall, but with moderation.
"come, out with it, Jane!" say Mr. Featherstone, look at she. "you
mean to say, Fred Vincy have be get somebody to advance he money
on what he say he know about my will, eh?"
"I never say so, brother" (Mrs. Waule's voice have again become dry and
unshaken). "it be tell I by my brother Solomon last night when he
call come from market to give I advice about the old wheat, I
be a widow, and my son John only three-and-twenty, though steady
beyond anything. and he have it from most undeniable authority, and not
one, but many."
"stuff and nonsense! I donot believe a word of it. itbe all a get-up
story. go to the window, missy; I think I hear a horse. see if the
doctor's come."
"not get up by I, brother, nor yet by Solomon, who, whatever else he
may be--and I donot deny he have oddity--have make his will and part
his property equal between such kin as hebe friend with; though, for
my part, I think there be time when some should be consider more
than other. but Solomon make it no secret what he mean to do."
"the more fool he!" say Mr. Featherstone, with some difficulty;
break into a severe fit of cough that require Mary Garth to
stand near he, so that she do not find out whose horse they be
which presently pause stamp on the gravel before the door.
before Mr. Featherstone's cough be quiet, Rosamond enter, bear up
her rid-habit with much grace. she bow ceremoniously to Mrs.
Waule, who say stiffly, "how do you do, miss?" smile and nod
silently to Mary, and remain stand till the coughing should cease,
and allow her uncle to notice she.
"Heyday, miss!" he say at last, "you have a fine color. wherebe Fred?"
"see about the horse. he will be in presently."
"sit down, sit down. Mrs. Waule, youwould well go."
even those neighbor who have call Peter Featherstone an old fox, have
never accuse he of be insincerely polite, and his sister be quite
use to the peculiar absence of ceremony with which he mark his sense
of blood-relationship. indeed, she herself be accustom to think that
entire freedom from the necessity of behave agreeably be include in
the Almighty's intention about family. she rise slowly without any
sign of resentment, and say in her usual muffled monotone, "Brother, I
hope the new doctor will be able to do something for you. Solomon say
therebe great talk of his cleverness. Ibe sure itbe my wish you should
be spar. and therebe none more ready to nurse you than your own
sister and your own niece, if youwould only say the word. therebe
Rebecca, and Joanna, and Elizabeth, you know."
"ay, ay, I remember--you'll see Ihave remember them all--all dark and
ugly. theywould need have some money, eh? there never be any beauty in
the woman of our family; but the Featherstones have always have some
money, and the Waules too. Waule have money too. a warm man be Waule.
ay, ay; moneybe a good egg; and if you 've get money to leave behind
you, lie it in a warm nest. good-by, Mrs. Waule." here Mr.
Featherstone pull at both side of his wig as if he want to deafen
himself, and his sister go away ruminate on this oracular speech of
his. notwithstanding her jealousy of the Vincys and of Mary Garth,
there remain as the nethermost sediment in her mental shallow a
persuasion that her brother Peter Featherstone could never leave his
chief property away from his blood-relations:--else, why have the
Almighty carry off his two wife both childless, after he have gain
so much by manganese and thing, turn up when nobody expect
it?--and why be there a Lowick parish church, and the Waules and
powderell all sit te in the same pew for generation, and the
Featherstone pew next to they, if, the Sunday after her brother Peter's
death, everybody be to know that the property be go out of the
family? the human mind have at no period accept a moral chaos; and so
preposterous a result be not strictly conceivable. but we be
frighten at much that be not strictly conceivable.
when Fred come in the old man eye he with a peculiar twinkle, which
the young have often have reason to interpret as pride in the
satisfactory detail of his appearance.
"you two miss go away," say Mr. Featherstone. "I want to speak to
Fred."
"come into my room, Rosamond, you will not mind the cold for a little
while," say Mary. the two girl have not only know each other in
childhood, but have be at the same provincial school together (Mary as
an articled pupil), so that they have many memory in common, and like
very well to talk in private. indeed, this tete-a-tete be one of
Rosamond's object in come to Stone Court.
Old Featherstone would not begin the dialogue till the door have be
close. he continue to look at Fred with the same twinkle and with
one of his habitual grimace, alternately screw and widen his
mouth; and when he speak, it be in a low tone, which might be take
for that of an informer ready to be buy off, rather than for the
tone of an offended senior. he be not a man to feel any strong moral
indignation even on account of trespass against himself. it be
natural that other should want to get an advantage over he, but then,
he be a little too cunning for they.
"so, sir, youhave be pay ten per cent for money which youhave
promise to pay off by mortgage my land when Ibe dead and go, eh?
you put my life at a twelvemonth, say. but I can alter my will yet."
Fred blush. he have not borrow money in that way, for excellent
reason. but he be conscious of have speak with some confidence
(perhaps with more than he exactly remember) about his prospect of
get Featherstone's land as a future mean of pay present debt.
"I donot know what you refer to, sir. I have certainly never borrow
any money on such an insecurity. please to explain."
"no, sir, itbe you must explain. I can alter my will yet, let I tell
you. Ibe of sound mind--can reckon compound interest in my head, and
remember every fool's name as well as I could twenty year ago. what
the deuce? Ibe under eighty. I say, you must contradict this story."
"I have contradict it, sir," Fred answer, with a touch of
impatience, not remember that his uncle do not verbally
discriminate contradict from disproving, though no one be far
from confound the two idea than old Featherstone, who often
wonder that so many fool take his own assertion for proof. "but I
contradict it again. the story be a silly lie."
"Nonsense! you must bring dockiment. it come from authority."
"name the authority, and make he name the man of whom I borrow the
money, and then I can disprove the story."
"itbe pretty good authority, I think--a man who know most of what go
on in Middlemarch. itbe that fine, religious, charitable uncle o'
your. come now!" here Mr. Featherstone have his peculiar inward shake
which signify merriment.
"Mr. Bulstrode?"
"who else, eh?"
"then the story have grow into this lie out of some sermonize word
he may have let fall about I. do they pretend that he name the man
who lend I the money?"
"if there be such a man, depend upon it Bulstrode know he. but,
suppose you only try to get the money lent, and donot get
it--Bulstrode 'ud know that too. you bring I a writing from Bulstrode
to say he donot believe youhave ever promise to pay your debt out o'
my land. come now!"
Mr. Featherstone's face require its whole scale of grimace as a
muscular outlet to his silent triumph in the soundness of his faculty.
Fred feel himself to be in a disgusting dilemma.
"you must be joke, sir. Mr. Bulstrode, like other man, believe
score of thing that be not true, and he have a prejudice against I.
I could easily get he to write that he know no fact in proof of the
report you speak of, though it might lead to unpleasantness. but I
could hardly ask he to write down what he believe or do not believe
about I." Fred pause an instant, and then add, in politic appeal to
his uncle's vanity, "that be hardly a thing for a gentleman to ask."
but he be disappoint in the result.
"ay, I know what you mean. youwould soon offend I than Bulstrode. and
whatbe he?--hebe get no land hereabout that ever I hear tell of. a
speckilate fellow! he may come down any day, when the devil leave
off back he. and thatbe what his religion mean: he want God
A'mighty to come in. thatbe nonsense! therebe one thing I make out
pretty clear when I use to go to church--and itbe this: God A'mighty
stick to the land. he promise land, and he give land, and he make
chap rich with corn and cattle. but you take the other side. you
like Bulstrode and speckilation well than Featherstone and land."
"I beg your pardon, sir," say Fred, rise, stand with his back to
the fire and beat his boot with his whip. "I like neither Bulstrode
nor speculation." he speak rather sulkily, feel himself stalemate.
"well, well, you can do without I, thatbe pretty clear," say old
Featherstone, secretly dislike the possibility that Fred would show
himself at all independent. "you neither want a bit of land to make a
squire of you instead of a starve parson, nor a lift of a hundred
pound by the way. itbe all one to I. I can make five codicil if I
like, and I shall keep my bank-note for a nest-egg. itbe all one to
I."
Fred color again. Featherstone have rarely give he present of
money, and at this moment it seem almost hard to part with the
immediate prospect of bank-note than with the more distant prospect of
the land.
"I be not ungrateful, sir. I never mean to show disregard for any
kind intention you might have towards I. on the contrary."
"very good. then prove it. you bring I a letter from Bulstrode
say he donot believe youhave be crack and promise to pay
your debt out o' my land, and then, if therebe any scrape youhave get
into, wewill see if I cannot back you a bit. come now! thatbe a
bargain. here, give I your arm. Iwill try and walk round the room."
Fred, in spite of his irritation, have kindness enough in he to be a
little sorry for the unloved, unvenerated old man, who with his
dropsical leg look more than usually pitiable in walk. while
give his arm, he think that he should not himself like to be an old
fellow with his constitution break up; and he wait
good-temperedly, first before the window to hear the wonte remark
about the guinea-fowl and the weather-cock, and then before the scanty
book-shelf, of which the chief glory in dark calf be Josephus,
Culpepper, Klopstock's "Messiah," and several volume of the
"Gentleman's Magazine."
"read I the name o' the book. come now! yoube a college man."
Fred give he the title.
"what do missy want with more book? what must you be bring she
more book for?"
"they amuse she, sir. she be very fond of reading."
"a little too fond," say Mr. Featherstone, captiously. "she be for
reading when she sit with I. but I put a stop to that. shebe get the
newspaper to read out loud. thatbe enough for one day, I should think.
I cannot abide to see her reading to herself. you mind and not bring
she any more book, do you hear?"
"yes, sir, I hear." Fred have receive this order before, and have
secretly disobey it. he intend to disobey it again.
"ring the bell," say Mr. Featherstone; "I want missy to come down."
Rosamond and Mary have be talk fast than their male friend.
they do not think of sit down, but stand at the toilet-table near
the window while Rosamond take off her hat, adjust her veil, and
apply little touch of her finger-tip to her hair--hair of
infantine fairness, neither flaxen nor yellow. Mary Garth seem all
the plainer stand at an angle between the two nymph--the one in the
glass, and the one out of it, who look at each other with eye of
heavenly blue, deep enough to hold the most exquisite meaning an
ingenious beholder could put into they, and deep enough to hide the
meaning of the owner if these should happen to be less exquisite.
only a few child in Middlemarch look blond by the side of
Rosamond, and the slim figure display by her riding-habit have
delicate undulation. in fact, most man in Middlemarch, except her
brother, hold that Miss Vincy be the good girl in the world, and some
call she an angel. Mary Garth, on the contrary, have the aspect of an
ordinary sinner: she be brown; her curly dark hair be rough and
stubborn; her stature be low; and it would not be true to declare, in
satisfactory antithesis, that she have all the virtue. Plainness have
its peculiar temptation and vice quite as much as beauty; it be apt
either to feign amiability, or, not feign it, to show all the
repulsiveness of discontent: at any rate, to be call an ugly thing in
contrast with that lovely creature your companion, be apt to produce
some effect beyond a sense of fine veracity and fitness in the phrase.
at the age of two-and-twenty Mary have certainly not attain that
perfect good sense and good principle which be usually recommend to
the less fortunate girl, as if they be to be obtain in quantity
ready mixed, with a flavor of resignation as require. her shrewdness
have a streak of satiric bitterness continually renew and never
carry utterly out of sight, except by a strong current of gratitude
towards those who, instead of tell she that she ought to be
content, do something to make she so. advance womanhood have
temper her plainness, which be of a good human sort, such as the
mother of our race have very commonly wear in all latitude under a
more or less become headgear. Rembrandt would have paint she with
pleasure, and would have make her broad feature look out of the canvas
with intelligent honesty. for honesty, truth-tell fairness, be
Mary's reign virtue: she neither try to create illusion, nor
indulge in they for her own behoof, and when she be in a good mood
she have humor enough in she to laugh at herself. when she and Rosamond
happen both to be reflect in the glass, she say, laughingly--
"what a brown patch I be by the side of you, rosy! you be the most
unbecoming companion."
"oh no! no one think of your appearance, you be so sensible and
useful, Mary. Beauty be of very little consequence in reality," say
Rosamond, turn her head towards Mary, but with eye swerve towards
the new view of her neck in the glass.
"you mean my beauty," say Mary, rather sardonically.
Rosamond think, "Poor Mary, she take the kind thing ill." Aloud
she say, "what have you be do lately?"
"I? oh, mind the house--pour out syrup--pretend to be amiable
and content--learn to have a bad opinion of everybody."
"it be a wretched life for you."
"no," say Mary, curtly, with a little toss of her head. "I think my
life be pleasanter than your Miss Morgan's."
"yes; but Miss Morgan be so uninteresting, and not young."
"she be interesting to herself, I suppose; and I be not at all sure
that everything get easy as one get old."
"no," say Rosamond, reflectively; "one wonder what such people do,
without any prospect. to be sure, there be religion as a support.
but," she add, dimple, "it be very different with you,'mary. you
may have an offer."
"have any one tell you he mean to make I one?"
"of course not. I mean, there be a gentleman who may fall in love with
you, see you almost every day."
a certain change in Mary's face be chiefly determine by the resolve
not to show any change.
"do that always make people fall in love?" she answer, carelessly;
"it seem to I quite as often a reason for detest each other."
"not when they be interesting and agreeable. I hear that Mr. Lydgate
be both."
"oh, Mr. Lydgate!" say Mary, with an unmistakable lapse into
indifference. "you want to know something about he," she add, not
choose to indulge Rosamond's indirectness.
"merely, how you like he."
"there be no question of like at present. my liking always want
some little kindness to kindle it. I be not magnanimous enough to like
people who speak to I without seem to see I."
"be he so haughty?" say Rosamond, with heightened satisfaction. "you
know that he be of good family?"
"no; he do not give that as a reason."
"Mary! you be the oddest girl. but what sort of look man be he?
describe he to I."
"how can one describe a man? I can give you an inventory: heavy
eyebrow, dark eye, a straight nose, thick dark hair, large solid
white hand--and--let I see--oh, an exquisite cambric
pocket-handkerchief. but you will see he. you know this be about the
time of his visit."
Rosamond blush a little, but say, meditatively, "I rather like a
haughty manner. I cannot endure a rattle young man."
"I do not tell you that Mr. Lydgate be haughty; but il y en a pour
tous les gout, as little Mamselle use to say, and if any girl can
choose the particular sort of conceit she would like, I should think it
be you, rosy."
"Haughtiness be not conceit; I call Fred conceite."
"I wish no one say any bad of he. he should be more careful. Mrs.
Waule have be tell uncle that Fred be very unsteady." Mary speak
from a girlish impulse which get the well of her judgment. there be
a vague uneasiness associate with the word "unsteady" which she hop
Rosamond might say something to dissipate. but she purposely abstain
from mention Mrs. Waule's more special insinuation.
"oh, Fred be horrid!" say Rosamond. she would not have allow
herself so unsuitable a word to any one but Mary.
"what do you mean by horrid?"
"he be so idle, and make papa so angry, and say he will not take
order."
"I think Fred be quite right."
"how can you say he be quite right, Mary? I think you have more sense
of religion."
"he be not fit to be a clergyman."
"but he ought to be fit."--"Well, then, he be not what he ought to be.
I know some other people who be in the same case."
"but no one approve of they. I should not like to marry a clergyman;
but there must be clergyman."
"it do not follow that Fred must be one."
"but when papa have be at the expense of educate he for it! and
only suppose, if he should have no fortune leave he?"
"I can suppose that very well," say Mary, dryly.
"then I wonder you can defend Fred," say Rosamond, incline to push
this point.
"I donot defend he," say Mary, laugh; "I would defend any parish
from have he for a clergyman."
"but of course if he be a clergyman, he must be different."
"yes, he would be a great hypocrite; and he be not that yet."
"it be of no use say anything to you, Mary. you always take Fred's
part."
"why should I not take his part?" say Mary, light up. "he would
take mine. he be the only person who take the least trouble to oblige
I."
"you make I feel very uncomfortable, Mary," say Rosamond, with she
grave mildness; "I would not tell mamma for the world."
"what would you not tell she?" say Mary, angrily.
"pray do not go into a rage, Mary," say Rosamond, mildly as ever.
"if your mamma be afraid that Fred will make I an offer, tell she that
I would not marry he if he ask I. but he be not go to do so,
that I be aware. he certainly never have ask I."
"Mary, you be always so violent."
"and you be always so exasperating."
"I? what can you blame I for?"
"oh, blameless people be always the most exasperating. there be the
bell--I think we must go down."
"I do not mean to quarrel," say Rosamond, put on her hat.
"Quarrel? nonsense; we have not quarrel. if one be not to get into
a rage sometimes, what be the good of be friend?"
"be I to repeat what you have say?" "just as you please. I never say
what I be afraid of have repeat. but let we go down."
Mr. Lydgate be rather late this morning, but the visitor stay long
enough to see he; for Mr. Featherstone ask Rosamond to sing to he,
and she herself be so kind as to propose a second favorite song of
his--"flow on, thou shin river"--after she have sing "Home, sweet
home" (which she detest). this hard-head old Overreach approve of
the sentimental song, as the suitable garnish for girl, and also as
fundamentally fine, sentiment be the right thing for a song.
Mr. Featherstone be still applaud the last performance, and
assure missy that her voice be as clear as a blackbird's, when Mr.
Lydgate's horse pass the window.
his dull expectation of the usual disagreeable routine with an aged
patient--who can hardly believe that medicine would not "set he up" if
the doctor be only clever enough--add to his general disbelief in
Middlemarch charm, make a doubly effective background to this vision
of Rosamond, whom old Featherstone make haste ostentatiously to
introduce as his niece, though he have never think it worth while to
speak of Mary Garth in that light. nothing escape Lydgate in
Rosamond's graceful behavior: how delicately she waive the notice
which the old man's want of taste have thrust upon she by a quiet
gravity, not show her dimple on the wrong occasion, but show
they afterwards in speak to Mary, to whom she address herself with
so much good-natured interest, that lydgate, after quickly examine
Mary more fully than he have do before, see an adorable kindness in
Rosamond's eye. but Mary from some cause look rather out of temper.
"Miss Rosy have be sing I a song--you've nothing to say against
that, eh, doctor?" say Mr. Featherstone. "I like it well than your
physic."
"that have make I forget how the time be go," say Rosamond, rise
to reach her hat, which she have lay aside before singing, so that her
flower-like head on its white stem be see in perfection above-her
riding-habit. "Fred, we must really go."
"very good," say Fred, who have his own reason for not be in the
good spirit, and want to get away.
"Miss Vincy be a musician?" say Lydgate, follow she with his eye.
(every nerve and muscle in Rosamond be adjust to the consciousness
that she be be look at. she be by nature an actress of part
that enter into her physique: she even act her own character, and
so well, that she do not know it to be precisely her own.)
"the good in Middlemarch, Iwill be bind," say Mr. Featherstone, "let
the next be who she will. eh, Fred? speak up for your sister."
"Ibe afraid Ibe out of court, sir. my evidence would be good for
nothing."
"Middlemarch have not a very high standard, uncle," say Rosamond, with
a pretty lightness, go towards her whip, which lie at a distance.
Lydgate be quick in anticipate she. he reach the whip before she
do, and turn to present it to she. she bow and look at he: he
of course be look at she, and their eye meet with that peculiar
meeting which be never arrive at by effort, but seem like a sudden
divine clearance of haze. I think Lydgate turn a little pale than
usual, but Rosamond blush deeply and feel a certain astonishment.
after that, she be really anxious to go, and do not know what sort of
stupidity her uncle be talk of when she go to shake hand with
he.
yet this result, which she take to be a mutual impression, call
fall in love, be just what Rosamond have contemplate beforehand.
ever since that important new arrival in Middlemarch she have weave a
little future, of which something like this scene be the necessary
beginning. stranger, whether wrecked and cling to a raft, or duly
escort and accompany by portmanteau, have always have a
circumstantial fascination for the virgin mind, against which native
merit have urge itself in vain. and a stranger be absolutely
necessary to Rosamond's social romance, which have always turn on a
lover and bridegroom who be not a Middlemarcher, and who have no
connection at all like her own: of late, indeed, the construction
seem to demand that he should somehow be relate to a baronet. now
that she and the stranger have meet, reality prove much more move than
anticipation, and Rosamond could not doubt that this be the great
epoch of her life. she judge of her own symptom as those of
awakening love, and she hold it still more natural that Mr. Lydgate
should have fall in love at first sight of she. these thing
happen so often at ball, and why not by the morning light, when the
complexion show all the well for it? Rosamond, though no old
than Mary, be rather use to be fall in love with; but she, for
her part, have remain indifferent and fastidiously critical towards
both fresh sprig and fade bachelor. and here be Mr. Lydgate suddenly
correspond to her ideal, be altogether foreign to Middlemarch,
carry a certain air of distinction congruous with good family, and
possess connection which offer vista of that middle-class
heaven, rank; a man of talent, also, whom it would be especially
delightful to enslave: in fact, a man who have touch her nature quite
newly, and bring a vivid interest into her life which be well than
any fancied "might-be" such as she be in the habit of oppose to the
actual.
thus, in rid home, both the brother and the sister be preoccupy
and incline to be silent. Rosamond, whose basis for her structure have
the usual airy slightness, be of remarkably detailed and realistic
imagination when the foundation have be once presuppose; and before
they have ride a mile she be far on in the costume and introduction
of her wed life, have determine on her house in Middle-march, and
foresee the visit she would pay to her husband's high-breed relative
at a distance, whose finished manner she could appropriate as
thoroughly as she have do her school accomplishment, prepare
herself thus for vaguer elevation which might ultimately come. there
be nothing financial, still less sordid, in her prevision: she care
about what be consider refinement, and not about the money that
be to pay for they.
Fred's mind, on the other hand, be busy with an anxiety which even his
ready hopefulness could not immediately quell. he see no way of
elude Featherstone's stupid demand without incur consequence
which he like less even than the task of fulfil it. his father
be already out of humor with he, and would be still more so if he
be the occasion of any additional coolness between his own family and
the Bulstrodes. then, he himself hat have to go and speak to his
uncle Bulstrode, and perhaps after drink wine he have say many
foolish thing about Featherstone's property, and these have be
magnify by report. Fred feel that he make a wretched figure as a
fellow who brag about expectation from a queer old miser like
Featherstone, and go to beg for certificate at his bidding.
but--those expectation! he really have they, and he see no agreeable
alternative if he give they up; besides, he have lately make a debt
which gall he extremely, and old Featherstone have almost bargain
to pay it off. the whole affair be miserably small: his debt be
small, even his expectation be not anything so very magnificent.
Fred have know man to whom he would have be ashamed of confess the
smallness of his scrape. such rumination naturally produce a streak
of misanthropic bitterness. to be bear the son of a middlemarch
manufacturer, and inevitable heir to nothing in particular, while such
man as Mainwaring and Vyan--certainly life be a poor business, when a
spirited young fellow, with a good appetite for the good of everything,
have so poor an outlook.
it have not occur to Fred that the introduction of Bulstrode's name
in the matter be a fiction of old Featherstone's; nor could this have
make any difference to his position. he see plainly enough that the
old man want to exercise his power by torment he a little, and
also probably to get some satisfaction out of see he on unpleasant
term with Bulstrode. Fred fancy that he see to the bottom of his
uncle Featherstone's soul, though in reality half what he see there be
no more than the reflex of his own inclination. the difficult task of
know another soul be not for young gentleman whose consciousness be
chiefly make up of their own wish.
Fred's main point of debate with himself be, whether he should tell
his father, or try to get through the affair without his father's
knowledge. it be probably Mrs. Waule who have be talk about he;
and if Mary Garth have repeat Mrs. Waule's report to Rosamond, it
would be sure to reach his father, who would as surely question he
about it. he say to Rosamond, as they slacken their pace--
"Rosy, do Mary tell you that Mrs. Waule have say anything about I?"
"yes, indeed, she do."
"what?"
"that you be very unsteady."
"be that all?"
"I should think that be enough, Fred."
"you be sure she say no more?"
"Mary mention nothing else. but really, Fred, I think you ought to
be ashamed."
"oh, fudge! donot lecture I. what do Mary say about it?"
"I be not oblige to tell you. you care so very much what Mary say,
and you be too rude to allow I to speak."
"of course I care what Mary say. she be the good girl I know."
"I should never have think she be a girl to fall in love with."
"how do you know what man would fall in love with? girl never know."
"at least, Fred, let I advise _you_ not to fall in love with she, for
she say she would not marry you if you ask she."
"she might have wait till I do ask she."
"I know it would nettle you, Fred."
"not at all. she would not have say so if you have not provoke she."
before reach home, Fred conclude that he would tell the whole
affair as simply as possible to his father, who might perhaps take on
himself the unpleasant business of speak to Bulstrode.
BOOK II.
OLD and YOUNG.
CHAPTER XIII.
1st gent. how class your man?--as well than the most,
or, seem well, bad beneath that cloak?
as saint or knave, pilgrim or hypocrite?
2d Gent. Nay, tell I how you class your wealth of book
the drifted relic of all time.
as well sort they at once by size and livery:
Vellum, tall copy, and the common calf
will hardly cover more diversity
than all your label cunningly devise
to class your unread author.
in consequence of what he have hear from Fred, Mr. Vincy determine to
speak with Mr. Bulstrode in his private room at the Bank at half-past
one, when he be usually free from other caller. but a visitor have
come in at one o'clock, and Mr. Bulstrode have so much to say to he,
that there be little chance of the interview be over in half an
hour. the banker's speech be fluent, but it be also copious, and he
use up an appreciable amount of time in brief meditative pause. do
not imagine his sickly aspect to have be of the yellow, black-haire
sort: he have a pale blond skin, thin gray-besprinkle brown hair,
light-gray eye, and a large forehead. loud man call his subdued
tone an undertone, and sometimes imply that it be inconsistent with
openness; though there seem to be no reason why a loud man should not
be give to concealment of anything except his own voice, unless it can
be show that Holy Writ have place the seat of candor in the lung.
Mr. Bulstrode have also a deferential bend attitude in listening, and
an apparently fix attentiveness in his eye which make those person
who think themselves worth hear infer that he be seek the
utmost improvement from their discourse. other, who expect to make
no great figure, dislike this kind of moral lantern turn on they.
if you be not proud of your cellar, there be no thrill of satisfaction
in see your guest hold up his wine-glass to the light and look
judicial. such joy be reserve for conscious merit. hence Mr.
Bulstrode's close attention be not agreeable to the publican and
sinner in Middlemarch; it be attribute by some to his be a
Pharisee, and by other to his be evangelical. Less superficial
reasoner among they wish to know who his father and grandfather
be, observe that five-and-twenty year ago nobody have ever hear of
a Bulstrode in Middlemarch. to his present visitor, Lydgate, the
scrutinize look be a matter of indifference: he simply form an
unfavorable opinion of the banker's constitution, and conclude that he
have an eager inward life with little enjoyment of tangible thing.
"I shall be exceedingly oblige if you will look in on I here
occasionally, Mr. Lydgate," the banker observe, after a brief pause.
"if, as I dare to hope, I have the privilege of find you a valuable
coadjutor in the interesting matter of hospital management, there will
be many question which we shall need to discuss in private. as to the
new hospital, which be nearly finish, I shall consider what you have
say about the advantage of the special destination for fever. the
decision will rest with I, for though Lord Medlicote have give the
land and timber for the building, he be not dispose to give his
personal attention to the object."
"there be few thing well worth the pain in a provincial town like
this," say Lydgate. "a fine fever hospital in addition to the old
infirmary might be the nucleus of a medical school here, when once we
get our medical reform; and what would do more for medical education
than the spread of such school over the country? a bear provincial
man who have a grain of public spirit as well as a few idea, should do
what he can to resist the rush of everything that be a little well
than common towards London. any valid professional aim may often find
a freer, if not a rich field, in the province."
one of Lydgate's gift be a voice habitually deep and sonorous, yet
capable of become very low and gentle at the right moment. about his
ordinary bearing there be a certain fling, a fearless expectation of
success, a confidence in his own power and integrity much fortify by
contempt for petty obstacle or seduction of which he have have no
experience. but this proud openness be make lovable by an expression
of unaffected good-will. Mr. Bulstrode perhaps like he the well for
the difference between they in pitch and manner; he certainly like
he the well, as Rosamond do, for be a stranger in Middlemarch.
one can begin so many thing with a new person!--even begin to be a
well man.
"I shall rejoice to furnish your zeal with full opportunity," Mr.
Bulstrode answer; "I mean, by confide to you the superintendence of
my new hospital, should a mature knowledge favor that issue, for I be
determined that so great an object shall not be shackle by our two
physician. indeed, I be encourage to consider your advent to this
town as a gracious indication that a more manifest blessing be now to
be award to my effort, which have hitherto be much with stood.
with regard to the old infirmary, we have gain the initial point--I
mean your election. and now I hope you will not shrink from incur
a certain amount of jealousy and dislike from your professional
brother by present yourself as a reformer."
"I will not profess bravery," say lydgate, smile, "but I acknowledge
a good deal of pleasure in fighting, and I should not care for my
profession, if I do not believe that well method be to be find
and enforce there as well as everywhere else."
"the standard of that profession be low in Middlemarch, my dear sir,"
say the banker. "I mean in knowledge and skill; not in social status,
for our medical man be most of they connect with respectable
townspeople here. my own imperfect health have induce I to give some
attention to those palliative resource which the divine mercy have
place within our reach. I have consult eminent man in the
metropolis, and I be painfully aware of the backwardness under which
medical treatment labor in our provincial district."
"yes;--with our present medical rule and education, one must be
satisfied now and then to meet with a fair practitioner. as to all the
high question which determine the starting-point of a diagnosis--as
to the philosophy of medial evidence--any glimmering of these can only
come from a scientific culture of which country practitioner have
usually no more notion than the man in the moon."
Mr. Bulstrode, bend and look intently, find the form which
Lydgate have give to his agreement not quite suited to his
comprehension. under such circumstance a judicious man change the
topic and enter on ground where his own gift may be more useful.
"I be aware," he say, "that the peculiar bias of medical ability be
towards material mean. nevertheless, Mr. Lydgate, I hope we shall not
vary in sentiment as to a measure in which you be not likely to be
actively concern, but in which your sympathetic concurrence may be an
aid to I. you recognize, I hope; the existence of spiritual interest
in your patient?"
"certainly I do. but those word be apt to cover different meaning
to different mind."
"precisely. and on such subject wrong teaching be as fatal as no
teaching. now a point which I have much at heart to secure be a new
regulation as to clerical attendance at the old infirmary. the
building stand in Mr. Farebrother's parish. you know Mr. Farebrother?"
"I have see he. he give I his vote. I must call to thank he. he
seem a very bright pleasant little fellow. and I understand he be a
naturalist."
"Mr. Farebrother, my dear sir, be a man deeply painful to contemplate.
I suppose there be not a clergyman in this country who have great
talent." Mr. Bulstrode pause and look meditative.
"I have not yet be pain by find any excessive talent in
Middlemarch," say Lydgate, bluntly.
"what I desire," Mr. Bulstrode continue, look still more serious,
"be that Mr. Farebrother's attendance at the hospital should be
supersede by the appointment of a chaplain--of Mr. Tyke, in fact--and
that no other spiritual aid should be call in."
"as a medial man I could have no opinion on such a point unless I know
Mr. Tyke, and even then I should require to know the case in which he
be apply." Lydgate smile, but he be bent on be circumspect.
"of course you cannot enter fully into the merit of this measure at
present. but"--here Mr. Bulstrode begin to speak with a more chisel
emphasis--"the subject be likely to be refer to the medical board of
the infirmary, and what I trust I may ask of you be, that in virtue of
the cooperation between we which I now look forward to, you will not,
so far as you be concern, be influence by my opponent in this
matter."
"I hope I shall have nothing to do with clerical dispute," say
Lydgate. "the path I have choose be to work well in my own profession."
"my responsibility, Mr. Lydgate, be of a broad kind. with I,
indeed, this question be one of sacred accountableness; whereas with my
opponent, I have good reason to say that it be an occasion for
gratify a spirit of worldly opposition. but I shall not therefore
drop one iota of my conviction, or cease to identify myself with that
truth which an evil generation hate. I have devote myself to this
object of hospital-improvement, but I will boldly confess to you, Mr.
Lydgate, that I should have no interest in hospital if I believe that
nothing more be concern therein than the cure of mortal disease. I
have another ground of action, and in the face of persecution I will
not conceal it."
Mr. Bulstrode's voice have become a loud and agitated whisper as he say
the last word.
"there we certainly differ," say Lydgate. but he be not sorry that
the door be now open, and Mr. Vincy be announce. that florid
sociable personage be become more interesting to he since he have see
Rosamond. not that, like she, he have be weave any future in which
their lot be unite; but a man naturally remember a charming girl
with pleasure, and be willing to dine where he may see she again.
before he take leave, Mr. Vincy have give that invitation which he have
be "in no hurry about," for Rosamond at breakfast have mention that
she think her uncle Featherstone have take the new doctor into great
favor.
Mr. Bulstrode, alone with his brother-in-law, pour himself out a
glass of water, and open a sandwich-box.
"I cannot persuade you to adopt my regimen, vincy?"
"no, no; Ihave no opinion of that system. life want padding," say Mr.
Vincy, unable to omit his portable theory. "however," he go on,
accent the word, as if to dismiss all irrelevance, "what I come here
to talk about be a little affair of my young scapegrace, Fred's."
"that be a subject on which you and I be likely to take quite as
different view as on diet, Vincy."
"I hope not this time." (Mr. Vincy be resolve to be good-humor.)
"the fact be, itbe about a whim of old Featherstone's. somebody have
be cook up a story out of spite, and tell it to the old man, to
try to set he against Fred. hebe very fond of Fred, and be likely to
do something handsome for he; indeed he have as good as tell Fred that
he mean to leave he his land, and that make other people jealous."
"Vincy, I must repeat, that you will not get any concurrence from I as
to the course you have pursue with your eld son. it be entirely
from worldly vanity that you destine he for the Church: with a family
of three son and four daughter, you be not warrant in devoting
money to an expensive education which have succeed in nothing but in
give he extravagant idle habit. you be now reap the
consequence."
to point out other people's error be a duty that Mr. Bulstrode rarely
shrink from, but Mr. Vincy be not equally prepared to be patient.
when a man have the immediate prospect of be mayor, and be ready, in
the interest of commerce, to take up a firm attitude on politic
generally, he have naturally a sense of his importance to the framework
of thing which seem to throw question of private conduct into the
background. and this particular reproof irritate he more than any
other. it be eminently superfluous to he to be tell that he be
reap the consequence. but he feel his neck under Bulstrode's yoke;
and though he usually enjoy kick, he be anxious to refrain from
that relief.
"as to that, Bulstrode, itbe no use go back. Ibe not one of your
pattern man, and I donot pretend to be. I couldnot foresee everything
in the trade; there benot a fine business in Middlemarch than ours,
and the lad be clever. my poor brother be in the Church, and would
have do well--have get preferment already, but that stomach fever take
he off: else he might have be a dean by this time. I think I be
justify in what I try to do for Fred. if you come to religion, it
seem to I a man shouldnot want to carve out his meat to an ounce
beforehand:--one must trust a little to Providence and be generous.
itbe a good british feeling to try and raise your family a little: in
my opinion, itbe a father's duty to give his son a fine chance."
"I donot wish to act otherwise than as your good friend, Vincy, when I
say that what you have be utter just now be one mass of
worldliness and inconsistent folly."
"very well," say Mr. Vincy, kick in spite of resolution, "I never
profess to be anything but worldly; and, whatbe more, I donot see
anybody else who be not worldly. I suppose you donot conduct business
on what you call unworldly principle. the only difference I see be
that one worldliness be a little bit honester than another."
"this kind of discussion be unfruitful, Vincy," say Mr. Bulstrode,
who, finish his sandwich, have throw himself back in his chair, and
shade his eye as if weary. "you have some more particular business."
"yes, yes. the long and short of it be, somebody have tell old
Featherstone, give you as the authority, that Fred have be borrow
or try to borrow money on the prospect of his land. of course you
never say any such nonsense. but the old fellow will insist on it
that Fred should bring he a denial in your handwriting; that be, just
a bit of a note say you donot believe a word of such stuff, either
of his have borrow or try to borrow in such a fool's way. I
suppose you can have no objection to do that."
"pardon I. I have an objection. I be by no mean sure that your son,
in his recklessness and ignorance--I will use no severer word--have not
try to raise money by hold out his future prospect, or even that
some one may not have be foolish enough to supply he on so vague a
presumption: there be plenty of such lax money-lending as of other
folly in the world."
"but Fred give I his honor that he have never borrow money on the
pretence of any understanding about his uncle's land. he be not a
liar. I donot want to make he well than he be. I have blow he up
well--nobody can say I wink at what he do. but he be not a liar.
and I should have think--but I may be wrong--that there be no
religion to hinder a man from believe the good of a young fellow,
when you donot know bad. it seem to I it would be a poor sort of
religion to put a spoke in his wheel by refuse to say you donot
believe such harm of he as youhave get no good reason to believe."
"I be not at all sure that I should be befriend your son by
smooth his way to the future possession of Featherstone's property.
I cannot regard wealth as a blessing to those who use it simply as a
harvest for this world. you do not like to hear these thing, Vincy,
but on this occasion I feel call upon to tell you that I have no
motive for further such a disposition of property as that which you
refer to. I do not shrink from say that it will not tend to your
son's eternal welfare or to the glory of God. why then should you
expect I to pen this kind of affidavit, which have no object but to
keep up a foolish partiality and secure a foolish bequest?"
"if you mean to hinder everybody from have money but saint and
evangelist, you must give up some profitable partnership, thatbe all
I can say," Mr. Vincy burst out very bluntly. "it may be for the glory
of God, but it be not for the glory of the Middlemarch trade, that
Plymdale's house use those blue and green dye it get from the
Brassing manufactory; they rot the silk, thatbe all I know about it.
perhaps if other people know so much of the profit go to the glory of
God, they might like it well. but I donot mind so much about that--I
could get up a pretty row, if I choose."
Mr. Bulstrode pause a little before he answer. "you pain I very
much by speak in this way, Vincy. I do not expect you to understand
my ground of action--it be not an easy thing even to thread a path for
principle in the intricacy of the world--still less to make the
thread clear for the careless and the scoffing. you must remember, if
you please, that I stretch my tolerance towards you as my wife's
brother, and that it little become you to complain of I as
withholding material help towards the worldly position of your family.
I must remind you that it be not your own prudence or judgment that have
enable you to keep your place in the trade."
"very likely not; but you have be no loser by my trade yet," say Mr.
Vincy, thoroughly nettle (a result which be seldom much retarded by
previous resolution). "and when you marry Harriet, I donot see how
you could expect that our family should not hang by the same nail.
if youhave change your mind, and want my family to come down in the
world, youwould well say so. Ihave never change; Ibe a plain churchman
now, just as I use to be before doctrine come up. I take the world
as I find it, in trade and everything else. Ibe content to be no
bad than my neighbor. but if you want we to come down in the world,
say so. I shall know well what to do then."
"you talk unreasonably. shall you come down in the world for want of
this letter about your son?"
"well, whether or not, I consider it very unhandsome of you to refuse
it. such doing may be line with religion, but outside they have a
nasty, dog-in-the-manger look. you might as well slander Fred: it
come pretty near to it when you refuse to say you donot set a slander
go. itbe this sort of thing--this tyrannical spirit, want to
play bishop and banker everywhere--itbe this sort of thing make a
man's name stink."
"Vincy, if you insist on quarrel with I, it will be exceedingly
painful to Harriet as well as myself," say Mr. Bulstrode, with a
trifle more eagerness and paleness than usual.
"I donot want to quarrel. itbe for my interest--and perhaps for your
too--that we should be friend. I bear you no grudge; I think no bad
of you than I do of other people. a man who half starve himself, and
go the length in family prayer, and so on, that you do, believe in
his religion whatever it may be: you could turn over your capital just
as fast with cursing and swearing:--plenty of fellow do. you like to
be master, therebe no deny that; you must be first chop in heaven,
else you willnot like it much. but yoube my sister's husband, and we
ought to stick together; and if I know Harriet, shewill consider it your
fault if we quarrel because you strain at a gnat in this way, and
refuse to do Fred a good turn. and I donot mean to say I shall bear it
well. I consider it unhandsome."
Mr. Vincy rise, begin to button his great-coat, and look steadily at
his brother-in-law, mean to imply a demand for a decisive answer.
this be not the first time that Mr. Bulstrode have begin by admonish
Mr. Vincy, and have end by see a very unsatisfactory reflection of
himself in the coarse unflattering mirror which that manufacturer's
mind present to the subtler light and shadow of his fellow-man; and
perhaps his experience ought to have warn he how the scene would
end. but a full-fed fountain will be generous with its water even in
the rain, when they be bad than useless; and a fine fount of
admonition be apt to be equally irrepressible.
it be not in Mr. Bulstrode's nature to comply directly in consequence
of uncomfortable suggestion. before change his course, he always
need to shape his motif and bring they into accordance with his
habitual standard. he say, at last--
"I will reflect a little, Vincy. I will mention the subject to
Harriet. I shall probably send you a letter."
"very well. as soon as you can, please. I hope it will all be settle
before I see you to-morrow."
CHAPTER XIV.
"follow here the strict receipt
for that sauce to dainty meat,
name Idleness, which many eat
by preference, and call it sweet:
first watch for morsel, like a hound
mix well with buffet, stir they round
with good thick oil of flattery,
and froth with mean self-laud lie.
serve warm: the vessel you must choose
to keep it in be dead man's shoe."
Mr. Bulstrode's consultation of Harriet seem to have have the effect
desire by Mr. Vincy, for early the next morning a letter come which
Fred could carry to Mr. Featherstone as the require testimony.
the old gentleman be stay in bed on account of the cold weather,
and as Mary Garth be not to be see in the sitting-room, Fred go
up-stair immediately and present the letter to his uncle, who,
prop up comfortably on a bed-rest, be not less able than usual to
enjoy his consciousness of wisdom in distrust and frustrating
mankind. he put on his spectacle to read the letter, purse up his
lip and draw down their corner.
"under the circumstance I will not decline to state my
conviction--tchah! what fine word the fellow put! hebe as fine as an
auctioneer--that your son Frederic have not obtain any advance of
money on bequest promise by Mr. Featherstone--promise? who say I
have ever promise? I promise nothing--I shall make codicil as long as
I like--and that consider the nature of such a proceeding, it be
unreasonable to presume that a young man of sense and character would
attempt it--ah, but the gentleman donot say you be a young man of
sense and character, mark you that, sir!--as to my own concern with any
report of such a nature, I distinctly affirm that I never make any
statement to the effect that your son have borrow money on any
property that might accrue to he on Mr. Featherstone's demise--bless
my heart! 'property'--accrue--demise! Lawyer Standish be nothing to
he. he couldnot speak fine if he want to borrow. well," Mr.
Featherstone here look over his spectacle at Fred, while he hand
back the letter to he with a contemptuous gesture, "you donot suppose
I believe a thing because Bulstrode write it out fine, eh?"
Fred color. "you wish to have the letter, sir. I should think it
very likely that Mr. Bulstrode's denial be as good as the authority
which tell you what he deny."
"every bit. I never say I believe either one or the other. and now
what d' you expect?" say Mr. Featherstone, curtly, keep on his
spectacle, but withdraw his hand under his wrap.
"I expect nothing, sir." Fred with difficulty restrain himself from
vent his irritation. "I come to bring you the letter. if you like
I will bid you good morning."
"not yet, not yet. ring the bell; I want missy to come."
it be a servant who come in answer to the bell.
"tell missy to come!" say Mr. Featherstone, impatiently. "what
business have she to go away?" he speak in the same tone when Mary come.
"why couldnot you sit still here till I tell you to go? want my
waistcoat now. I tell you always to put it on the bed."
Mary's eye look rather red, as if she have be cry. it be clear
that Mr. Featherstone be in one of his most snappish humor this
morning, and though Fred have now the prospect of receive the
much-need present of money, he would have prefer be free to
turn round on the old tyrant and tell he that Mary Garth be too good
to be at his beck. though Fred have rise as she enter the room, she
have barely notice he, and look as if her nerve be quiver with
the expectation that something would be throw at she. but she never
have anything bad than word to dread. when she go to reach the
waistcoat from a peg, Fred go up to she and say, "allow I."
"let it alone! you bring it, missy, and lie it down here," say Mr.
Featherstone. "now you go away again till I call you," he add, when
the waistcoat be lay down by he. it be usual with he to season
his pleasure in show favor to one person by be especially
disagreeable to another, and Mary be always at hand to furnish the
condiment. when his own relative come she be treat well. slowly
he take out a bunch of key from the waistcoat pocket, and slowly he
draw forth a tin box which be under the bed-clothe.
"you expect I be go to give you a little fortune, eh?" he say,
look above his spectacle and pause in the act of open the lid.
"not at all, sir. you be good enough to speak of make I a present
the other day, else, of course, I should not have think of the
matter." but Fred be of a hopeful disposition, and a vision have
present itself of a sum just large enough to deliver he from a
certain anxiety. when Fred get into debt, it always seem to he
highly probable that something or other--he do not necessarily
conceive what--would come to pass enable he to pay in due time. and
now that the providential occurrence be apparently close at hand, it
would have be sheer absurdity to think that the supply would be short
of the need: as absurd as a faith that believe in half a miracle for
want of strength to believe in a whole one.
the deep-veined hand finger many bank-note-one after the other,
lay they down flat again, while Fred lean back in his chair,
scorn to look eager. he hold himself to be a gentleman at heart,
and do not like court an old fellow for his money. at last, Mr.
Featherstone eye he again over his spectacle and present he with
a little sheaf of note: Fred could see distinctly that there be but
five, as the less significant edge gap towards he. but then, each
might mean fifty pound. he take they, saying--
"I be very much oblige to you, sir," and be go to roll they up
without seem to think of their value. but this do not suit Mr.
Featherstone, who be eye he intently.
"come, donot you think it worth your while to count them? you take
money like a lord; I suppose you lose it like one."
"I think I be not to look a gift-horse in the mouth, sir. but I
shall be very happy to count they."
Fred be not so happy, however, after he have count they. for they
actually present the absurdity of be less than his hopefulness have
decide that they must be. what can the fitness of thing mean, if not
their fitness to a man's expectation? fail this, absurdity and
atheism gape behind he. the collapse for Fred be severe when he
find that he hold no more than five twenty, and his share in the
high education of this country do not seem to help he.
nevertheless he say, with rapid change in his fair complexion--
"it be very handsome of you, sir."
"I should think it be," say Mr. Featherstone, lock his box and
replace it, then take off his spectacle deliberately, and at
length, as if his inward meditation have more deeply convince he,
repeat, "I should think it handsome."
"I assure you, sir, I be very grateful," say Fred, who have have time to
recover his cheerful air.
"so you ought to be. you want to cut a figure in the world, and I
reckon Peter Featherstone be the only one youhave get to trust to." here
the old man's eye gleam with a curiously mingle satisfaction in the
consciousness that this smart young fellow rely upon he, and that
the smart young fellow be rather a fool for do so.
"yes, indeed: I be not bear to very splendid chance. few man have
be more cramp than I have be," say Fred, with some sense of
surprise at his own virtue, consider how hardly he be deal with.
"it really seem a little too bad to have to ride a break-wind
hunter, and see man, who, be not half such good judge as yourself,
able to throw away any amount of money on buy bad bargain."
"well, you can buy yourself a fine hunter now. eighty pound be enough
for that, I reckon--and youwill have twenty pound over to get yourself
out of any little scrape," say Mr. Featherstone, chuckle slightly.
"you be very good, sir," say Fred, with a fine sense of contrast
between the word and his feeling.
"ay, rather a well uncle than your fine uncle Bulstrode. you willnot
get much out of his spekilation, I think. hebe get a pretty strong
string round your father's leg, by what I hear, eh?"
"my father never tell I anything about his affair, sir."
"well, he show some sense there. but other people find them out
without his telling. _hewill_ never have much to leave you: hewill
most-like die without a will--hebe the sort of man to do it--let them
make he mayor of Middlemarch as much as they like. but you willnot get
much by his dying without a will, though you _be_ the eld son."
Fred think that Mr. Featherstone have never be so disagreeable
before. true, he have never before give he quite so much money at
once.
"shall I destroy this letter of Mr. Bulstrode's, sir?" say Fred,
rise with the letter as if he would put it in the fire.
"ay, ay, I donot want it. itbe worth no money to I."
Fred carry the letter to the fire, and thrust the poker through it
with much z. he long to get out of the room, but he be a little
ashamed before his inner self, as well as before his uncle, to run away
immediately after pocket the money. presently, the farm-bailiff
come up to give his master a report, and Fred, to his unspeakable
relief, be dismiss with the injunction to come again soon.
he have long not only to be set free from his uncle, but also to find
Mary Garth. she be now in her usual place by the fire, with sew in
her hand and a book open on the little table by her side. her eyelid
have lose some of their redness now, and she have her usual air of
self-command.
"be I want up-stair?" she say, half rise as Fred enter.
"no; I be only dismiss, because Simmons be go up."
Mary sit down again, and resume her work. she be certainly treat
he with more indifference than usual: she do not know how
affectionately indignant he have feel on her behalf up-stair.
"may I stay here a little, Mary, or shall I bore you?"
"pray sit down," say Mary; "you will not be so heavy a bore as Mr.
John Waule, who be here yesterday, and he sit down without ask my
leave."
"poor fellow! I think he be in love with you."
"I be not aware of it. and to I it be one of the most odious thing
in a girl's life, that there must always be some supposition of fall
in love come between she and any man who be kind to she, and to whom
she be grateful. I should have think that I, at least, might have
be safe from all that. I have no ground for the nonsensical vanity
of fancy everybody who come near I be in love with I."
Mary do not mean to betray any feeling, but in spite of herself she
end in a tremulous tone of vexation.
"Confound John Waule! I do not mean to make you angry. I donot know
you have any reason for be grateful to I. I forget what a great
service you think it if any one snuff a candle for you. Fred also have
his pride, and be not go to show that he know what have call forth
this outburst of Mary's.
"oh, I be not angry, except with the way of the world. I do like to
be speak to as if I have common-sense. I really often feel as if I
could understand a little more than I ever hear even from young
gentleman who have be to college." Mary have recover, and she speak
with a suppress rippling under-current of laughter pleasant to hear.
"I donot care how merry you be at my expense this morning," say Fred,
"I think you look so sad when you come up-stair. it be a shame you
should stay here to be bully in that way."
"oh, I have an easy life--by comparison. I have try be a teacher,
and I be not fit for that: my mind be too fond of wander on its own
way. I think any hardship be well than pretend to do what one be
pay for, and never really do it. everything here I can do as well
as any one else could; perhaps well than some--rosy, for example.
though she be just the sort of beautiful creature that be imprison
with ogre in fairy tale."
"_rosy!_" cry Fred, in a tone of profound brotherly scepticism.
"Come, Fred!" say Mary, emphatically; "you have no right to be so
critical."
"do you mean anything particular--just now?"
"no, I mean something general--always."
"oh, that I be idle and extravagant. well, I be not fit to be a poor
man. I should not have make a bad fellow if I have be rich."
"you would have do your duty in that state of life to which it have
not pleased God to call you," say Mary, laugh.
"well, I couldnot do my duty as a clergyman, any more than you could do
your as a governess. you ought to have a little fellow-feeling there,
Mary."
"I never say you ought to be a clergyman. there be other sort of
work. it seem to I very miserable not to resolve on some course and
act accordingly."
"so I could, if--" Fred break off, and stand up, lean against the
mantel-piece.
"if you be sure you should not have a fortune?"
"I do not say that. you want to quarrel with I. it be too bad of
you to be guide by what other people say about I."
"how can I want to quarrel with you? I should be quarrel with all
my new book," say Mary, lift the volume on the table. "however
naughty you may be to other people, you be good to I."
"because I like you well than any one else. but I know you despise
I."
"yes, I do--a little," say Mary, nodding, with a smile.
"you would admire a stupendous fellow, who would have wise opinion
about everything."
"yes, I should." Mary be sew swiftly, and seem provokingly
mistress of the situation. when a conversation have take a wrong turn
for we, we only get far and far into the swamp of awkwardness.
this be what Fred Vincy feel.
"I suppose a woman be never in love with any one she have always
know--ever since she can remember; as a man often be. it be always
some new fellow who strike a girl."
"let I see," say Mary, the corner of her mouth curl archly; "I
must go back on my experience. there be Juliet--she seem an example
of what you say. but then Ophelia have probably know Hamlet a long
while; and Brenda Troil--she have know Mordaunt Merton ever since they
be child; but then he seem to have be an estimable young man;
and Minna be still more deeply in love with Cleveland, who be a
stranger. Waverley be new to Flora MacIvor; but then she do not fall
in love with he. and there be Olivia and Sophia Primrose, and
Corinne--they may be say to have fall in love with new man.
altogether, my experience be rather mixed."
Mary look up with some roguishness at Fred, and that look of hers be
very dear to he, though the eye be nothing more than clear window
where observation sit laughingly. he be certainly an affectionate
fellow, and as he have grow from boy to man, he have grow in love with
his old playmate, notwithstanding that share in the high education of
the country which have exalt his view of rank and income.
"when a man be not love, it be no use for he to say that he could be
a well fellow--could do anything--I mean, if he be sure of be
love in return."
"not of the least use in the world for he to say he _could_ be well.
might, could, would--they be contemptible auxiliary."
"I donot see how a man be to be good for much unless he have some one
woman to love he dearly."
"I think the goodness should come before he expect that."
"you know well, Mary. woman donot love man for their goodness."
"perhaps not. but if they love they, they never think they bad."
"it be hardly fair to say I be bad."
"I say nothing at all about you."
"I never shall be good for anything, Mary, if you will not say that you
love I--if you will not promise to marry I--I mean, when I be able to
marry."
"if I do love you, I would not marry you: I would certainly not
promise ever to marry you."
"I think that be quite wicked, Mary. if you love I, you ought to
promise to marry I."
"on the contrary, I think it would be wicked in I to marry you even if
I do love you."
"you mean, just as I be, without any mean of maintain a wife. of
course: I be but three-and-twenty."
"in that last point you will alter. but I be not so sure of any other
alteration. my father say an idle man ought not to exist, much less,
be marry."
"then I be to blow my brain out?"
"no; on the whole I should think you would do well to pass your
examination. I have hear Mr. Farebrother say it be disgracefully
easy."
"that be all very fine. anything be easy to he. not that cleverness
have anything to do with it. I be ten time clever than many man who
pass."
"dear I!" say Mary, unable to repress her sarcasm; "that account for
the curate like Mr. Crowse. divide your cleverness by ten, and the
quotient--dear me!--is able to take a degree. but that only show you
be ten time more idle than the other."
"well, if I do pass, you would not want I to go into the Church?"
"that be not the question--what I want you to do. you have a
conscience of your own, I suppose. there! there be Mr. Lydgate. I
must go and tell my uncle."
"Mary," say Fred, seize her hand as she rise; "if you will not give
I some encouragement, I shall get bad instead of well."
"I will not give you any encouragement," say Mary, redden. "your
friend would dislike it, and so would mine. my father would think it
a disgrace to I if I accept a man who get into debt, and would not
work!"
Fred be sting, and release her hand. she walk to the door, but
there she turn and say: "Fred, you have always be so good, so
generous to I. I be not ungrateful. but never speak to I in that
way again."
"very well," say Fred, sulkily, take up his hat and whip. his
complexion show patch of pale pink and dead white. like many a
pluck idle young gentleman, he be thoroughly in love, and with a
plain girl, who have no money! but have Mr. Featherstone's land in
the background, and a persuasion that, let Mary say what she would, she
really do care for he, Fred be not utterly in despair.
when he get home, he give four of the twenty to his mother, ask
she to keep they for he. "I donot want to spend that money, mother.
I want it to pay a debt with. so keep it safe away from my finger."
"bless you, my dear," say Mrs. Vincy. she dot on her eld son and
her young girl (a child of six), whom other think her two
naughty child. the mother's eye be not always deceive in
their partiality: she at least can good judge who be the tender,
filial-hearted child. and Fred be certainly very fond of his mother.
perhaps it be his fondness for another person also that make he
particularly anxious to take some security against his own liability to
spend the hundred pound. for the creditor to whom he owe a hundred
and sixty hold a firm security in the shape of a bill sign by
Mary's father.
CHAPTER XV.
"black eye you have leave, you say,
blue eye fail to draw you;
yet you seem more rapt to-day,
than of old we see you.
"oh, I track the fairest fair
through new haunt of pleasure;
footprint here and echo there
guide I to my treasure:
"Lo! she turn--immortal youth
Wrought to mortal stature,
Fresh as starlight's age truth--
Many-name Nature!"
a great historian, as he insist on call himself, who have the
happiness to be dead a hundred and twenty year ago, and so to take his
place among the colossi whose huge leg our live pettiness be
observe to walk under, glory in his copious remark and digression
as the least imitable part of his work, and especially in those initial
chapter to the successive book of his history, where he seem to
bring his armchair to the proscenium and chat with we in all the lusty
ease of his fine English. but Fielding live when the day be long
(for time, like money, be measure by our need), when summer
afternoon be spacious, and the clock tick slowly in the winter
evening. we belate historian must not linger after his example; and
if we do so, it be probable that our chat would be thin and eager, as
if deliver from a campstool in a parrot-house. I at least have so
much to do in unravel certain human lot, and see how they be
weave and interweave, that all the light I can command must be
concentrate on this particular web, and not disperse over that
tempting range of relevancy call the universe.
at present I have to make the new settler Lydgate well know to any
one interested in he than he could possibly be even to those who have
see the most of he since his arrival in Middlemarch. for surely all
must admit that a man may be puff and belaude, envy, ridicule,
count upon as a tool and fall in love with, or at least select as
a future husband, and yet remain virtually unknown--know merely as a
cluster of sign for his neighbor' false supposition. there be a
general impression, however, that Lydgate be not altogether a common
country doctor, and in Middlemarch at that time such an impression be
significant of great thing be expect from he. for everybody's
family doctor be remarkably clever, and be understand to have
immeasurable skill in the management and training of the most skittish
or vicious disease. the evidence of his cleverness be of the high
intuitive order, lie in his lady-patient' immovable conviction, and
be unassailable by any objection except that their intuition be
oppose by other equally strong; each lady who see medical truth in
Wrench and "the strengthen treatment" regard Toller and "the
lower system" as medical perdition. for the heroic time of copious
bleeding and blistering have not yet depart, still less the time of
thorough-go theory, when disease in general be call by some bad
name, and treat accordingly without shilly-shally--as if, for
example, it be to be call insurrection, which must not be fire on
with blank-cartridge, but have its blood draw at once. the
strengthener and the lowerer be all "clever" man in somebody's
opinion, which be really as much as can be say for any live talent.
nobody's imagination have go so far as to conjecture that Mr. Lydgate
could know as much as Dr. Sprague and Dr. Minchin, the two physician,
who alone could offer any hope when danger be extreme, and when the
small hope be worth a guinea. still, I repeat, there be a general
impression that Lydgate be something rather more uncommon than any
general practitioner in Middlemarch. and this be true. he be but
seven-and-twenty, an age at which many man be not quite common--at
which they be hopeful of achievement, resolute in avoidance, think
that Mammon shall never put a bit in their mouth and get astride their
back, but rather that Mammon, if they have anything to do with he,
shall draw their chariot.
he have be leave an orphan when he be fresh from a public school. his
father, a military man, have make but little provision for three
child, and when the boy Tertius ask to have a medical education,
it seem easy to his guardian to grant his request by apprentice
he to a country practitioner than to make any objection on the score
of family dignity. he be one of the rare lad who early get a
decide bent and make up their mind that there be something particular
in life which they would like to do for its own sake, and not because
their father do it. Most of we who turn to any subject with love
remember some morning or evening hour when we get on a high stool to
reach down an untried volume, or sit with part lip listen to a
new talker, or for very lack of book begin to listen to the voice
within, as the first traceable beginning of our love. something of
that sort happen to Lydgate. he be a quick fellow, and when hot
from play, would toss himself in a corner, and in five minute be deep
in any sort of book that he could lay his hand on: if it be Rasselas
or Gulliver, so much the well, but Bailey's Dictionary would do, or
the Bible with the Apocrypha in it. something he must read, when he
be not rid the pony, or run and hunting, or listen to the
talk of man. all this be true of he at ten year of age; he have then
read through "Chrysal, or the Adventures of a Guinea," which be
neither milk for babe, nor any chalky mixture mean to pass for milk,
and it have already occur to he that book be stuff, and that life
be stupid. his school study have not much modify that opinion, for
though he "do" his classic and mathematic, he be not pre-eminent in
they. it be say of he, that Lydgate could do anything he like, but
he have certainly not yet like to do anything remarkable. he be a
vigorous animal with a ready understanding, but no spark have yet
kindle in he an intellectual passion; knowledge seem to he a very
superficial affair, easily master: judge from the conversation of
his elder, he have apparently get already more than be necessary for
mature life. probably this be not an exceptional result of expensive
teaching at that period of short-waiste coat, and other fashion
which have not yet recur. but, one vacation, a wet day send he to
the small home library to hunt once more for a book which might have
some freshness for he: in vain! unless, indeed, he take down a dusty
row of volume with gray-paper back and dingy label--the volume of
an old Cyclopaedia which he have never disturb. it would at least be
a novelty to disturb they. they be on the high shelf, and he
stand on a chair to get they down. but he open the volume which he
first take from the shelf: somehow, one be apt to read in a makeshift
attitude, just where it might seem inconvenient to do so. the page he
open on be under the head of Anatomy, and the first passage that
draw his eye be on the valve of the heart. he be not much
acquaint with valve of any sort, but he know that valvae be
fold-door, and through this crevice come a sudden light startle
he with his first vivid notion of finely adjusted mechanism in the
human frame. a liberal education have of course leave he free to read
the indecent passage in the school classic, but beyond a general
sense of secrecy and obscenity in connection with his internal
structure, have leave his imagination quite unbiassed, so that for
anything he know his brain lie in small bag at his temple, and he
have no more thought of represent to himself how his blood circulate
than how paper serve instead of gold. but the moment of vocation have
come, and before he get down from his chair, the world be make new to
he by a presentiment of endless process fill the vast space
plank out of his sight by that wordy ignorance which he have suppose
to be knowledge. from that hour Lydgate feel the growth of an
intellectual passion.
we be not afraid of tell over and over again how a man come to
fall in love with a woman and be wed to she, or else be fatally
part from she. be it due to excess of poetry or of stupidity that we
be never weary of describe what King James call a woman's "makdom
and her fairnesse," never weary of listen to the twanging of the old
Troubadour string, and be comparatively uninterested in that other
kind of "makdom and fairnesse" which must be woo with industrious
thought and patient renunciation of small desire? in the story of
this passion, too, the development vary: sometimes it be the glorious
marriage, sometimes frustration and final parting. and not seldom the
catastrophe be bind up with the other passion, sing by the
troubadour. for in the multitude of middle-aged man who go about
their vocation in a daily course determine for they much in the same
way as the tie of their cravat, there be always a good number who once
mean to shape their own deed and alter the world a little. the story
of their come to be shapen after the average and fit to be pack by
the gross, be hardly ever tell even in their consciousness; for perhaps
their ardor in generous unpaid toil cool as imperceptibly as the
ardor of other youthful love, till one day their early self walk
like a ghost in its old home and make the new furniture ghastly.
nothing in the world more subtle than the process of their gradual
change! in the beginning they inhale it unknowingly: you and I may
have send some of our breath towards infect they, when we utter
our conform falsity or draw our silly conclusion: or perhaps it
come with the vibration from a woman's glance.
Lydgate do not mean to be one of those failure, and there be the
well hope of he because his scientific interest soon take the form
of a professional enthusiasm: he have a youthful belief in his
bread-win work, not to be stifle by that initiation in makeshift
call his 'prentice day; and he carry to his study in London,
Edinburgh, and Paris, the conviction that the medical profession as it
might be be the fine in the world; present the most perfect
interchange between science and art; offer the most direct alliance
between intellectual conquest and the social good. lydgate's nature
demand this combination: he be an emotional creature, with a
flesh-and-blood sense of fellowship which withstand all the
abstraction of special study. he care not only for "case," but for
John and Elizabeth, especially Elizabeth.
there be another attraction in his profession: it want reform, and
give a man an opportunity for some indignant resolve to reject its
venal decoration and other humbug, and to be the possessor of genuine
though undemanded qualification. he go to study in Paris with the
determination that when he provincial home again he would settle in
some provincial town as a general practitioner, and resist the
irrational severance between medical and surgical knowledge in the
interest of his own scientific pursuit, as well as of the general
advance: he would keep away from the range of London intrigue,
jealousy, and social truckling, and win celebrity, however slowly, as
Jenner have do, by the independent value of his work. for it must be
remember that this be a dark period; and in spite of venerable
college which use great effort to secure purity of knowledge by
make it scarce, and to exclude error by a rigid exclusiveness in
relation to fee and appointment, it happen that very ignorant young
gentleman be promote in town, and many more get a legal right to
practise over large area in the country. also, the high standard hold
up to the public mind by the College of which which give its peculiar
sanction to the expensive and highly rarefied medical instruction
obtain by graduate of Oxford and Cambridge, do not hinder quackery
from have an excellent time of it; for since professional practice
chiefly consist in give a great many drug, the public infer
that it might be well off with more drug still, if they could only
be get cheaply, and hence swallow large cubic measure of physic
prescribe by unscrupulous ignorance which have take no degree.
consider that statistic have not yet embrace a calculation as to
the number of ignorant or canting doctor which absolutely must exist
in the tooth of all change, it seem to lydgate that a change in the
unit be the most direct mode of change the number. he mean to be
a unit who would make a certain amount of difference towards that
spread change which would one day tell appreciably upon the
average, and in the mean time have the pleasure of make an
advantageous difference to the viscera of his own patient. but he do
not simply aim at a more genuine kind of practice than be common. he
be ambitious of a wide effect: he be fire with the possibility that
he might work out the proof of an anatomical conception and make a link
in the chain of discovery.
do it seem incongruous to you that a Middlemarch surgeon should dream
of himself as a discoverer? Most of we, indeed, know little of the
great originator until they have be lift up among the
constellation and already rule our fate. but that Herschel, for
example, who "break the barrier of the heavens"--did he not once play
a provincial church-organ, and give music-lesson to stumble
pianist? each of those shin Ones have to walk on the earth among
neighbor who perhaps think much more of his gait and his garment
than of anything which be to give he a title to everlaste fame:
each of they have his little local personal history sprinkle with small
temptation and sordid care, which make the retarding friction of his
course towards final companionship with the immortal. Lydgate be not
blind to the danger of such friction, but he have plenty of confidence
in his resolution to avoid it as far as possible: be
seven-and-twenty, he feel himself experienced. and he be not go to
have his vanity provoke by contact with the showy worldly success
of the capital, but to live among people who could hold no rivalry with
that pursuit of a great idea which be to be a twin object with the
assiduous practice of his profession. there be fascination in the
hope that the two purpose would illuminate each other: the careful
observation and inference which be his daily work, the use of the lens
to further his judgment in special case, would further his thought as
an instrument of large inquiry. be not this the typical pre-eminence
of his profession? he would be a good Middlemarch doctor, and by that
very mean keep himself in the track of far-reach investigation. on
one point he may fairly claim approval at this particular stage of his
career: he do not mean to imitate those philanthropic model who make
a profit out of poisonous pickle to support themselves while they be
expose adulteration, or hold share in a gambling-hell that they may
have leisure to represent the cause of public morality. he intend to
begin in his own case some particular reform which be quite
certainly within his reach, and much less of a problem than the
demonstrating of an anatomical conception. one of these reform be to
act stoutly on the strength of a recent legal decision, and simply
prescribe, without dispense drug or take percentage from
druggist. this be an innovation for one who have choose to adopt the
style of general practitioner in a country town, and would be feel as
offensive criticism by his professional brother. but Lydgate mean to
innovate in his treatment also, and he be wise enough to see that the
good security for his practising honestly accord to his belief be
to get rid of systematic temptation to the contrary.
perhaps that be a more cheerful time for observer and theorizer than
the present; we be apt to think it the fine era of the world when
America be begin to be discover, when a bold sailor, even if he
be wreck, might alight on a new kingdom; and about 1829 the dark
territory of Pathology be a fine America for a spirited young
adventurer. Lydgate be ambitious above all to contribute towards
enlarge the scientific, rational basis of his profession. the more
he become interested in special question of disease, such as the
nature of fever or fever, the more keenly he feel the need for that
fundamental knowledge of structure which just at the beginning of the
century have be illuminate by the brief and glorious career of
Bichat, who die when he be only one-and-thirty, but, like another
Alexander, leave a realm large enough for many heir. that great
Frenchman first carry out the conception that live body,
fundamentally consider, be not association of organ which can be
understand by study they first apart, and then as it be federally;
but must be regard as consist of certain primary webs or tissue,
out of which the various organ--brain, heart, lung, and so on--be
compact, as the various accommodation of a house be build up in
various proportion of wood, iron, stone, brick, zinc, and the rest,
each material have its peculiar composition and proportion. no man,
one see, can understand and estimate the entire structure or its
part--what be its frailty and what its repair, without know the
nature of the material. and the conception work out by Bichat,
with his detailed study of the different tissue, act necessarily on
medical question as the turning of gas-light would act on a dim,
oil-light street, show new connection and hitherto hide fact of
structure which must be take into account in consider the symptom
of malady and the action of medicament. but result which depend on
human conscience and intelligence work slowly, and now at the end of
1829, most medical practice be still strut or shamble along the
old path, and there be still scientific work to be do which might
have seem to be a direct sequence of Bichat's. this great seer do
not go beyond the consideration of the tissue as ultimate fact in the
living organism, mark the limit of anatomical analysis; but it be
open to another mind to say, have not these structure some common
basis from which they have all start, as your sarsnet, gauze, net,
satin, and velvet from the raw cocoon? here would be another light, as
of oxy-hydrogen, show the very grain of thing, and revise all
former explanation. of this sequence to Bichat's work, already
vibrate along many current of the european mind, Lydgate be
enamour; he long to demonstrate the more intimate relation of
living structure, and help to define man's think more accurately
after the true order. the work have not yet be do, but only
prepare for those who know how to use the preparation. what be the
primitive tissue? in that way Lydgate put the question--not quite in
the way require by the await answer; but such missing of the right
word befall many seeker. and he count on quiet interval to be
watchfully seize, for take up the thread of investigation--on many
hint to be win from diligent application, not only of the scalpel, but
of the microscope, which research have begin to use again with new
enthusiasm of reliance. such be Lydgate's plan of his future: to do
good small work for Middlemarch, and great work for the world.
he be certainly a happy fellow at this time: to be seven-and-twenty,
without any fix vice, with a generous resolution that his action
should be beneficent, and with idea in his brain that make life
interesting quite apart from the cultus of horseflesh and other mystic
rite of costly observance, which the eight hundred pound leave he
after buy his practice would certainly not have go far in pay
for. he be at a starting-point which make many a man's career a fine
subject for bet, if there be any gentleman give to that
amusement who could appreciate the complicated probability of an
arduous purpose, with all the possible thwarting and furthering of
circumstance, all the nicety of inward balance, by which a man swim
and make his point or else be carry headlong. the risk would remain
even with close knowledge of Lydgate's character; for character too be
a process and an unfolding. the man be still in the making, as much
as the Middlemarch doctor and immortal discoverer, and there be both
virtue and fault capable of shrink or expand. the fault will
not, I hope, be a reason for the withdrawal of your interest in he.
among our value friend be there not some one or other who be a little
too self-confident and disdainful; whose distinguished mind be a little
spot with commonness; who be a little pinch here and protuberant
there with native prejudice; or whose well energy be liable to
lapse down the wrong channel under the influence of transient
solicitation? all these thing might be allege against Lydgate, but
then, they be the periphrasis of a polite preacher, who talk of Adam,
and would not like to mention anything painful to the pew-renter. the
particular fault from which these delicate generality be distil
have distinguishable physiognomy, diction, accent, and grimace;
fill up part in very various drama. our vanity differ as our
nose do: all conceit be not the same conceit, but vary in
correspondence with the minutia of mental make in which one of we
differ from another. Lydgate's conceit be of the arrogant sort,
never simper, never impertinent, but massive in its claim and
benevolently contemptuous. he would do a great deal for noodle, be
sorry for they, and feel quite sure that they could have no power
over he: he have think of join the Saint Simonians when he be in
Paris, in order to turn they against some of their own doctrine. all
his fault be mark by kindre trait, and be those of a man who
have a fine baritone, whose clothe hang well upon he, and who even in
his ordinary gesture have an air of inbreed distinction. where then lay
the spot of commonness? say a young lady enamour of that careless
grace. how could there be any commonness in a man so well-breed, so
ambitious of social distinction, so generous and unusual in his view
of social duty? as easily as there may be stupidity in a man of genius
if you take he unawares on the wrong subject, or as many a man who have
the good will to advance the social millennium might be ill-inspire in
imagine its light pleasure; unable to go beyond Offenbach's music,
or the brilliant pun in the last burlesque. lydgate's spot of
commonness lie in the complexion of his prejudice, which, in spite of
noble intention and sympathy, be half of they such as be find in
ordinary man of the world: that distinction of mind which belong to
his intellectual ardor, do not penetrate his feeling and judgment
about furniture, or woman, or the desirability of its be know
(without his telling) that he be well bear than other country
surgeon. he do not mean to think of furniture at present; but
whenever he do so it be to be fear that neither biology nor scheme
of reform would lift he above the vulgarity of feeling that there
would be an incompatibility in his furniture not be of the good.
as to woman, he have once already be draw headlong by impetuous
folly, which he mean to be final, since marriage at some distant
period would of course not be impetuous. for those who want to be
acquaint with Lydgate it will be good to know what be that case of
impetuous folly, for it may stand as an example of the fitful swerving
of passion to which he be prone, together with the chivalrous kindness
which help to make he morally lovable. the story can be tell
without many word. it happen when he be study in Paris, and
just at the time when, over and above his other work, he be occupy
with some galvanic experiment. one evening, tired with his
experimenting, and not be able to elicit the fact he need, he
leave his frog and rabbit to some repose under their try and
mysterious dispensation of unexplained shock, and go to finish his
evening at the theatre of the Porte Saint Martin, where there be a
melodrama which he have already see several time; attract, not by
the ingenious work of the collaborate author, but by an actress
whose part it be to stab her lover, mistake he for the
evil-design duke of the piece. Lydgate be in love with this
actress, as a man be in love with a woman whom he never expect to
speak to. she be a Provencale, with dark eye, a greek profile, and
round majestic form, have that sort of beauty which carry a sweet
matronliness even in youth, and her voice be a soft cooing. she have
but lately come to Paris, and bear a virtuous reputation, her husband
act with she as the unfortunate lover. it be her act which be
"no well than it should be," but the public be satisfied. Lydgate's
only relaxation now be to go and look at this woman, just as he might
have throw himself under the breath of the sweet south on a bank of
violet for a while, without prejudice to his galvanism, to which he
would presently return. but this evening the old drama have a new
catastrophe. at the moment when the heroine be to act the stabbing of
her lover, and he be to fall gracefully, the wife veritably stab
her husband, who fall as death will. a wild shriek pierce the
house, and the Provencale fall swoon: a shriek and a swoon be
demand by the play, but the swooning too be real this time. lydgate
leap and climb, he hardly know how, on to the stage, and be active
in help, make the acquaintance of his heroine by find a contusion
on her head and lift she gently in his arm. Paris ring with the
story of this death:--wa it a murder? some of the actress's warm
admirer be inclined to believe in her guilt, and like she the
well for it (such be the taste of those time); but Lydgate be not
one of these. he vehemently contend for her innocence, and the
remote impersonal passion for her beauty which he have feel before, have
pass now into personal devotion, and tender thought of her lot. the
notion of murder be absurd: no motive be discoverable, the young
couple be understand to dote on each other; and it be not
unprecedented that an accidental slip of the foot should have bring
these grave consequence. the legal investigation end in Madame
Laure's release. lydgate by this time have have many interview with
she, and find she more and more adorable. she talk little; but that
be an additional charm. she be melancholy, and seem grateful; her
presence be enough, like that of the evening light. Lydgate be madly
anxious about her affection, and jealous lest any other man than
himself should win it and ask she to marry he. but instead of
reopen her engagement at the Porte Saint Martin, where she would
have be all the more popular for the fatal episode, she leave Paris
without warning, forsake her little court of admirer. perhaps no
one carry inquiry far except Lydgate, who feel that all science have
come to a stand-still while he imagine the unhappy Laure, stricken by
ever-wander sorrow, herself wandering, and find no faithful
comforter. hidden actress, however, be not so difficult to find as
some other hide fact, and it be not long before Lydgate gather
indication that Laure have take the route to Lyons. he find she at
last act with great success at Avignon under the same name, look
more majestic than ever as a forsaken wife carry her child in her
arm. he speak to she after the play, be receive with the usual
quietude which seem to he beautiful as clear depth of water, and
obtain leave to visit she the next day; when he be bent on tell
she that he adore she, and on ask she to marry he. he know that
this be like the sudden impulse of a madman--incongruous even with his
habitual foible. no matter! it be the one thing which he be
resolve to do. he have two self within he apparently, and they must
learn to accommodate each other and bear reciprocal impediment.
Strange, that some of we, with quick alternate vision, see beyond our
infatuation, and even while we rave on the height, behold the wide
plain where our persistent self pause and await we.
to have approach Laure with any suit that be not reverentially
tender would have be simply a contradiction of his whole feeling
towards she.
"you have come all the way from Paris to find I?" she say to he the
next day, sit before he with fold arm, and look at he with
eye that seem to wonder as an untamed ruminate animal wonder.
"be all englishman like that?"
"I come because I could not live without try to see you. you be
lonely; I love you; I want you to consent to be my wife; I will wait,
but I want you to promise that you will marry I--no one else."
Laure look at he in silence with a melancholy radiance from under
her grand eyelid, until he be full of rapturous certainty, and knelt
close to her knee.
"I will tell you something," she say, in her cooing way, keep she
arm fold. "my foot really slip."
"I know, I know," say Lydgate, deprecatingly. "it be a fatal
accident--a dreadful stroke of calamity that bind I to you the more."
again Laure pause a little and then say, slowly, "_I mean to do it._"
Lydgate, strong man as he be, turn pale and tremble: moment seem
to pass before he rise and stand at a distance from she.
"there be a secret, then," he say at last, even vehemently. "he be
brutal to you: you hat he."
"no! he weary I; he be too fond: he would live in Paris, and not in
my country; that be not agreeable to I."
"Great God!" say Lydgate, in a groan of horror. "and you plan to
murder he?"
"I do not plan: it come to I in the play--_i mean to do it._"
Lydgate stand mute, and unconsciously press his hat on while he
look at she. he see this woman--the first to whom he have give his
young adoration--amid the throng of stupid criminal.
"you be a good young man," she say. "but I do not like husband. I
will never have another."
three day afterwards Lydgate be at his galvanism again in his Paris
chamber, believe that illusion be at an end for he. he be
save from harden effect by the abundant kindness of his heart and
his belief that human life might be make well. but he have more
reason than ever for trust his judgment, now that it be so
experienced; and henceforth he would take a strictly scientific view of
woman, entertain no expectation but such as be justify
beforehand.
no one in middle march be likely to have such a notion of Lydgate's
past as have here be faintly shadow, and indeed the respectable
townsfolk there be not more give than mortal generally to any eager
attempt at exactness in the representation to themselves of what do
not come under their own sens. not only young virgin of that town,
but gray-bearded man also, be often in haste to conjecture how a new
acquaintance might be work into their purpose, content with very
vague knowledge as to the way in which life have be shape he for
that instrumentality. Middlemarch, in fact, count on swallow
Lydgate and assimilate he very comfortably.
CHAPTER XVI.
"all that in woman be adore
in thy fair self I find--
for the whole sex can but afford
the handsome and the kind."
--SIR CHARLES SEDLEY.
the question whether Mr. Tyke should be appoint as salaried chaplain
to the hospital be an exciting topic to the Middlemarchers; and
Lydgate hear it discuss in a way that throw much light on the power
exercise in the town by Mr. Bulstrode. the banker be evidently a
ruler, but there be an opposition party, and even among his supporter
there be some who allow it to be see that their support be a
compromise, and who frankly state their impression that the general
scheme of thing, and especially the casualty of trade, require you
to hold a candle to the devil.
Mr. Bulstrode's power be not due simply to his be a country banker,
who know the financial secret of most trader in the town and could
touch the spring of their credit; it be fortify by a beneficence
that be at once ready and severe--ready to confer obligation, and
severe in watch the result. he have gather, as an industrious man
always at his post, a chief share in administer the town charity,
and his private charity be both minute and abundant. he would take
a great deal of pain about apprentice Tegg the shoemaker's son, and
he would watch over Tegg's church-go; he would defend Mrs. Strype
the washerwoman against Stubbs's unjust exaction on the score of her
dry-ground, and he would himself-scrutinize a calumny against Mrs.
Strype. his private minor loan be numerous, but he would inquire
strictly into the circumstance both before and after. in this way a
man gather a domain in his neighbor' hope and fear as well as
gratitude; and power, when once it have get into that subtle region,
propagate itself, spread out of all proportion to its external
mean. it be a principle with Mr. Bulstrode to gain as much power as
possible, that he might use it for the glory of God. he go through a
great deal of spiritual conflict and inward argument in order to adjust
his motif, and make clear to himself what God's glory require. but,
as we have see, his motif be not always rightly appreciate.
there be many crass mind in Middlemarch whose reflective scale
could only weigh thing in the lump; and they have a strong suspicion
that since Mr. Bulstrode could not enjoy life in their fashion, eat
and drink so little as he do, and worrete himself about
everything, he must have a sort of vampire's feast in the sense of
mastery.
the subject of the chaplaincy come up at Mr. Vincy's table when Lydgate
be din there, and the family connection with Mr. Bulstrode do not,
he observe, prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of the
host himself, though his reason against the propose arrangement
turn entirely on his objection to Mr. Tyke's sermon, which be all
doctrine, and his preference for Mr. Farebrother, whose sermon be
free from that taint. Mr. Vincy like well enough the notion of the
chaplain's have a salary, suppose it be give to Farebrother, who
be as good a little fellow as ever breathe, and the good preacher
anywhere, and companionable too.
"what line shall you take, then?" say Mr. Chichely, the coroner, a
great course comrade of Mr. Vincy's.
"oh, Ibe precious glad Ibe not one of the Directors now. I shall vote
for refer the matter to the Directors and the Medical Board
together. I shall roll some of my responsibility on your shoulder,
doctor," say Mr. Vincy, glance first at Dr. Sprague, the senior
physician of the town, and then at Lydgate who sit opposite. "you
medical gentleman must consult which sort of black draught you will
prescribe, eh, Mr. Lydgate?"
"I know little of either," say Lydgate; "but in general, appointment
be apt to be make too much a question of personal liking. the fit
man for a particular post be not always the good fellow or the most
agreeable. sometimes, if you want to get a reform, your only way
would be to pension off the good fellow whom everybody be fond of, and
put they out of the question."
Dr. Sprague, who be consider the physician of most "weight," though
Dr. Minchin be usually say to have more "penetration," divest his
large heavy face of all expression, and look at his wine-glass while
Lydgate be speak. whatever be not problematical and suspect
about this young man--for example, a certain showiness as to foreign
idea, and a disposition to unsettle what have be settle and
forget by his elder--be positively unwelcome to a physician whose
standing have be fix thirty year before by a treatise on
Meningitis, of which at least one copy mark "own" be bind in calf.
for my part I have some fellow-feeling with Dr. Sprague: one's
self-satisfaction be an untaxed kind of property which it be very
unpleasant to find deprecate.
Lydgate's remark, however, do not meet the sense of the company. Mr.
Vincy say, that if he could have _his_ way, he would not put
disagreeable fellow anywhere.
"hang your reform!" say Mr. Chichely. "therebe no great humbug in
the world. you never hear of a reform, but it mean some trick to put
in new man. I hope you be not one of the 'Lancet's' man, Mr.
Lydgate--want to take the coronership out of the hand of the legal
profession: your word appear to point that way."
"I disapprove of Wakley," interpose Dr. Sprague, "no man more: he be
an ill-intentione fellow, who would sacrifice the respectability of
the profession, which everybody know depend on the London Colleges,
for the sake of get some notoriety for himself. there be man who
donot mind about be kick blue if they can only get talk about.
but Wakley be right sometimes," the Doctor add, judicially. "I could
mention one or two point in which Wakley be in the right."
"oh, well," say Mr. Chichely, "I blame no man for stand up in favor
of his own cloth; but, come to argument, I should like to know how a
coroner be to judge of evidence if he have not have a legal training?"
"in my opinion," say Lydgate, "legal training only make a man more
incompetent in question that require knowledge a of another kind.
People talk about evidence as if it could really be weigh in scale
by a blind Justice. no man can judge what be good evidence on any
particular subject, unless he know that subject well. a lawyer be no
well than an old woman at a post-mortem examination. how be he to
know the action of a poison? you might as well say that scan verse
will teach you to scan the potato crop."
"you be aware, I suppose, that it be not the coroner's business to
conduct the post-mortem, but only to take the evidence of the medical
witness?" say Mr. Chichely, with some scorn.
"who be often almost as ignorant as the coroner himself," say Lydgate.
"question of medical jurisprudence ought not to be leave to the chance
of decent knowledge in a medical witness, and the coroner ought not to
be a man who will believe that strychnine will destroy the coat of the
stomach if an ignorant practitioner happen to tell he so."
Lydgate have really lose sight of the fact that Mr. Chichely be his
Majesty's coroner, and end innocently with the question, "donot you
agree with I, Dr. Sprague?"
"to a certain extent--with regard to populous district, and in the
metropolis," say the Doctor. "but I hope it will be long before this
part of the country lose the service of my friend Chichely, even
though it might get the good man in our profession to succeed he. I
be sure Vincy will agree with I."
"yes, yes, give I a coroner who be a good course man," say Mr.
Vincy, jovially. "and in my opinion, yoube safest with a lawyer.
nobody can know everything. Most thing be 'visitation of God.' and as
to poisoning, why, what you want to know be the law. come, shall we
join the lady?"
Lydgate's private opinion be that Mr. Chichely might be the very
coroner without bias as to the coat of the stomach, but he have not
mean to be personal. this be one of the difficulty of move in
good middlemarch society: it be dangerous to insist on knowledge as a
qualification for any salaried office. Fred Vincy have call Lydgate a
prig, and now Mr. Chichely be inclined to call he prick-eare;
especially when, in the drawing-room, he seem to be make himself
eminently agreeable to Rosamond, whom he have easily monopolize in a
tete-a-tete, since Mrs. Vincy herself sit at the tea-table. she
resign no domestic function to her daughter; and the matron's
bloom good-natured face, with the two volatile pink string float
from her fine throat, and her cheery manner to husband and child,
be certainly among the great attraction of the Vincy
house--attraction which make it all the easy to fall in love with
the daughter. the tinge of unpretentious, inoffensive vulgarity in
Mrs. Vincy give more effect to Rosamond's refinement, which be beyond
what Lydgate have expect.
certainly, small foot and perfectly turn shoulder aid the impression
of refined manner, and the right thing say seem quite astonishingly
right when it be accompany with exquisite curve of lip and eyelid.
and Rosamond could say the right thing; for she be clever with that
sort of cleverness which catch every tone except the humorous.
happily she never attempt to joke, and this perhaps be the most
decisive mark of her cleverness.
she and Lydgate readily get into conversation. he regret that he
have not hear she sing the other day at Stone Court. the only pleasure
he allow himself during the latter part of his stay in Paris be to
go and hear music.
"you have study music, probably?" say Rosamond.
"no, I know the note of many bird, and I know many melody by ear;
but the music that I donot know at all, and have no notion about,
delight I--affect I. how stupid the world be that it do not make
more use of such a pleasure within its reach!"
"yes, and you will find Middlemarch very tuneless. there be hardly
any good musician. I only know two gentleman who sing at all well."
"I suppose it be the fashion to sing comic song in a rhythmic way,
leave you to fancy the tune--very much as if it be tap on a
drum?"
"ah, you have hear Mr. Bowyer," say Rosamond, with one of her rare
smile. "but we be speak very ill of our neighbor."
Lydgate be almost forget that he must carry on the conversation,
in think how lovely this creature be, her garment seem to be
make out of the faint blue sky, herself so immaculately blond, as if
the petal of some gigantic flower have just open and disclose she;
and yet with this infantine blondness show so much ready,
self-possess grace. since he have have the memory of Laure, Lydgate
have lose all taste for large-eyed silence: the divine cow no long
attract he, and Rosamond be her very opposite. but he recall
himself.
"you will let I hear some music to-night, I hope."
"I will let you hear my attempt, if you like," say Rosamond. "papa
be sure to insist on my singing. but I shall tremble before you, who
have hear the good singer in Paris. I have hear very little: I have
only once be to London. but our organist at St. Peter's be a good
musician, and I go on study with he."
"tell I what you see in London."
"very little." (a more naive girl would have say, "oh, everything!"
but Rosamond know well.) "a few of the ordinary sight, such as raw
country girl be always take to."
"do you call yourself a raw country girl?" say Lydgate, look at she
with an involuntary emphasis of admiration, which make Rosamond blush
with pleasure. but she remain simply serious, turn she long neck a
little, and put up her hand to touch her wondrous hair-plait--an
habitual gesture with she as pretty as any movement of a kitten's paw.
not that Rosamond be in the least like a kitten: she be a sylph
catch young and educate at Mrs. Lemon's.
"I assure you my mind be raw," she say immediately; "I pass at
Middlemarch. I be not afraid of talk to our old neighbor. but I
be really afraid of you."
"an accomplished woman almost always know more than we man, though her
knowledge be of a different sort. I be sure you could teach I a
thousand thing--as an exquisite bird could teach a bear if there be
any common language between they. happily, there be a common language
between woman and man, and so the bear can get teach."
"ah, there be Fred beginning to strum! I must go and hinder he from
jar all your nerve," say Rosamond, move to the other side of
the room, where Fred have open the piano, at his father's desire,
that Rosamond might give they some music, be parenthetically
perform "Cherry Ripe!" with one hand. able man who have pass
their examination will do these thing sometimes, not less than the
pluck Fred.
"Fred, pray defer your practising till to-morrow; you will make Mr.
Lydgate ill," say Rosamond. "he have an ear."
Fred laugh, and go on with his tune to the end.
Rosamond turn to Lydgate, smile gently, and say, "you perceive,
the bear will not always be teach."
"now then, Rosy!" say Fred, spring from the stool and twist it
upward for she, with a hearty expectation of enjoyment. "some good
rouse tune first."
Rosamond play admirably. her master at Mrs. Lemon's school (close to
a county town with a memorable history that have its relic in church
and castle) be one of those excellent musician here and there to be
find in our province, worthy to compare with many a noted
Kapellmeister in a country which offer more plentiful condition of
musical celebrity. Rosamond, with the executant's instinct, have seize
his manner of playing, and give forth his large rendering of noble
music with the precision of an echo. it be almost startling, hear
for the first time. a hidden soul seem to be flow forth from
Rosamond's finger; and so indeed it be, since soul live on in
perpetual echo, and to all fine expression there go somewhere an
originating activity, if it be only that of an interpreter. lydgate
be take possession of, and begin to believe in she as something
exceptional. after all, he think, one need not be surprised to find
the rare conjunction of nature under circumstance apparently
unfavorable: come where they may, they always depend on condition that
be not obvious. he sit look at she, and do not rise to pay she
any compliment, leave that to other, now that his admiration be
deepen.
her singing be less remarkable, but also well train, and sweet to
hear as a chime perfectly in tune. it be true she sing "meet I by
moonlight," and "Ihave be roam"; for mortal must share the
fashion of their time, and none but the ancient can be always
classical. but Rosamond could also sing "black-eyed Susan" with
effect, or Haydn's canzonet, or "Voi, che sapete," or "Batti,
batti"--she only want to know what her audience like.
her father look round at the company, delight in their admiration.
her mother sit, like a niobe before her trouble, with her young
little girl on her lap, softly beat the child's hand up and down in
time to the music. and Fred, notwithstanding his general scepticism
about Rosy, listen to her music with perfect allegiance, wish he
could do the same thing on his flute. it be the pleasantest family
party that Lydgate have see since he come to Middlemarch. the Vincys
have the readiness to enjoy, the rejection of all anxiety, and the
belief in life as a merry lot, which make a house exceptional in most
county town at that time, when Evangelicalism have cast a certain
suspicion as of plague-infection over the few amusement which survive
in the province. at the Vincys' there be always whist, and the
card-table stand ready now, make some of the company secretly
impatient of the music. before it cease Mr. Farebrother come in--a
handsome, broad-cheste but otherwise small man, about forty, whose
black be very threadbare: the brilliancy be all in his quick gray
eye. he come like a pleasant change in the light, arrest little
Louisa with fatherly nonsense as she be be lead out of the room by
Miss Morgan, greet everybody with some special word, and seem to
condense more talk into ten minute than have be hold all through the
evening. he claim from Lydgate the fulfilment of a promise to come
and see he. "I cannot let you off, you know, because I have some
beetle to show you. we collector feel an interest in every new man
till he have see all we have to show he."
but soon he swerve to the whist-table, rub his hand and say,
"come now, let we be serious! Mr. Lydgate? not play? ah! you be too
young and light for this kind of thing."
Lydgate say to himself that the clergyman whose ability be so
painful to Mr. Bulstrode, appear to have find an agreeable resort in
this certainly not erudite household. he could half understand it: the
good-humor, the good look of eld and young, and the provision for
pass the time without any labor of intelligence, might make the
house beguiling to people who have no particular use for their odd hour.
everything look bloom and joyous except Miss Morgan, who be
brown, dull, and resign, and altogether, as Mrs. Vincy often say,
just the sort of person for a governess. Lydgate do not mean to pay
many such visit himself. they be a wretched waste of the evening;
and now, when he have talk a little more to Rosamond, he mean to
excuse himself and go.
"you will not like we at Middlemarch, I feel sure," she say, when the
whist-player be settle. "we be very stupid, and you have be
use to something quite different."
"I suppose all country town be pretty much alike," say Lydgate.
"but I have notice that one always believe one's own town to be more
stupid than any other. I have make up my mind to take Middlemarch as
it come, and shall be much oblige if the town will take I in the
same way. I have certainly find some charm in it which be much
great than I have expect."
"you mean the ride towards Tipton and Lowick; every one be please
with those," say Rosamond, with simplicity.
"no, I mean something much near to I."
Rosamond rise and reach her netting, and then say, "do you care
about dance at all? I be not quite sure whether clever man ever
dance."
"I would dance with you if you would allow I."
"oh!" say Rosamond, with a slight deprecatory laugh. "I be only
go to say that we sometimes have dancing, and I want to know
whether you would feel insulted if you be ask to come."
"not on the condition I mention."
after this chat Lydgate think that he be go, but on move
towards the whist-table, he get interested in watch Mr.
Farebrother's play, which be masterly, and also his face, which be a
strike mixture of the shrewd and the mild. at ten o'clock supper be
bring in (such be the custom of Middlemarch) and there be
punch-drinking; but Mr. Farebrother have only a glass of water. he be
win, but there seem to be no reason why the renewal of rubber
should end, and Lydgate at last take his leave.
but as it be not eleven o'clock, he choose to walk in the brisk air
towards the tower of St. Botolph's, Mr. Farebrother's church, which
stand out dark, square, and massive against the starlight. it be the
old church in Middlemarch; the living, however, be but a vicarage
worth barely four hundred a-year. Lydgate have hear that, and he
wonder now whether Mr. Farebrother care about the money he win at
card; think, "he seem a very pleasant fellow, but Bulstrode may
have his good reason." many thing would be easy to lydgate if it
should turn out that Mr. Bulstrode be generally justifiable. "what be
his religious doctrine to I, if he carry some good notion along
with it? one must use such brain as be to be find."
these be actually Lydgate's first meditation as he walk away from
Mr. Vincy's, and on this ground I fear that many lady will consider
he hardly worthy of their attention. he think of Rosamond and her
music only in the second place; and though, when her turn come, he
dwelt on the image of she for the rest of his walk, he feel no
agitation, and have no sense that any new current have set into his life.
he could not marry yet; he wish not to marry for several year; and
therefore he be not ready to entertain the notion of be in love
with a girl whom he happen to admire. he do admire Rosamond
exceedingly; but that madness which have once beset he about Laure be
not, he think, likely to recur in relation to any other woman.
certainly, if fall in love have be at all in question, it would
have be quite safe with a creature like this Miss Vincy, who have just
the kind of intelligence one would desire in a woman--polish,
refined, docile, lend itself to finish in all the delicacy of
life, and enshrine in a body which express this with a force of
demonstration that exclude the need for other evidence. Lydgate feel
sure that if ever he marry, his wife would have that feminine
radiance, that distinctive womanhood which must be class with flower
and music, that sort of beauty which by its very nature be virtuous,
be mould only for pure and delicate joy.
but since he do not mean to marry for the next five year--his more
press business be to look into Louis' new book on Fever, which he
be specially interested in, because he have know Louis in Paris, and
have follow many anatomical demonstration in order to ascertain the
specific difference of typhus and typhoid. he go home and read far
into the small hour, bring a much more testing vision of detail
and relation into this pathological study than he have ever think it
necessary to apply to the complexity of love and marriage, these
be subject on which he feel himself amply inform by literature,
and that traditional wisdom which be hand down in the genial
conversation of man. whereas Fever have obscure condition, and give
he that delightful labor of the imagination which be not mere
arbitrariness, but the exercise of discipline power--combine and
construct with the clear eye for probability and the full
obedience to knowledge; and then, in yet more energetic alliance with
impartial Nature, standing aloof to invent test by which to try its
own work.
many man have be praise as vividly imaginative on the strength of
their profuseness in indifferent drawing or cheap narration:--report
of very poor talk go on in distant orb; or portrait of Lucifer
come down on his bad errand as a large ugly man with bat's wing and
spurt of phosphorescence; or exaggeration of wantonness that seem to
reflect life in a diseased dream. but these kind of inspiration
Lydgate regard as rather vulgar and vinous compare with the
imagination that reveal subtle action inaccessible by any sort of
lens, but track in that outer darkness through long pathway of
necessary sequence by the inward light which be the last refinement of
Energy, capable of bath even the ethereal atom in its ideally
illuminate space. he for his part have toss away all cheap
invention where ignorance find itself able and at ease: he be
enamoured of that arduous invention which be the very eye of research,
provisionally frame its object and correct it to more and more
exactness of relation; he want to pierce the obscurity of those
minute process which prepare human misery and joy, those invisible
thoroughfare which be the first lurking-place of anguish, mania, and
crime, that delicate poise and transition which determine the growth of
happy or unhappy consciousness.
as he throw down his book, stretch his leg towards the ember in the
grate, and clasp his hand at the back of his head, in that agreeable
afterglow of excitement when think lapse from examination of a
specific object into a suffusive sense of its connection with all the
rest of our existence--seem, as it be, to throw itself on its back
after vigorous swimming and float with the repose of unexhausted
strength--Lydgate feel a triumphant delight in his study, and
something like pity for those less lucky man who be not of his
profession.
"if I have not take that turn when I be a lad," he think, "I might
have get into some stupid draught-horse work or other, and live always
in blinker. I should never have be happy in any profession that do
not call forth the high intellectual strain, and yet keep I in good
warm contact with my neighbor. there be nothing like the medical
profession for that: one can have the exclusive scientific life that
touch the distance and befriend the old fogy in the parish too. it
be rather hard for a clergyman: Farebrother seem to be an anomaly."
this last thought bring back the Vincys and all the picture of the
evening. they float in his mind agreeably enough, and as he take up
his bed-candle his lip be curl with that incipient smile which be
apt to accompany agreeable recollection. he be an ardent fellow, but
at present his ardor be absorb in love of his work and in the
ambition of make his life recognize as a factor in the well life
of mankind--like other hero of science who have nothing but an obscure
country practice to begin with.
Poor Lydgate! or shall I say, Poor Rosamond! each live in a world of
which the other know nothing. it have not occur to lydgate that he
have be a subject of eager meditation to Rosamond, who have neither any
reason for throw her marriage into distant perspective, nor any
pathological study to divert her mind from that ruminating habit,
that inward repetition of look, word, and phrase, which make a
large part in the life of most girl. he have not mean to look at she
or speak to she with more than the inevitable amount of admiration and
compliment which a man must give to a beautiful girl; indeed, it seem
to he that his enjoyment of her music have remain almost silent, for
he fear fall into the rudeness of tell she his great surprise
at her possession of such accomplishment. but Rosamond have register
every look and word, and estimate they as the open incident of a
preconceived romance--incident which gather value from the foreseen
development and climax. in Rosamond's romance it be not necessary to
imagine much about the inward life of the hero, or of his serious
business in the world: of course, he have a profession and be clever,
as well as sufficiently handsome; but the piquant fact about Lydgate
be his good birth, which distinguish he from all Middlemarch
admirer, and present marriage as a prospect of rise in rank and
get a little near to that celestial condition on earth in which
she would have nothing to do with vulgar people, and perhaps at last
associate with relative quite equal to the county people who look
down on the Middlemarchers. it be part of Rosamond's cleverness to
discern very subtly the faint aroma of rank, and once when she have
see the Miss Brookes accompany their uncle at the county assize,
and seat among the aristocracy, she have envy they, notwithstanding
their plain dress.
if you think it incredible that to imagine Lydgate as a man of family
could cause thrill of satisfaction which have anything to do with the
sense that she be in love with he, I will ask you to use your power
of comparison a little more effectively, and consider whether red cloth
and epaulet have never have an influence of that sort. our passion do
not live apart in locked chamber, but, dress in their small wardrobe
of notion, bring their provision to a common table and mess together,
feed out of the common store accord to their appetite.
Rosamond, in fact, be entirely occupy not exactly with Tertius
Lydgate as he be in himself, but with his relation to she; and it be
excusable in a girl who be accustomed to hear that all young man
might, could, would be, or actually be in love with she, to believe
at once that Lydgate could be no exception. his look and word mean
more to she than other man's, because she care more for they: she
think of they diligently, and diligently attend to that perfection
of appearance, behavior, sentiment, and all other elegancie, which
would find in Lydgate a more adequate admirer than she have yet be
conscious of.
for Rosamond, though she would never do anything that be disagreeable
to she, be industrious; and now more than ever she be active in
sketch her landscape and market-cart and portrait of friend, in
practise her music, and in be from morning till night her own
standard of a perfect lady, have always an audience in her own
consciousness, with sometimes the not unwelcome addition of a more
variable external audience in the numerous visitor of the house. she
find time also to read the good novel, and even the second good, and
she know much poetry by heart. her favorite poem be "Lalla Rookh."
"the good girl in the world! he will be a happy fellow who get she!"
be the sentiment of the elderly gentleman who visit the Vincys; and
the reject young man think of try again, as be the fashion in
country town where the horizon be not thick with come rival. but
Mrs. Plymdale think that Rosamond have be educate to a ridiculous
pitch, for what be the use of accomplishment which would be all lay
aside as soon as she be marry? while her aunt Bulstrode, who have a
sisterly faithfulness towards her brother's family, have two sincere
wish for Rosamond--that she might show a more serious turn of mind,
and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth correspond to her
habit.
CHAPTER XVII.
"the clerkly person smile and say
promise be a pretty maid,
but be poor she die unwed."
the Rev. Camden Farebrother, whom Lydgate go to see the next evening,
live in an old parsonage, build of stone, venerable enough to match
the church which it look out upon. all the furniture too in the
house be old, but with another grade of age--that of Mr. Farebrother's
father and grandfather. there be paint white chair, with gilding
and wreath on they, and some linger red silk damask with slit in
it. there be engrave portrait of Lord Chancellors and other
celebrate lawyer of the last century; and there be old pier-glass
to reflect they, as well as the little satin-wood table and the sofas
resemble a prolongation of uneasy chair, all stand in relief
against the dark wainscot this be the physiognomy of the drawing-room
into which Lydgate be show; and there be three lady to receive
he, who be also old-fashioned, and of a faded but genuine
respectability: Mrs. Farebrother, the Vicar's white-haired mother,
befrille and kerchiefe with dainty cleanliness, up right, quick-eye,
and still under seventy; Miss Noble, her sister, a tiny old lady of
meeker aspect, with frill and kerchief decidedly more worn and mend;
and Miss Winifred Farebrother, the Vicar's eld sister, well-look
like himself, but nip and subdue as single woman be apt to be who
spend their life in uninterrupted subjection to their elder. lydgate
have not expect to see so quaint a group: know simply that Mr.
Farebrother be a bachelor, he have think of be usher into a
snuggery where the chief furniture would probably be book and
collection of natural object. the Vicar himself seem to wear
rather a change aspect, as most man do when acquaintance make
elsewhere see they for the first time in their own home; some indeed
show like an actor of genial part disadvantageously cast for the
curmudgeon in a new piece. this be not the case with Mr. Farebrother:
he seem a trifle milder and more silent, the chief talker be his
mother, while he only put in a good-humor moderate remark here and
there. the old lady be evidently accustomed to tell her company what
they ought to think, and to regard no subject as quite safe without her
steering. she be afford leisure for this function by have all her
little want attend to by Miss Winifred. meanwhile tiny Miss Noble
carry on her arm a small basket, into which she divert a bit of
sugar, which she have first drop in her saucer as if by mistake;
look round furtively afterwards, and revert to her teacup with a
small innocent noise as of a tiny timid quadruped. pray think no ill
of Miss Noble. that basket hold small saving from her more portable
food, destine for the child of her poor friend among whom she
trot on fine morning; foster and pet all needy creature
be so spontaneous a delight to she, that she regard it much as if
it have be a pleasant vice that she be addict to. perhaps she be
conscious of be tempt to steal from those who have much that she
might give to those who have nothing, and carry in her conscience the
guilt of that repressed desire. one must be poor to know the luxury of
give!
Mrs. Farebrother welcome the guest with a lively formality and
precision. she presently inform he that they be not often in want
of medical aid in that house. she have bring up her child to wear
flannel and not to over-eat themselves, which last habit she consider
the chief reason why people need doctor. Lydgate plead for those
whose father and mother have over-eat themselves, but Mrs.
Farebrother hold that view of thing dangerous: nature be more just
than that; it would be easy for any felon to say that his ancestor
ought to have be hang instead of he. if those he have bad father
and mother be bad themselves, they be hang for that. there be
no need to go back on what you couldnot see.
"my mother be like old George the Third," say the Vicar, "she object
to metaphysic."
"I object to what be wrong, Camden. I say, keep hold of a few plain
truth, and make everything square with they. when I be young, Mr.
Lydgate, there never be any question about right and wrong. we know
our catechism, and that be enough; we learn our creed and our duty.
every respectable Church person have the same opinion. but now, if you
speak out of the Prayer-book itself, you be liable to be contradict."
"that make rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to maintain
their own point," say Lydgate.
"but my mother always give way," say the Vicar, slyly.
"no, no, Camden, you must not lead Mr. Lydgate into a mistake about
_I_. I shall never show that disrespect to my parent, to give up what
they teach I. any one may see what come of turn. if you change
once, why not twenty time?"
"a man might see good argument for change once, and not see they for
change again," say Lydgate, amuse with the decisive old lady.
"excuse I there. if you go upon argument, they be never want,
when a man have no constancy of mind. my father never change, and he
preach plain moral sermon without argument, and be a good man--few
well. when you get I a good man make out of argument, I will get
you a good dinner with read you the cookery-book. thatbe my opinion,
and I think anybody's stomach will bear I out."
"about the dinner certainly, mother," say Mr. Farebrother.
"it be the same thing, the dinner or the man. I be nearly seventy, Mr.
Lydgate, and I go upon experience. I be not likely to follow new
light, though there be plenty of they here as elsewhere. I say, they
come in with the mixed stuff that will neither wash nor wear. it be
not so in my youth: a Churchman be a Churchman, and a clergyman, you
might be pretty sure, be a gentleman, if nothing else. but now he may
be no well than a Dissenter, and want to push aside my son on
pretence of doctrine. but whoever may wish to push he aside, I be
proud to say, Mr. Lydgate, that he will compare with any preacher in
this kingdom, not to speak of this town, which be but a low standard to
go by; at least, to my thinking, for I be bear and breed at Exeter."
"a mother be never partial," say Mr. Farebrother, smile. "what do
you think Tyke's mother say about he?"
"ah, poor creature! what indeed?" say Mrs. Farebrother, her sharpness
blunt for the moment by her confidence in maternal judgment. "she
say the truth to herself, depend upon it."
"and what be the truth?" say Lydgate. "I be curious to know."
"oh, nothing bad at all," say Mr. Farebrother. "he be a zealous
fellow: not very learn, and not very wise, I think--because I donot
agree with he."
"why, Camden!" say Miss Winifred, "Griffin and his wife tell I only
to-day, that Mr. Tyke say they should have no more coal if they come
to hear you preach."
Mrs. Farebrother lay down her knitting, which she have resume after
her small allowance of tea and toast, and look at her son as if to
say "you hear that?" Miss Noble say, "oh poor thing! poor thing!"
in reference, probably, to the double loss of preaching and coal. but
the Vicar answer quietly--
"that be because they be not my parishioner. and I donot think my
sermon be worth a load of coal to they."
"Mr. Lydgate," say Mrs. Farebrother, who could not let this pass, "you
donot know my son: he always undervalue himself. I tell he he be
undervalue the God who make he, and make he a most excellent
preacher."
"that must be a hint for I to take Mr. Lydgate away to my study,
mother," say the Vicar, laugh. "I promise to show you my
collection," he add, turn to lydgate; "shall we go?"
all three lady remonstrate. Mr. Lydgate ought not to be hurry
away without be allow to accept another cup of tea: Miss Winifred
have abundance of good tea in the pot. why be Camden in such haste to
take a visitor to his den? there be nothing but pickled vermin, and
drawer full of blue-bottle and moth, with no carpet on the floor.
Mr. Lydgate must excuse it. a game at cribbage would be far well.
in short, it be plain that a vicar might be adore by his womankind as
the king of man and preacher, and yet be hold by they to stand in much
need of their direction. lydgate, with the usual shallowness of a
young bachelor, wonder that Mr. Farebrother have not teach they
well.
"my mother be not use to my have visitor who can take any interest
in my hobby," say the Vicar, as he open the door of his study,
which be indeed as bare of luxury for the body as the lady have
imply, unless a short porcelain pipe and a tobacco-box be to be
excepted.
"man of your profession donot generally smoke," he say. lydgate
smile and shake his head. "nor of mine either, properly, I suppose.
you will hear that pipe allege against I by Bulstrode and Company.
they donot know how pleased the devil would be if I give it up."
"I understand. you be of an excitable temper and want a sedative. I
be heavy, and should get idle with it. I should rush into idleness,
and stagnate there with all my might."
"and you mean to give it all to your work. I be some ten or twelve
year old than you, and have come to a compromise. I feed a weakness
or two lest they should get clamorous. see," continue the Vicar,
open several small drawer, "I fancy I have make an exhaustive study
of the entomology of this district. I be go on both with the fauna
and flora; but I have at least do my insect well. we be singularly
rich in orthoptera: I donot know whether--ah! you have get hold of that
glass jar--you be look into that instead of my drawer. you donot
really care about these thing?"
"not by the side of this lovely anencephalous monster. I have never
have time to give myself much to natural history. I be early bite
with an interest in structure, and it be what lie most directly in my
profession. I have no hobby besides. I have the sea to swim in there."
"ah! you be a happy fellow," say Mr. Farebrother, turn on his heel
and begin to fill his pipe. "you donot know what it be to want
spiritual tobacco--bad emendation of old text, or small item about a
variety of Aphis Brassicae, with the well-know signature of
Philomicron, for the 'Twaddler's magazine;' or a learn treatise on
the entomology of the Pentateuch, include all the insect not
mention, but probably meet with by the Israelites in their passage
through the desert; with a monograph on the Ant, as treat by Solomon,
show the harmony of the Book of Proverbs with the result of modern
research. you donot mind my fumigating you?"
Lydgate be more surprised at the openness of this talk than at its
imply meaning--that the Vicar feel himself not altogether in the
right vocation. the neat fitting-up of drawer and shelf, and the
bookcase fill with expensive illustrate book on Natural history,
make he think again of the winning at card and their destination.
but he be begin to wish that the very good construction of
everything that Mr. Farebrother do should be the true one. the
Vicar's frankness seem not of the repulsive sort that come from an
uneasy consciousness seek to forestall the judgment of other, but
simply the relief of a desire to do with as little pretence as
possible. apparently he be not without a sense that his freedom of
speech might seem premature, for he presently said--
"I have not yet tell you that I have the advantage of you, Mr. Lydgate,
and know you well than you know I. you remember Trawley who share
your apartment at Paris for some time? I be a correspondent of his,
and he tell I a good deal about you. I be not quite sure when you
first come that you be the same man. I be very glad when I find
that you be. only I donot forget that you have not have the like
prologue about I."
Lydgate divine some delicacy of feeling here, but do not half
understand it. "by the way," he say, "what have become of Trawley? I
have quite lose sight of he. he be hot on the french social system,
and talk of go to the backwood to found a sort of pythagorean
community. be he go?"
"not at all. he be practise at a german bath, and have marry a rich
patient."
"then my notion wear the good, so far," say Lydgate, with a short
scornful laugh. "he would have it, the medical profession be an
inevitable system of humbug. I say, the fault be in the man--man who
truckle to lie and folly. instead of preach against humbug outside
the wall, it might be well to set up a disinfect apparatus
within. in short--I be report my own conversation--you may be sure
I have all the good sense on my side."
"your scheme be a good deal more difficult to carry out than the
pythagorean community, though. you have not only get the old Adam in
yourself against you, but you have get all those descendant of the
original Adam who form the society around you. you see, I have pay
twelve or thirteen year more than you for my knowledge of
difficulty. But"--Mr. Farebrother break off a moment, and then
add, "you be eye that glass vase again. do you want to make an
exchange? you shall not have it without a fair barter."
"I have some sea-mice--fine specimen--in spirit. and I will throw in
Robert Brown's new thing--'microscopic Observations on the Pollen of
plants'--if you donot happen to have it already."
"why, see how you long for the monster, I might ask a high price.
suppose I ask you to look through my drawer and agree with I about
all my new specie?" the Vicar, while he talk in this way,
alternately move about with his pipe in his mouth, and return to
hang rather fondly over his drawer. "that would be good discipline,
you know, for a young doctor who have to please his patient in
Middlemarch. you must learn to be bore, remember. however, you shall
have the monster on your own term."
"donot you think man overrate the necessity for humor everybody's
nonsense, till they get despise by the very fool they humor?" say
Lydgate, move to Mr. Farebrother's side, and look rather absently
at the insect range in fine gradation, with name subscribe in
exquisite writing. "the short way be to make your value feel, so
that people must put up with you whether you flatter they or not."
"with all my heart. but then you must be sure of have the value, and
you must keep yourself independent. very few man can do that. either
you slip out of service altogether, and become good for nothing, or you
wear the harness and draw a good deal where your yoke-fellow pull you.
but do look at these delicate orthoptera!"
Lydgate have after all to give some scrutiny to each drawer, the Vicar
laugh at himself, and yet persist in the exhibition.
"apropos of what you say about wear harness," Lydgate begin, after
they have sit down, "I make up my mind some time ago to do with as
little of it as possible. that be why I determine not to try anything
in London, for a good many year at least. I donot like what I see
when I be study there--so much empty bigwiggism, and obstructive
trickery. in the country, people have less pretension to knowledge,
and be less of companion, but for that reason they affect one's
amour-propre less: one make less bad blood, and can follow one's own
course more quietly."
"yes--well--you have get a good start; you be in the right profession,
the work you feel yourself most fit for. some people miss that, and
repent too late. but you must not be too sure of keep your
independence."
"you mean of family tie?" say Lydgate, conceive that these might
press rather tightly on Mr. Farebrother.
"not altogether. of course they make many thing more difficult. but
a good wife--a good unworldly woman--may really help a man, and keep
he more independent. therebe a parishioner of mine--a fine fellow,
but who would hardly have pull through as he have do without his
wife. do you know the Garths? I think they be not Peacock's
patient."
"no; but there be a Miss Garth at old Featherstone's, at Lowick."
"their daughter: an excellent girl."
"she be very quiet--I have hardly notice she."
"she have take notice of you, though, depend upon it."
"I donot understand," say lydgate; he could hardly say "of course."
"oh, she gauge everybody. I prepare she for confirmation--she be a
favorite of mine."
Mr. Farebrother puff a few moment in silence, Lydgate not care to
know more about the Garths. at last the Vicar lay down his pipe,
stretch out his leg, and turn his bright eye with a smile towards
Lydgate, saying--
"but we Middlemarchers be not so tame as you take we to be. we have
our intrigue and our party. I be a party man, for example, and
Bulstrode be another. if you vote for I you will offend Bulstrode."
"what be there against Bulstrode?" say Lydgate, emphatically.
"I do not say there be anything against he except that. if you vote
against he you will make he your enemy."
"I donot know that I need mind about that," say Lydgate, rather
proudly; "but he seem to have good idea about hospital, and he
spend large sum on useful public object. he might help I a good
deal in carry out my idea. as to his religious notion--why, as
Voltaire say, incantation will destroy a flock of sheep if
administer with a certain quantity of arsenic. I look for the man
who will bring the arsenic, and donot mind about his incantation."
"very good. but then you must not offend your arsenic-man. you will
not offend I, you know," say Mr. Farebrother, quite unaffectedly. "I
donot translate my own convenience into other people's duty. I be
oppose to Bulstrode in many way. I donot like the set he belong to:
they be a narrow ignorant set, and do more to make their neighbor
uncomfortable than to make they well. their system be a sort of
worldly-spiritual cliqueism: they really look on the rest of mankind as
a doomed carcass which be to nourish they for heaven. but," he add,
smilingly, "I donot say that Bulstrode's new hospital be a bad thing;
and as to his wanting to oust I from the old one--why, if he think I
a mischievous fellow, he be only return a compliment. and I be not
a model clergyman--only a decent makeshift."
Lydgate be not at all sure that the Vicar malign himself. a model
clergyman, like a model doctor, ought to think his own profession the
fine in the world, and take all knowledge as mere nourishment to his
moral pathology and therapeutic. he only say, "what reason do
Bulstrode give for supersede you?"
"that I donot teach his opinion--which he call spiritual religion;
and that I have no time to spare. both statement be true. but then
I could make time, and I should be glad of the forty pound. that be
the plain fact of the case. but let we dismiss it. I only want to
tell you that if you vote for your arsenic-man, you be not to cut I
in consequence. I cannot spare you. you be a sort of circumnavigator
come to settle among we, and will keep up my belief in the antipode.
now tell I all about they in Paris."
CHAPTER XVIII.
"oh, sir, the lofty hope on earth
draw lot with mean hope: heroic breast,
breathe bad air, run risk of pestilence;
or, lack lime-juice when they cross the line,
may languish with the scurvy."
some week pass after this conversation before the question of the
chaplaincy gather any practical import for Lydgate, and without
tell himself the reason, he defer the predetermination on which
side he should give his vote. it would really have be a matter of
total indifference to he--that be to say, he would have take the more
convenient side, and give his vote for the appointment of Tyke without
any hesitation--if he have not care personally for Mr. Farebrother.
but his liking for the Vicar of St. Botolph's grow with grow
acquaintanceship. that, enter into Lydgate's position as a
new-comer who have his own professional object to secure, Mr.
Farebrother should have take pain rather to warn off than to obtain
his interest, show an unusual delicacy and generosity, which
Lydgate's nature be keenly alive to. it go along with other point
of conduct in Mr. Farebrother which be exceptionally fine, and make
his character resemble those southern landscape which seem divide
between natural grandeur and social slovenliness. very few man could
have be as filial and chivalrous as he be to the mother, aunt, and
sister, whose dependence on he have in many way shape his life rather
uneasily for himself; few man who feel the pressure of small need be
so nobly resolute not to dress up their inevitably self-interest
desire in a pretext of well motif. in these matter he be
conscious that his life would bear the close scrutiny; and perhaps
the consciousness encourage a little defiance towards the critical
strictness of person whose celestial intimacy seem not to improve
their domestic manner, and whose lofty aim be not need to account
for their action. then, his preaching be ingenious and pithy, like
the preaching of the English Church in its robust age, and his sermon
be deliver without book. People outside his parish go to hear
he; and, since to fill the church be always the most difficult part
of a clergyman's function, here be another ground for a careless sense
of superiority. besides, he be a likable man: sweet-temper,
ready-witted, frank, without grin of suppress bitterness or other
conversational flavor which make half of we an affliction to our
friend. Lydgate like he heartily, and wish for his friendship.
with this feeling uppermost, he continue to waive the question of the
chaplaincy, and to persuade himself that it be not only no proper
business of his, but likely enough never to vex he with a demand for
his vote. lydgate, at Mr. Bulstrode's request, be lay down plan
for the internal arrangement of the new hospital, and the two be
often in consultation. the banker be always presuppose that he
could count in general on Lydgate as a coadjutor, but make no special
recurrence to the come decision between Tyke and Farebrother. when
the General Board of the Infirmary have meet, however, and Lydgate have
notice that the question of the chaplaincy be throw on a council of
the director and medical man, to meet on the following Friday, he have
a vexed sense that he must make up his mind on this trivial Middlemarch
business. he could not help hear within he the distinct
declaration that Bulstrode be prime minister, and that the Tyke affair
be a question of office or no office; and he could not help an equally
pronounce dislike to give up the prospect of office. for his
observation be constantly confirm Mr. Farebrother's assurance that
the banker would not overlook opposition. "confound their petty
politic!" be one of his thought for three morning in the meditative
process of shaving, when he have begin to feel that he must really hold
a court of conscience on this matter. certainly there be valid
thing to be say against the election of Mr. Farebrother: he have too
much on his hand already, especially consider how much time he
spend on non-clerical occupation. then again it be a continually
repeat shock, disturb Lydgate's esteem, that the Vicar should
obviously play for the sake of money, like the play indeed, but
evidently like some end which it serve. Mr. Farebrother contend
on theory for the desirability of all game, and say that Englishmen's
wit be stagnant for want of they; but Lydgate feel certain that he
would have play very much less but for the money. there be a
billiard-room at the Green Dragon, which some anxious mother and wife
regard as the chief temptation in Middlemarch. the Vicar be a
first-rate billiard-player, and though he do not frequent the Green
Dragon, there be report that he have sometimes be there in the
daytime and have win money. and as to the chaplaincy, he do not
pretend that he care for it, except for the sake of the forty pound.
Lydgate be no Puritan, but he do not care for play, and win money
at it have always seem a meanness to he; besides, he have an ideal of
life which make this subservience of conduct to the gaining of small
sum thoroughly hateful to he. Hitherto in his own life his want have
be supply without any trouble to himself, and his first impulse be
always to be liberal with half-crown as matter of no importance to a
gentleman; it have never occur to he to devise a plan for get
half-crown. he have always know in a general way that he be not
rich, but he have never feel poor, and he have no power of imagine the
part which the want of money play in determine the action of man.
Money have never be a motive to he. hence he be not ready to frame
excuse for this deliberate pursuit of small gain. it be altogether
repulsive to he, and he never enter into any calculation of the
ratio between the Vicar's income and his more or less necessary
expenditure. it be possible that he would not have make such a
calculation in his own case.
and now, when the question of voting have come, this repulsive fact tell
more strongly against Mr. Farebrother than it have do before. one
would know much well what to do if man's character be more
consistent, and especially if one's friend be invariably fit for any
function they desire to undertake! Lydgate be convince that if
there have be no valid objection to Mr. Farebrother, he would have
vote for he, whatever Bulstrode might have feel on the subject: he
do not intend to be a vassal of Bulstrode's. on the other hand, there
be Tyke, a man entirely give to his clerical office, who be simply
curate at a chapel of ease in St. Peter's parish, and have time for
extra duty. nobody have anything to say against Mr. Tyke, except that
they could not bear he, and suspect he of cannot. really, from his
point of view, Bulstrode be thoroughly justified.
but whichever way Lydgate begin to incline, there be something to make
he wince; and be a proud man, he be a little exasperate at be
oblige to wince. he do not like frustrate his own good purpose by
get on bad term with Bulstrode; he do not like vote against
Farebrother, and help to deprive he of function and salary; and the
question occur whether the additional forty pound might not leave
the Vicar free from that ignoble care about win at card.
moreover, Lydgate do not like the consciousness that in vote for
tyke he should be vote on the side obviously convenient for himself.
but would the end really be his own convenience? other people would
say so, and would allege that he be curry favor with Bulstrode for
the sake of make himself important and get on in the world. what
then? he for his own part know that if his personal prospect simply
have be concern, he would not have care a rotten nut for the
banker's friendship or enmity. what he really care for be a medium
for his work, a vehicle for his idea; and after all, be he not bind
to prefer the object of get a good hospital, where he could
demonstrate the specific distinction of fever and test therapeutic
result, before anything else connect with this chaplaincy? for the
first time Lydgate be feel the hampering threadlike pressure of
small social condition, and their frustrating complexity. at the end
of his inward debate, when he set out for the hospital, his hope be
really in the chance that discussion might somehow give a new aspect to
the question, and make the scale dip so as to exclude the necessity for
voting. I think he trust a little also to the energy which be
beget by circumstance--some feeling rush warmly and make
resolve easy, while debate in cool blood have only make it more
difficult. however it be, he do not distinctly say to himself on
which side he would vote; and all the while he be inwardly resent
the subjection which have be force upon he. it would have seem
beforehand like a ridiculous piece of bad logic that he, with his
unmixe resolution of independence and his select purpose, would find
himself at the very outset in the grasp of petty alternative, each of
which be repugnant to he. in his student's chamber, he have
prearrange his social action quite differently.
Lydgate be late in set out, but Dr. Sprague, the two other
surgeon, and several of the director have arrive early; Mr.
Bulstrode, treasurer and chairman, be among those who be still
absent. the conversation seem to imply that the issue be
problematical, and that a majority for Tyke be not so certain as have
be generally suppose. the two physician, for a wonder, turn out
to be unanimous, or rather, though of different mind, they concur
in action. Dr. Sprague, the rugged and weighty, be, as every one have
foresee, an adherent of Mr. Farebrother. the doctor be more than
suspect of have no religion, but somehow Middlemarch tolerate this
deficiency in he as if he have be a Lord Chancellor; indeed it be
probable that his professional weight be the more believe in, the
world-old association of cleverness with the evil principle be still
potent in the mind even of lady-patient who have the strict idea
of frilling and sentiment. it be perhaps this negation in the doctor
which make his neighbor call he hard-head and dry-witted;
condition of texture which be also hold favorable to the storing of
judgment connect with drug. at all event, it be certain that if
any medical man have come to Middlemarch with the reputation of have
very definite religious view, of be give to prayer, and of
otherwise show an active piety, there would have be a general
presumption against his medical skill.
on this ground it be (professionally speak) fortunate for Dr.
Minchin that his religious sympathy be of a general kind, and such
as give a distant medical sanction to all serious sentiment, whether of
Church or Dissent, rather than any adhesion to particular tenet. if
Mr. Bulstrode insist, as he be apt to do, on the Lutheran doctrine
of justification, as that by which a Church must stand or fall, Dr.
Minchin in return be quite sure that man be not a mere machine or a
fortuitous conjunction of atom; if Mrs. Wimple insist on a
particular providence in relation to her stomach complaint, Dr. Minchin
for his part like to keep the mental window open and object to
fix limit; if the unitarian brewer jest about the Athanasian
Creed, Dr. Minchin quote Pope's "Essay on Man." he object to the
rather free style of anecdote in which Dr. Sprague indulge, prefer
well-sanction quotation, and like refinement of all kind: it be
generally know that he have some kinship to a bishop, and sometimes
spend his holiday at "the palace."
Dr. Minchin be soft-handed, pale-complexion, and of rounded outline,
not to be distinguish from a mild clergyman in appearance: whereas
Dr. Sprague be superfluously tall; his trouser get crease at the
knee, and show an excess of boot at a time when strap seem
necessary to any dignity of bear; you hear he go in and out, and
up and down, as if he have come to see after the roofing. in short, he
have weight, and might be expect to grapple with a disease and throw
it; while Dr. Minchin might be well able to detect it lurk and to
circumvent it. they enjoy about equally the mysterious privilege of
medical reputation, and conceal with much etiquette their contempt
for each other's skill. regard themselves as Middlemarch
institution, they be ready to combine against all innovator, and
against non-professional give to interference. on this ground they
be both in their heart equally averse to Mr. Bulstrode, though Dr.
Minchin have never be in open hostility with he, and never differ
from he without elaborate explanation to Mrs. Bulstrode, who have find
that Dr. Minchin alone understand her constitution. a layman who pry
into the professional conduct of medical man, and be always obtrude
his reforms,--though he be less directly embarrassing to the two
physician than to the surgeon-apothecary who attend pauper by
contract, be nevertheless offensive to the professional nostril as
such; and Dr. Minchin share fully in the new pique against Bulstrode,
excite by his apparent determination to patronize Lydgate. the
long-establish practitioner, Mr. Wrench and Mr. Toller; be just
now stand apart and have a friendly colloquy, in which they agree
that Lydgate be a jackanape, just make to serve Bulstrode's purpose.
to non-medical friend they have already concur in praise the other
young practitioner, who have come into the town on Mr. Peacock's
retirement without further recommendation than his own merit and such
argument for solid professional acquirement as might be gather from
his have apparently waste no time on other branch of knowledge.
it be clear that lydgate, by not dispense drug, intend to cast
imputation on his equal, and also to obscure the limit between his
own rank as a general practitioner and that of the physician, who, in
the interest of the profession, feel bind to maintain its various
grades,--especially against a man who have not be to either of the
english university and enjoy the absence of anatomical and bedside
study there, but come with a libellous pretension to experience in
Edinburgh and Paris, where observation might be abundant indeed, but
hardly sound.
thus it happen that on this occasion Bulstrode become identify with
Lydgate, and Lydgate with Tyke; and owe to this variety of
interchangeable name for the chaplaincy question, diverse mind be
enable to form the same judgment concern it.
Dr. Sprague say at once bluntly to the group assemble when he
enter, "I go for Farebrother. a salary, with all my heart. but why
take it from the Vicar? he have none too much--have to insure his life,
besides keep house, and do a vicar's charity. put forty pound
in his pocket and youwill do no harm. hebe a good fellow, be
Farebrother, with as little of the parson about he as will serve to
carry order."
"Ho, ho! Doctor," say old Mr. Powderell, a retire iron-monger of
some standing--his interjection be something between a laugh and a
parliamentary disapproval; "we must let you have your say. but what we
have to consider be not anybody's income--itbe the soul of the poor
sick people"--here Mr. Powderell's voice and face have a sincere pathos
in they. "he be a real Gospel preacher, be Mr. Tyke. I should vote
against my conscience if I vote against Mr. Tyke--I should indeed."
"Mr. Tyke's opponent have not ask any one to vote against his
conscience, I believe," say Mr. Hackbutt, a rich tanner of fluent
speech, whose glitter spectacle and erect hair be turn with
some severity towards innocent Mr. Powderell. "but in my judgment it
behove we, as director, to consider whether we will regard it as our
whole business to carry out proposition emanate from a single
quarter. will any member of the committee aver that he would have
entertain the idea of displace the gentleman who have always
discharge the function of chaplain here, if it have not be suggest
to he by party whose disposition it be to regard every institution
of this town as a machinery for carry out their own view? I tax no
man's motif: let they lie between himself and a high power; but I
do say, that there be influence at work here which be incompatible
with genuine independence, and that a crawl servility be usually
dictate by circumstance which gentleman so conduct themselves
could not afford either morally or financially to avow. I myself be a
layman, but I have give no inconsiderable attention to the division
in the Church and--"
"oh, damn the division!" burst in Mr. Frank Hawley, lawyer and
town-clerk, who rarely present himself at the board, but now look
in hurriedly, whip in hand. "we have nothing to do with they here.
Farebrother have be do the work--what there be--without pay, and
if pay be to be give, it should be give to he. I call it a
confound job to take the thing away from Farebrother."
"I think it would be as well for gentleman not to give their remark a
personal bearing," say Mr. Plymdale. "I shall vote for the
appointment of Mr. Tyke, but I should not have know, if Mr. Hackbutt
havenot hint it, that I be a Servile Crawler."
"I disclaim any personality. I expressly say, if I may be allow
to repeat, or even to conclude what I be about to say--"
"ah, here's Minchin!" say Mr. Frank Hawley; at which everybody turn
away from Mr. Hackbutt, leave he to feel the uselessness of superior
gift in Middlemarch. "Come, Doctor, I must have you on the right
side, eh?"
"I hope so," say Dr. Minchin, nod and shake hand here and
there; "at whatever cost to my feeling."
"if therebe any feeling here, it should be feel for the man who be
turn out, I think," say Mr. Frank Hawley.
"I confess I have feeling on the other side also. I have a divided
esteem," say Dr. Minchin, rub his hand. "I consider Mr. Tyke an
exemplary man--none more so--and I believe he to be propose from
unimpeachable motif. I, for my part, wish that I could give he my
vote. but I be constrain to take a view of the case which give the
preponderance to Mr. Farebrother's claim. he be an amiable man, an
able preacher, and have be long among we."
Old Mr. Powderell look on, sad and silent. Mr. Plymdale settle his
cravat, uneasily.
"you donot set up Farebrother as a pattern of what a clergyman ought to
be, I hope," say Mr. Larcher, the eminent carrier, who have just come
in. "I have no ill-will towards he, but I think we owe something to
the public, not to speak of anything high, in these appointment. in
my opinion Farebrother be too lax for a clergyman. I donot wish to
bring up particular against he; but he will make a little attendance
here go as far as he can."
"and a devilish deal well than too much," say Mr. Hawley, whose bad
language be notorious in that part of the county. "sick people cannot
bear so much pray and preach. and that methodistical sort of
religion be bad for the spirit--bad for the inside, eh?" he add,
turn quickly round to the four medical man who be assemble.
but any answer be dispense with by the entrance of three gentleman,
with whom there be greeting more or less cordial. these be the
Reverend Edward Thesiger, Rector of St. Peter's, Mr. Bulstrode, and our
friend Mr. Brooke of Tipton, who have lately allow himself to be put
on the board of director in his turn, but have never before attend,
his attendance now be due to Mr. Bulstrode's exertion. Lydgate be
the only person still expect.
every one now sit down, Mr. Bulstrode presiding, pale and
self-restrain as usual. Mr. Thesiger, a moderate evangelical, wish
for the appointment of his friend Mr. Tyke, a zealous able man, who,
officiate at a chapel of ease, have not a cure of soul too extensive
to leave he ample time for the new duty. it be desirable that
chaplaincy of this kind should be enter on with a fervent
intention: they be peculiar opportunity for spiritual influence;
and while it be good that a salary should be allot, there be the
more need for scrupulous watching lest the office should be pervert
into a mere question of salary. Mr. Thesiger's manner have so much
quiet propriety that objector could only simmer in silence.
Mr. Brooke believe that everybody mean well in the matter. he have
not himself attend to the affair of the Infirmary, though he have a
strong interest in whatever be for the benefit of Middlemarch, and be
most happy to meet the gentleman present on any public question--"any
public question, you know," Mr. Brooke repeat, with his nod of
perfect understanding. "I be a good deal occupy as a magistrate, and
in the collection of documentary evidence, but I regard my time as
be at the disposal of the public--and, in short, my friend have
convince I that a chaplain with a salary--a salary, you know--be a
very good thing, and I be happy to be able to come here and vote for
the appointment of Mr. Tyke, who, I understand, be an unexceptionable
man, apostolic and eloquent and everything of that kind--and I be the
last man to withhold my vote--under the circumstance, you know."
"it seem to I that you have be cram with one side of the
question, Mr. Brooke," say Mr. Frank Hawley, who be afraid of nobody,
and be a Tory suspicious of electioneer intention. "you donot
seem to know that one of the worthy man we have have be do duty
as chaplain here for year without pay, and that Mr. Tyke be propose
to supersede he."
"excuse I, Mr. Hawley," say Mr. Bulstrode. "Mr. Brooke have be
fully informed of Mr. Farebrother's character and position."
"by his enemy," flash out Mr. Hawley.
"I trust there be no personal hostility concern here," say Mr.
Thesiger.
"Iwill swear there be, though," retort Mr. Hawley.
"gentleman," say Mr. Bulstrode, in a subdue tone, "the merit of the
question may be very briefly state, and if any one present doubt that
every gentleman who be about to give his vote have not be fully
inform, I can now recapitulate the consideration that should weigh
on either side."
"I donot see the good of that," say Mr. Hawley. "I suppose we all
know whom we mean to vote for. any man who want to do justice do
not wait till the last minute to hear both side of the question. I
have no time to lose, and I propose that the matter be put to the vote
at once."
a brief but still hot discussion follow before each person write
"tyke" or "Farebrother" on a piece of paper and slip it into a glass
tumbler; and in the mean time Mr. Bulstrode see Lydgate enter.
"I perceive that the vote be equally divide at present," say Mr.
Bulstrode, in a clear biting voice. then, look up at lydgate--
"there be a casting-vote still to be give. it be your, Mr. Lydgate:
will you be good enough to write?"
"the thing be settle now," say Mr. Wrench, rise. "we all know how
Mr. Lydgate will vote."
"you seem to speak with some peculiar meaning, sir," say Lydgate,
rather defiantly, and keep his pencil suspend.
"I merely mean that you be expect to vote with Mr. Bulstrode. do
you regard that meaning as offensive?"
"it may be offensive to other. but I shall not desist from voting
with he on that account." Lydgate immediately write down "Tyke."
so the Rev. Walter Tyke become chaplain to the Infirmary, and Lydgate
continue to work with Mr. Bulstrode. he be really uncertain whether
tyke be not the more suitable candidate, and yet his consciousness
tell he that if he have be quite free from indirect bias he should
have vote for Mr. Farebrother. the affair of the chaplaincy remain
a sore point in his memory as a case in which this petty medium of
Middlemarch have be too strong for he. how could a man be satisfy
with a decision between such alternative and under such circumstance?
no more than he can be satisfied with his hat, which he have choose from
among such shape as the resource of the age offer he, wear it at
well with a resignation which be chiefly support by comparison.
but Mr. Farebrother meet he with the same friendliness as before. the
character of the publican and sinner be not always practically
incompatible with that of the modern Pharisee, for the majority of we
scarcely see more distinctly the faultiness of our own conduct than the
faultiness of our own argument, or the dulness of our own joke. but
the Vicar of St. Botolph's have certainly escape the slight tincture
of the Pharisee, and by dint of admit to himself that he be too
much as other man be, he have become remarkably unlike they in
this--that he could excuse other for think slightly of he, and
could judge impartially of their conduct even when it tell against he.
"the world have be to strong for _I_, I know," he say one day to
lydgate. "but then I be not a mighty man--I shall never be a man of
renown. the choice of Hercules be a pretty fable; but Prodicus make
it easy work for the hero, as if the first resolve be enough.
another story say that he come to hold the distaff, and at last wear
the Nessus shirt. I suppose one good resolve might keep a man right if
everybody else's resolve help he."
the Vicar's talk be not always inspirit: he have escape be a
Pharisee, but he have not escape that low estimate of possibility
which we rather hastily arrive at as an inference from our own failure.
Lydgate think that there be a pitiable infirmity of will in Mr.
Farebrother.
CHAPTER XIX.
"L' altra vedete ch'ha fatto alla guancia
Della sua palma, sospirando, letto."
--Purgatorio, vii.
when George the Fourth be still reign over the privacy of
Windsor, when the Duke of Wellington be Prime Minister, and Mr. Vincy
be mayor of the old corporation in Middlemarch, Mrs. Casaubon, bear
Dorothea Brooke, have take her wedding journey to Rome. in those day
the world in general be more ignorant of good and evil by forty year
than it be at present. traveller do not often carry full information
on christian art either in their head or their pocket; and even the
most brilliant english critic of the day mistook the flower-flush
tomb of the ascended Virgin for an ornamental vase due to the painter's
fancy. romanticism, which have help to fill some dull blank with
love and knowledge, have not yet penetrate the time with its leaven
and enter into everybody's food; it be ferment still as a
distinguishable vigorous enthusiasm in certain long-haired german
artist at Rome, and the youth of other nation who work or idle
near they be sometimes catch in the spread movement.
one fine morning a young man whose hair be not immoderately long, but
abundant and curly, and who be otherwise english in his equipment, have
just turn his back on the Belvedere Torso in the Vatican and be
look out on the magnificent view of the mountain from the adjoining
round vestibule. he be sufficiently absorb not to notice the
approach of a dark-eye, animate German who come up to he and place
a hand on his shoulder, say with a strong accent, "come here, quick!
else she will have change her pose."
Quickness be ready at the call, and the two figure pass lightly
along by the Meleager, towards the hall where the recline Ariadne,
then call the Cleopatra, lie in the marble voluptuousness of her
beauty, the drapery fold around she with a petal-like ease and
tenderness. they be just in time to see another figure stand
against a pedestal near the reclining marble: a breathing bloom
girl, whose form, not sham by the Ariadne, be clothe in Quakerish gray
drapery; her long cloak, fasten at the neck, be throw backward from
her arm, and one beautiful ungloved hand pillow her cheek, push
somewhat backward the white beaver bonnet which make a sort of halo to
her face around the simply braid dark-brown hair. she be not
look at the sculpture, probably not think of it: her large eye
be fix dreamily on a streak of sunlight which fall across the
floor. but she become conscious of the two stranger who suddenly
pause as if to contemplate the Cleopatra, and, without look at
they, immediately turn away to join a maid-servant and courier who
be loiter along the hall at a little distance off.
"what do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesis?" say the
German, search in his friend's face for respond admiration, but
go on volubly without wait for any other answer. "there lie
antique beauty, not corpse-like even in death, but arrest in the
complete contentment of its sensuous perfection: and here stand beauty
in its breathing life, with the consciousness of christian century in
its bosom. but she should be dress as a nun; I think she look
almost what you call a Quaker; I would dress she as a nun in my
picture. however, she be marry; I see her wedding-ring on that
wonderful left hand, otherwise I should have think the sallow
Geistlicher be her father. I see he part from she a good while
ago, and just now I find she in that magnificent pose. only think! he
be perhaps rich, and would like to have her portrait take. ah! it be
no use look after she--there she go! let we follow her home!"
"no, no," say his companion, with a little frown.
"you be singular, Ladislaw. you look strike together. do you know
she?"
"I know that she be married to my cousin," say will Ladislaw,
saunter down the hall with a preoccupied air, while his german
friend keep at his side and watch he eagerly.
"what! the Geistlicher? he look more like an uncle--a more useful sort
of relation."
"he be not my uncle. I tell you he be my second cousin," say
Ladislaw, with some irritation.
"Schon, schon. donot be snappish. you be not angry with I for
think Mrs. Second-Cousin the most perfect young Madonna I ever see?"
"angry? nonsense. I have only see she once before, for a couple of
minute, when my cousin introduce she to I, just before I leave
England. they be not married then. I donot know they be come
to Rome."
"but you will go to see they now--you will find out what they have for
an address--since you know the name. shall we go to the post? and you
could speak about the portrait."
"confound you, Naumann! I donot know what I shall do. I be not so
brazen as you."
"Bah! that be because you be dilettantish and amateurish. if you be
an artist, you would think of Mistress second-Cousin as antique form
animate by christian sentiment--a sort of Christian Antigone--sensuous
force control by spiritual passion."
"yes, and that your paint she be the chief outcome of her
existence--the divinity pass into high completeness and all but
exhaust in the act of cover your bit of canvas. I be amateurish
if you like: I do _not_ think that all the universe be strain
towards the obscure significance of your picture."
"but it be, my dear!--so far as it be strain through I, Adolf
Naumann: that stand firm," say the good-natured painter, put a
hand on Ladislaw's shoulder, and not in the least disturb by the
unaccountable touch of ill-humor in his tone. "see now! my existence
presuppose the existence of the whole universe--do it _not?_ and my
function be to paint--and as a painter I have a conception which be
altogether genialisch, of your great-aunt or second grandmother as a
subject for a picture; therefore, the universe be strain towards
that picture through that particular hook or claw which it put forth
in the shape of I--not true?"
"but how if another claw in the shape of I be strain to thwart
it?--the case be a little less simple then."
"not at all: the result of the struggle be the same thing--picture or
no picture--logically."
will could not resist this imperturbable temper, and the cloud in his
face break into sunshiny laughter.
"come now, my friend--you will help?" say Naumann, in a hopeful tone.
"no; nonsense, Naumann! english lady be not at everybody's service
as model. and you want to express too much with your painting. you
would only have make a well or bad portrait with a background which
every connoisseur would give a different reason for or against. and
what be a portrait of a woman? your painting and Plastik be poor
stuff after all. they perturb and dull conception instead of raise
they. language be a fine medium."
"yes, for those who cannot paint," say Naumann. "there you have
perfect right. I do not recommend you to paint, my friend."
the amiable artist carry his sting, but Ladislaw do not choose to
appear stung. he go on as if he have not hear.
"language give a full image, which be all the well for being
vague. after all, the true seeing be within; and paint stare at
you with an insistent imperfection. I feel that especially about
representation of woman. as if a woman be a mere color
superficie! you must wait for movement and tone. there be a
difference in their very breathing: they change from moment to
moment.--This woman whom you have just see, for example: how would you
paint her voice, pray? but her voice be much diviner than anything you
have see of she."
"I see, I see. you be jealous. no man must presume to think that he
can paint your ideal. this be serious, my friend! your great-aunt!
'Der Neffe al Onkel' in a tragic sense--ungeheuer!"
"you and I shall quarrel, Naumann, if you call that lady my aunt again."
"how be she to be call then?"
"Mrs. Casaubon."
"good. suppose I get acquaint with she in spite of you, and find
that she very much wish to be paint?"
"yes, suppose!" say will Ladislaw, in a contemptuous undertone,
intend to dismiss the subject. he be conscious of be irritated
by ridiculously small cause, which be half of his own creation. why
be he make any fuss about Mrs. Casaubon? and yet he feel as if
something have happen to he with regard to she. there be character
which be continually create collision and node for themselves in
drama which nobody be prepared to act with they. their
susceptibility will clash against object that remain innocently
quiet.
CHAPTER XX.
"a child forsake, wake suddenly,
whose gaze afeard on all thing round doth rove,
and seeth only that it cannot see
the meeting eye of love."
two hour later, Dorothea be seat in an inner room or boudoir of a
handsome apartment in the Via Sistina.
I be sorry to add that she be sob bitterly, with such abandonment
to this relief of an oppressed heart as a woman habitually control
by pride on her own account and thoughtfulness for other will
sometimes allow herself when she feel securely alone. and Mr.
Casaubon be certain to remain away for some time at the Vatican.
yet Dorothea have no distinctly shapen grievance that she could state
even to herself; and in the midst of her confuse thought and passion,
the mental act that be struggle forth into clearness be a
self-accuse cry that her feeling of desolation be the fault of her
own spiritual poverty. she have marry the man of her choice, and with
the advantage over most girl that she have contemplate her marriage
chiefly as the beginning of new duty: from the very first she have
think of Mr. Casaubon as have a mind so much above her own, that he
must often be claim by study which she could not entirely share;
moreover, after the brief narrow experience of her girlhood she be
behold Rome, the city of visible history, where the past of a whole
hemisphere seem move in funeral procession with strange ancestral
image and trophy gather from afar.
but this stupendous fragmentariness heighten the dreamlike
strangeness of her bridal life. Dorothea have now be five week in
Rome, and in the kindly morning when autumn and winter seem to go
hand in hand like a happy aged couple one of whom would presently
survive in chiller loneliness, she have drive about at first with Mr.
Casaubon, but of late chiefly with Tantripp and their experienced
courier. she have be lead through the good gallery, have be take
to the chief point of view, have be show the grand ruin and the
most glorious church, and she have end by oftenest choose to drive
out to the Campagna where she could feel alone with the earth and sky,
away-from the oppressive masquerade of age, in which her own life too
seem to become a masque with enigmatical costume.
to those who have look at Rome with the quicken power of a
knowledge which breathe a grow soul into all historic shape, and
trace out the suppress transition which unite all contrast, Rome
may still be the spiritual centre and interpreter of the world. but
let they conceive one more historical contrast: the gigantic break
revelation of that Imperial and Papal city thrust abruptly on the
notion of a girl who have be bring up in English and Swiss
Puritanism, feed on meagre protestant history and on art chiefly of
the hand-screen sort; a girl whose ardent nature turn all her small
allowance of knowledge into principle, fuse her action into their
mould, and whose quick emotion give the most abstract thing the
quality of a pleasure or a pain; a girl who have lately become a wife,
and from the enthusiastic acceptance of untried duty find herself
plunge in tumultuous preoccupation with her personal lot. the weight
of unintelligible Rome might lie easily on bright nymph to whom it
form a background for the brilliant picnic of anglo-foreign society;
but Dorothea have no such defence against deep impression. ruin and
basilica, palace and colossi, set in the midst of a sordid present,
where all that be live and warm-blooded seem sink in the deep
degeneracy of a superstition divorce from reverence; the dimmer but
yet eager titanic life gaze and struggle on wall and ceiling; the
long vista of white form whose marble eye seem to hold the
monotonous light of an alien world: all this vast wreck of ambitious
ideal, sensuous and spiritual, mix confusedly with the sign of
breathe forgetfulness and degradation, at first jar she as with an
electric shock, and then urge themselves on she with that ache
belong to a glut of confused idea which check the flow of emotion.
form both pale and glow take possession of her young sense, and
fix themselves in her memory even when she be not think of they,
prepare strange association which remain through her after-year.
our mood be apt to bring with they image which succeed each other
like the magic-lantern picture of a doze; and in certain state of
dull forlornness Dorothea all her life continue to see the vastness of
St. Peter's, the huge bronze canopy, the excited intention in the
attitude and garment of the prophet and evangelist in the mosaic
above, and the red drapery which be be hang for Christmas spread
itself everywhere like a disease of the retina.
not that this inward amazement of Dorothea's be anything very
exceptional: many soul in their young nudity be tumble out among
incongruity and leave to "find their foot" among they, while their
elder go about their business. nor can I suppose that when Mrs.
Casaubon be discover in a fit of weep six week after her wedding,
the situation will be regard as tragic. some discouragement, some
faintness of heart at the new real future which replace the imaginary,
be not unusual, and we do not expect people to be deeply move by what
be not unusual. that element of tragedy which lie in the very fact of
frequency, have not yet work itself into the coarse emotion of
mankind; and perhaps our frame could hardly bear much of it. if we
have a keen vision and feeling of all ordinary human life, it would be
like hear the grass grow and the squirrel's heart beat, and we
should die of that roar which lie on the other side of silence. as it
be, the quick of we walk about well wad with stupidity.
however, Dorothea be cry, and if she have be require to state the
cause, she could only have do so in some such general word as I have
already use: to have be drive to be more particular would have be
like try to give a history of the light and shadow, for that new
real future which be replace the imaginary draw its material from
the endless minutia by which her view of Mr. Casaubon and her wifely
relation, now that she be married to he, be gradually change with
the secret motion of a watch-hand from what it have be in her maiden
dream. it be too early yet for she fully to recognize or at least
admit the change, still more for she to have readjust that
devotedness which be so necessary a part of her mental life that she
be almost sure soon or later to recover it. permanent rebellion,
the disorder of a life without some love reverent resolve, be not
possible to she; but she be now in an interval when the very force of
her nature heighten its confusion. in this way, the early month of
marriage often be time of critical tumult--whether that of a
shrimp-pool or of deep water--which afterwards subside into
cheerful peace.
but be not Mr. Casaubon just as learn as before? have his form of
expression change, or his sentiment become less laudable? oh
waywardness of womanhood! do his chronology fail he, or his ability
to state not only a theory but the name of those who hold it; or his
provision for give the head of any subject on demand? and be not
Rome the place in all the world to give free play to such
accomplishment? besides, have not Dorothea's enthusiasm especially
dwelt on the prospect of relieve the weight and perhaps the sadness
with which great task lie on he who have to achieve them?-- and that
such weight press on Mr. Casaubon be only plain than before.
all these be crush question; but whatever else remain the same,
the light have change, and you cannot find the pearly dawn at noonday.
the fact be unalterable, that a fellow-mortal with whose nature you be
acquaint solely through the brief entrance and exit of a few
imaginative week call courtship, may, when see in the continuity of
married companionship, be disclose as something well or bad than
what you have preconceive, but will certainly not appear altogether
the same. and it would be astonishing to find how soon the change be
feel if we have no kindre change to compare with it. to share
lodging with a brilliant dinner-companion, or to see your favorite
politician in the Ministry, may bring about change quite as rapid: in
these case too we begin by know little and believe much, and we
sometimes end by invert the quantity.
still, such comparison might mislead, for no man be more incapable of
flashy make-believe than Mr. Casaubon: he be as genuine a character as
any ruminant animal, and he have not actively assist in create any
illusion about himself. how be it that in the week since her
marriage, Dorothea have not distinctly observe but feel with a stifling
depression, that the large vista and wide fresh air which she have
dream of find in her husband's mind be replace by anteroom and
wind passage which seem to lead nowhither? I suppose it be that
in courtship everything be regard as provisional and preliminary, and
the small sample of virtue or accomplishment be take to guarantee
delightful store which the broad leisure of marriage will reveal. but
the door-sill of marriage once cross, expectation be concentrate on
the present. have once embark on your marital voyage, it be
impossible not to be aware that you make no way and that the sea be not
within sight--that, in fact, you be explore an enclose basin.
in their conversation before marriage, Mr. Casaubon have often dwell on
some explanation or questionable detail of which Dorothea do not see
the bearing; but such imperfect coherence seem due to the brokenness
of their intercourse, and, support by her faith in their future, she
have listen with fervid patience to a recitation of possible argument
to be bring against Mr. Casaubon's entirely new view of the
philistine god Dagon and other fish-deity, think that hereafter
she should see this subject which touch he so nearly from the same
high ground whence doubtless it have become so important to he. again,
the matter-of-course statement and tone of dismissal with which he
treat what to she be the most stirring thought, be easily
account for as belong to the sense of haste and preoccupation in
which she herself share during their engagement. but now, since they
have be in Rome, with all the depth of her emotion rouse to
tumultuous activity, and with life make a new problem by new element,
she have be become more and more aware, with a certain terror, that
her mind be continually slide into inward fit of anger and
repulsion, or else into forlorn weariness. how far the judicious
Hooker or any other hero of erudition would have be the same at Mr.
Casaubon's time of life, she have no mean of know, so that he could
not have the advantage of comparison; but her husband's way of
comment on the strangely impressive object around they have begin to
affect she with a sort of mental shiver: he have perhaps the good
intention of acquit himself worthily, but only of acquit
himself. what be fresh to her mind be wear out to his; and such
capacity of thought and feeling as have ever be stimulate in he by
the general life of mankind have long shrink to a sort of dried
preparation, a lifeless embalmment of knowledge.
when he say, "do this interest you, Dorothea? shall we stay a
little long? I be ready to stay if you wish it,"--it seem to she
as if go or stay be alike dreary. or, "should you like to go
to the Farnesina, Dorothea? it contain celebrated fresco design or
paint by Raphael, which most person think it worth while to visit."
"but do you care about they?" be always Dorothea's question.
"they be, I believe, highly esteemed. some of they represent the
fable of Cupid and Psyche, which be probably the romantic invention of
a literary period, and cannot, I think, be reckon as a genuine
mythical product. but if you like these wall-painting we can easily
drive thither; and you will then, I think, have see the chief work of
Raphael, any of which it be a pity to omit in a visit to Rome. he be
the painter who have be hold to combine the most complete grace of
form with sublimity of expression. such at least I have gather to be
the opinion of cognoscenti."
this kind of answer give in a measured official tone, as of a
clergyman reading accord to the rubric, do not help to justify the
glory of the Eternal City, or to give she the hope that if she know
more about they the world would be joyously illuminate for she. there
be hardly any contact more depressing to a young ardent creature than
that of a mind in which year full of knowledge seem to have issue in
a blank absence of interest or sympathy.
on other subject indeed Mr. Casaubon show a tenacity of occupation
and an eagerness which be usually regard as the effect of
enthusiasm, and Dorothea be anxious to follow this spontaneous
direction of his thought, instead of be make to feel that she
drag he away from it. but she be gradually cease to expect with
her former delightful confidence that she should see any wide opening
where she follow he. poor Mr. Casaubon himself be lose among small
closet and winding stair, and in an agitated dimness about the
Cabeiri, or in an exposure of other mythologist' ill-consider
parallel, easily lose sight of any purpose which have prompt he to
these labor. with his taper stick before he he forget the absence of
window, and in bitter manuscript remark on other man's notion about
the solar deity, he have become indifferent to the sunlight.
these characteristic, fix and unchangeable as bone in Mr. Casaubon,
might have remain long unfelt by Dorothea if she have be
encourage to pour forth her girlish and womanly feeling--if he would
have hold her hand between his and listen with the delight of
tenderness and understanding to all the little history which make up
her experience, and would have give she the same sort of intimacy in
return, so that the past life of each could be include in their mutual
knowledge and affection--or if she could have feed her affection with
those childlike caress which be the bent of every sweet woman, who
have begin by shower kiss on the hard pate of her bald doll,
create a happy soul within that woodenness from the wealth of her own
love. that be Dorothea's bent. with all her yearning to know what
be afar from she and to be widely benignant, she have ardor enough for
what be near, to have kiss Mr. Casaubon's coat-sleeve, or to have
caress his shoe-latchet, if he would have make any other sign of
acceptance than pronounce she, with his unfailing propriety, to be of
a most affectionate and truly feminine nature, indicate at the same
time by politely reach a chair for she that he regard these
manifestation as rather crude and startling. have make his clerical
toilet with due care in the morning, he be prepare only for those
amenity of life which be suit to the well-adjust stiff cravat
of the period, and to a mind weight with unpublished matter.
and by a sad contradiction Dorothea's idea and resolve seem like
melt ice float and lose in the warm flood of which they have be
but another form. she be humiliate to find herself a mere victim of
feeling, as if she could know nothing except through that medium: all
her strength be scatter in fit of agitation, of struggle, of
despondency, and then again in vision of more complete renunciation,
transform all hard condition into duty. poor Dorothea! she be
certainly troublesome--to herself chiefly; but this morning for the
first time she have be troublesome to Mr. Casaubon.
she have begin, while they be take coffee, with a determination to
shake off what she inwardly call her selfishness, and turn a face
all cheerful attention to her husband when he say, "my dear Dorothea,
we must now think of all that be yet leave undo, as a preliminary to
our departure. I would fain have return home early that we might
have be at Lowick for the Christmas; but my inquiry here have be
protract beyond their anticipated period. I trust, however, that the
time here have not be pass unpleasantly to you. among the sight of
Europe, that of Rome have ever be hold one of the most striking and in
some respect edify. I well remember that I consider it an epoch
in my life when I visit it for the first time; after the fall of
Napoleon, an event which open the continent to traveller. indeed I
think it be one among several city to which an extreme hyperbole have
be applied--'See Rome and die:' but in your case I would propose an
emendation and say, see Rome as a bride, and live henceforth as a happy
wife."
Mr. Casaubon pronounce this little speech with the most conscientious
intention, blink a little and sway his head up and down, and
conclude with a smile. he have not find marriage a rapturous state,
but he have no idea of be anything else than an irreproachable
husband, who would make a charming young woman as happy as she deserve
to be.
"I hope you be thoroughly satisfied with our stay--I mean, with the
result so far as your study be concern," say Dorothea, try to
keep her mind fix on what most affect her husband.
"yes," say Mr. Casaubon, with that peculiar pitch of voice which make
the word half a negative. "I have be lead far than I have
foresee, and various subject for annotation have present themselves
which, though I have no direct need of they, I could not pretermit.
the task, notwithstanding the assistance of my amanuensis, have be a
somewhat laborious one, but your society have happily prevent I from
that too continuous prosecution of thought beyond the hour of study
which have be the snare of my solitary life."
"I be very glad that my presence have make any difference to you," say
Dorothea, who have a vivid memory of evening in which she have suppose
that Mr. Casaubon's mind have go too deep during the day to be able to
get to the surface again. I fear there be a little temper in her
reply. "I hope when we get to Lowick, I shall be more useful to you,
and be able to enter a little more into what interest you."
"Doubtless, my dear," say Mr. Casaubon, with a slight bow. "the note
I have here make will want sift, and you can, if you please, extract
they under my direction."
"and all your note," say Dorothea, whose heart have already burn
within she on this subject, so that now she could not help speak
with her tongue. "all those row of volume--will you not now do what
you use to speak of?--will you not make up your mind what part of they
you will use, and begin to write the book which will make your vast
knowledge useful to the world? I will write to your dictation, or I
will copy and extract what you tell I: I can be of no other use."
Dorothea, in a most unaccountable, darkly feminine manner, end with a
slight sob and eye full of tear.
the excessive feeling manifest would alone have be highly
disturbing to Mr. Casaubon, but there be other reason why Dorothea's
word be among the most cutting and irritate to he that she could
have be impel to use. she be as blind to his inward trouble as
he to her: she have not yet learn those hide conflict in her
husband which claim our pity. she have not yet listen patiently to
his heartbeat, but only feel that her own be beat violently. in
Mr. Casaubon's ear, Dorothea's voice give loud emphatic iteration to
those muffle suggestion of consciousness which it be possible to
explain as mere fancy, the illusion of exaggerated sensitiveness:
always when such suggestion be unmistakably repeat from without,
they be resist as cruel and unjust. we be anger even by the full
acceptance of our humiliating confession--how much more by hear in
hard distinct syllable from the lip of a near observer, those
confuse murmur which we try to call morbid, and strive against as if
they be the oncoming of numbness! and this cruel outward accuser be
there in the shape of a wife--nay, of a young bride, who, instead of
observe his abundant pen-scratch and amplitude of paper with the
uncritical awe of an elegant-minded canary-bird, seem to present
herself as a spy watch everything with a malign power of inference.
here, towards this particular point of the compass, Mr. Casaubon have a
sensitiveness to match Dorothea's, and an equal quickness to imagine
more than the fact. he have formerly observe with approbation her
capacity for worship the right object; he now foresaw with sudden
terror that this capacity might be replace by presumption, this
worship by the most exasperating of all criticism,--that which see
vaguely a great many fine end, and have not the least notion what it
cost to reach they.
for the first time since Dorothea have know he, Mr. Casaubon's face
have a quick angry flush upon it.
"my love," he say, with irritation rein in by propriety, "you may
rely upon I for know the time and the season, adapt to the
different stage of a work which be not to be measure by the facile
conjecture of ignorant onlooker. it have be easy for I to gain a
temporary effect by a mirage of baseless opinion; but it be ever the
trial of the scrupulous explorer to be salute with the impatient scorn
of chatterer who attempt only the small achievement, be indeed
equip for no other. and it be well if all such could be
admonish to discriminate judgment of which the true subject-matter
lie entirely beyond their reach, from those of which the element may
be compass by a narrow and superficial survey."
this speech be deliver with an energy and readiness quite unusual
with Mr. Casaubon. it be not indeed entirely an improvisation, but
have take shape in inward colloquy, and rush out like the round
grain from a fruit when sudden heat crack it. Dorothea be not only
his wife: she be a personification of that shallow world which
surround the appreciated or despond author.
Dorothea be indignant in her turn. have she not be repress
everything in herself except the desire to enter into some fellowship
with her husband's chief interest?
"my judgment _be_ a very superficial one--such as I be capable of
form," she answer, with a prompt resentment, that need no
rehearsal. "you show I the row of notebook--you have often speak
of they--you have often say that they want digest. but I never
hear you speak of the writing that be to be publish. those be
very simple fact, and my judgment go no far. I only beg you
to let I be of some good to you."
Dorothea rise to leave the table and Mr. Casaubon make no reply, take
up a letter which lie beside he as if to reperuse it. both be
shock at their mutual situation--that each should have betray anger
towards the other. if they have be at home, settle at Lowick in
ordinary life among their neighbor, the clash would have be less
embarrassing: but on a wedding journey, the express object of which be
to isolate two people on the ground that they be all the world to each
other, the sense of disagreement be, to say the least, confound and
stultifying. to have change your longitude extensively and place
yourself in a moral solitude in order to have small explosion, to
find conversation difficult and to hand a glass of water without
look, can hardly be regard as satisfactory fulfilment even to the
tough mind. to Dorothea's inexperienced sensitiveness, it seem
like a catastrophe, change all prospect; and to Mr. Casaubon it be
a new pain, he never have be on a wedding journey before, or find
himself in that close union which be more of a subjection than he have
be able to imagine, since this charming young bride not only oblige
he to much consideration on her behalf (which he have sedulously
give), but turn out to be capable of agitate he cruelly just
where he most need soothe. instead of get a soft fence against
the cold, shadowy, unapplausive audience of his life, have he only give
it a more substantial presence?
neither of they feel it possible to speak again at present. to have
reverse a previous arrangement and decline to go out would have be
a show of persistent anger which Dorothea's conscience shrink from,
see that she already begin to feel herself guilty. however just her
indignation might be, her ideal be not to claim justice, but to give
tenderness. so when the carriage come to the door, she drive with Mr.
Casaubon to the Vatican, walk with he through the stony avenue of
inscription, and when she part with he at the entrance to the
Library, go on through the Museum out of mere listlessness as to what
be around she. she have not spirit to turn round and say that she
would drive anywhere. it be when Mr. Casaubon be quit she that
Naumann have first see she, and he have enter the long gallery of
sculpture at the same time with she; but here Naumann have to await
Ladislaw with whom he be to settle a bet of champagne about an
enigmatical mediaeval-look figure there. after they have examine
the figure, and have walk on finish their dispute, they have part,
ladislaw linger behind while Naumann have go into the Hall of
statue where he again see Dorothea, and see she in that brooding
abstraction which make she pose remarkable. she do not really see the
streak of sunlight on the floor more than she see the statue: she be
inwardly see the light of year to come in her own home and over the
english field and elm and hedge-border highroad; and feel that
the way in which they might be fill with joyful devotedness be not
so clear to she as it have be. but in Dorothea's mind there be a
current into which all thought and feeling be apt soon or later to
flow--the reach forward of the whole consciousness towards the
full truth, the least partial good. there be clearly something
well than anger and despondency.
CHAPTER XXI.
"hire facounde eke full womanly and plain,
no contrefete terme have she
to semen wise."
--CHAUCER.
it be in that way Dorothea come to be sob as soon as she be
securely alone. but she be presently rouse by a knock at the door,
which make she hastily dry her eye before say, "come in." Tantripp
have bring a card, and say that there be a gentleman wait in the
lobby. the courier have tell he that only Mrs. Casaubon be at home,
but he say he be a relation of Mr. Casaubon's: would she see he?
"yes," say Dorothea, without pause; "show he into the salon." her
chief impression about young Ladislaw be that when she have see he
at Lowick she have be make aware of Mr. Casaubon's generosity towards
he, and also that she have be interested in his own hesitation about
his career. she be alive to anything that give she an opportunity for
active sympathy, and at this moment it seem as if the visit have come
to shake she out of her self-absorb discontent--to remind she of her
husband's goodness, and make she feel that she have now the right to be
his helpmate in all kind deed. she wait a minute or two, but when
she pass into the next room there be just sign enough that she have
be cry to make her open face look more youthful and appealing than
usual. she meet Ladislaw with that exquisite smile of good-will which
be unmixe with vanity, and hold out her hand to he. he be the elder
by several year, but at that moment he look much the young, for
his transparent complexion flush suddenly, and he speak with a
shyness extremely unlike the ready indifference of his manner with his
male companion, while Dorothea become all the calm with a wonder
desire to put he at ease.
"I be not aware that you and Mr. Casaubon be in Rome, until this
morning, when I see you in the Vatican Museum," he say. "I know you
at once--but--I mean, that I conclude Mr. Casaubon's address would be
find at the Poste Restante, and I be anxious to pay my respect to
he and you as early as possible."
"pray sit down. he be not here now, but he will be glad to hear of
you, I be sure," say Dorothea, seat herself unthinkingly between
the fire and the light of the tall window, and point to a chair
opposite, with the quietude of a benignant matron. the sign of
girlish sorrow in her face be only the more striking. "Mr. Casaubon
be much engage; but you will leave your address--will you not?--and
he will write to you."
"you be very good," say Ladislaw, begin to lose his diffidence in
the interest with which he be observe the sign of weeping which have
alter her face. "my address be on my card. but if you will allow I
I will call again to-morrow at an hour when Mr. Casaubon be likely to
be at home."
"he go to read in the Library of the Vatican every day, and you can
hardly see he except by an appointment. especially now. we be about
to leave Rome, and he be very busy. he be usually away almost from
breakfast till dinner. but I be sure he will wish you to dine with we."
will Ladislaw be strike mute for a few moment. he have never be
fond of Mr. Casaubon, and if it have not be for the sense of
obligation, would have laugh at he as a Bat of erudition. but the
idea of this dry-up pedant, this elaborator of small explanation
about as important as the surplus stock of false antiquity keep in a
vendor's back chamber, have first get this adorable young creature to
marry he, and then pass his honeymoon away from she, grope after
his mouldy futility (will be give to hyperbole)--this sudden
picture stir he with a sort of comic disgust: he be divide
between the impulse to laugh aloud and the equally unseasonable impulse
to burst into scornful invective.
for an instant he feel that the struggle, be cause a queer
contortion of his mobile feature, but with a good effort he resolve
it into nothing more offensive than a merry smile.
Dorothea wonder; but the smile be irresistible, and shine back from
her face too. will Ladislaw's smile be delightful, unless you be
angry with he beforehand: it be a gush of inward light illuminate
the transparent skin as well as the eye, and play about every curve
and line as if some Ariel be touch they with a new charm, and
banish forever the trace of moodiness. the reflection of that
smile could not but have a little merriment in it too, even under dark
eyelash still moist, as Dorothea say inquiringly, "something amuse
you?"
"yes," say will, quick in find resource. "I be think of the
sort of figure I cut the first time I see you, when you annihilate my
poor sketch with your criticism."
"my criticism?" say Dorothea, wonder still more. "surely not. I
always feel particularly ignorant about paint."
"I suspect you of know so much, that you know how to say just what
be most cut. you say--I dare say you donot remember it as I
do--that the relation of my sketch to nature be quite hidden from you.
at least, you imply that." will could laugh now as well as smile.
"that be really my ignorance," say Dorothea, admire
Willbe good-humor. "I must have say so only because I never could see
any beauty in the picture which my uncle tell I all judge think
very fine. and I have go about with just the same ignorance in Rome.
there be comparatively few painting that I can really enjoy. at
first when I enter a room where the wall be cover with fresco, or
with rare picture, I feel a kind of awe--like a child present at great
ceremony where there be grand robe and procession; I feel myself
in the presence of some high life than my own. but when I begin to
examine the picture one by on the life go out of they, or else be
something violent and strange to I. it must be my own dulness. I be
see so much all at once, and not understand half of it. that
always make one feel stupid. it be painful to be tell that anything
be very fine and not be able to feel that it be fine--something like
be blind, while people talk of the sky."
"oh, there be a great deal in the feeling for art which must be
acquire," say Will. (it be impossible now to doubt the directness
of Dorothea's confession.) "art be an old language with a great many
artificial affect style, and sometimes the chief pleasure one get
out of know they be the mere sense of know. I enjoy the art of
all sort here immensely; but I suppose if I could pick my enjoyment to
piece I should find it make up of many different thread. there be
something in daub a little one's self, and have an idea of the
process."
"you mean perhaps to be a painter?" say Dorothea, with a new direction
of interest. "you mean to make paint your profession? Mr. Casaubon
will like to hear that you have choose a profession."
"no, oh no," say will, with some coldness. "I have quite make up my
mind against it. it be too one-side a life. I have be see a
great deal of the german artist here: I travel from Frankfort with
one of they. some be fine, even brilliant fellow--but I should not
like to get into their way of look at the world entirely from the
studio point of view."
"that I can understand," say Dorothea, cordially. "and in Rome it
seem as if there be so many thing which be more want in the
world than picture. but if you have a genius for painting, would it
not be right to take that as a guide? perhaps you might do well
thing than these--or different, so that there might not be so many
picture almost all alike in the same place."
there be no mistaking this simplicity, and will be win by it into
frankness. "a man must have a very rare genius to make change of that
sort. I be afraid mine would not carry I even to the pitch of do
well what have be do already, at least not so well as to make it
worth while. and I should never succeed in anything by dint of
drudgery. if thing donot come easily to I I never get they."
"I have hear Mr. Casaubon say that he regret your want of patience,"
say Dorothea, gently. she be rather shocked at this mode of take
all life as a holiday.
"yes, I know Mr. Casaubon's opinion. he and I differ."
the slight streak of contempt in this hasty reply offend Dorothea.
she be all the more susceptible about Mr. Casaubon because of she
morning's trouble.
"certainly you differ," she say, rather proudly. "I do not think of
compare you: such power of persevere devoted labor as Mr.
Casaubon's be not common."
will see that she be offend, but this only give an additional
impulse to the new irritation of his latent dislike towards Mr.
Casaubon. it be too intolerable that Dorothea should be worship
this husband: such weakness in a woman be pleasant to no man but the
husband in question. mortal be easily tempt to pinch the life out
of their neighbor's buzzing glory, and think that such killing be no
murder.
"no, indeed," he answer, promptly. "and therefore it be a pity that
it should be throw away, as so much english scholarship be, for want
of know what be be do by the rest of the world. if Mr.
Casaubon read German he would save himself a great deal of trouble."
"I do not understand you," say Dorothea, startled and anxious.
"I merely mean," say will, in an offhand way, "that the Germans have
take the lead in historical inquiry, and they laugh at result which
be get by grope about in wood with a pocket-compass while they have
make good road. when I be with Mr. Casaubon I see that he deafen
himself in that direction: it be almost against his will that he read
a latin treatise write by a German. I be very sorry."
will only thought of give a good pinch that would annihilate that
vaunted laboriousness, and be unable to imagine the mode in which
Dorothea would be wound. young Mr. Ladislaw be not at all deep
himself in german writer; but very little achievement be require in
order to pity another man's shortcoming.
Poor Dorothea feel a pang at the thought that the labor of her
husband's life might be void, which leave she no energy to spare for the
question whether this young relative who be so much oblige to he
ought not to have repress his observation. she do not even speak,
but sit look at her hand, absorb in the piteousness of that
thought.
will, however, have give that annihilate pinch, be rather
ashamed, imagine from Dorothea's silence that he have offend she
still more; and have also a conscience about pluck the
tail-feather from a benefactor.
"I regret it especially," he resume, take the usual course from
detraction to insincere eulogy, "because of my gratitude and respect
towards my cousin. it would not signify so much in a man whose talent
and character be less distinguished."
Dorothea raise her eye, bright than usual with excited feeling, and
say in her sad recitative, "how I wish I have learn German when I
be at Lausanne! there be plenty of german teacher. but now I can
be of no use."
there be a new light, but still a mysterious light, for Will in
Dorothea's last word. the question how she have come to accept Mr.
Casaubon--which he have dismiss when he first see she by say that
she must be disagreeable in spite of appearance--be not now to be
answer on any such short and easy method. whatever else she might
be, she be not disagreeable. she be not coldly clever and indirectly
satirical, but adorably simple and full of feeling. she be an angel
beguile. it would be a unique delight to wait and watch for the
melodious fragment in which her heart and soul come forth so directly
and ingenuously. the AEolian harp again come into his mind.
she must have make some original romance for herself in this marriage.
and if Mr. Casaubon have be a dragon who have carry she off to his
lair with his talon simply and without legal form, it would have be
an unavoidable feat of heroism to release she and fall at her foot.
but he be something more unmanageable than a dragon: he be a
benefactor with collective society at his back, and he be at that
moment enter the room in all the unimpeachable correctness of his
demeanor, while Dorothea be look animate with a newly rouse alarm
and regret, and will be look animate with his admire speculation
about her feeling.
Mr. Casaubon feel a surprise which be quite unmixed with pleasure, but
he do not swerve from his usual politeness of greeting, when will rise
and explain his presence. Mr. Casaubon be less happy than usual,
and this perhaps make he look all the dimmer and more fade; else, the
effect might easily have be produce by the contrast of his young
cousin's appearance. the first impression on see Will be one of
sunny brightness, which add to the uncertainty of his change
expression. surely, his very feature change their form, his jaw
look sometimes large and sometimes small; and the little ripple in
his nose be a preparation for metamorphosis. when he turn his head
quickly his hair seem to shake out light, and some person think
they see decide genius in this coruscation. Mr. Casaubon, on the
contrary, stand rayless.
as Dorothea's eye be turn anxiously on her husband she be perhaps
not insensible to the contrast, but it be only mingle with other
cause in make she more conscious of that new alarm on his behalf
which be the first stirring of a pitying tenderness feed by the
reality of his lot and not by her own dream. yet it be a source of
great freedom to she that will be there; his young equality be
agreeable, and also perhaps his openness to conviction. she feel an
immense need of some one to speak to, and she have never before see any
one who seem so quick and pliable, so likely to understand everything.
Mr. Casaubon gravely hop that Will be pass his time profitably as
well as pleasantly in Rome--have think his intention be to remain in
South Germany--but beg he to come and dine to-morrow, when he could
converse more at large: at present he be somewhat weary. ladislaw
understand, and accept the invitation immediately take his leave.
Dorothea's eye follow her husband anxiously, while he sink down
wearily at the end of a sofa, and rest his elbow support his head
and look on the floor. a little flushed, and with bright eye, she
seat herself beside he, and said--
"forgive I for speak so hastily to you this morning. I be wrong.
I fear I hurt you and make the day more burdensome."
"I be glad that you feel that, my dear," say Mr. Casaubon. he speak
quietly and bow his head a little, but there be still an uneasy
feeling in his eye as he look at she.
"but you do forgive I?" say Dorothea, with a quick sob. in her need
for some manifestation of feel she be ready to exaggerate her own
fault. would not love see return penitence afar off, and fall on
its neck and kiss it?
"my dear dorothea--'who with repentance be not satisfied, be not of
heaven nor earth:'--you do not think I worthy to be banish by that
severe sentence," say Mr. Casaubon, exert himself to make a strong
statement, and also to smile faintly.
Dorothea be silent, but a tear which have come up with the sob would
insist on fall.
"you be excited, my dear.. and I also be feel some unpleasant
consequence of too much mental disturbance," say Mr. Casaubon. in
fact, he have it in his thought to tell she that she ought not to have
receive young Ladislaw in his absence: but he abstain, partly from
the sense that it would be ungracious to bring a new complaint in the
moment of her penitent acknowledgment, partly because he want to
avoid further agitation of himself by speech, and partly because he be
too proud to betray that jealousy of disposition which be not so
exhausted on his scholarly compeer that there be none to spare in
other direction. there be a sort of jealousy which need very little
fire: it be hardly a passion, but a blight breed in the cloudy, damp
despondency of uneasy egoism.
"I think it be time for we to dress," he add, look at his watch.
they both rise, and there be never any further allusion between they
to what have pass on this day.
but Dorothea remember it to the last with the vividness with which we
all remember epoch in our experience when some dear expectation die,
or some new motive be bear. today she have begin to see that she have
be under a wild illusion in expect a response to her feeling from
Mr. Casaubon, and she have feel the waking of a presentiment that there
might be a sad consciousness in his life which make as great a need on
his side as on her own.
we be all of we bear in moral stupidity, take the world as an udder
to feed our supreme self: Dorothea have early begin to emerge from
that stupidity, but yet it have be easy to she to imagine how she
would devote herself to Mr. Casaubon, and become wise and strong in his
strength and wisdom, than to conceive with that distinctness which be
no long reflection but feeling--an idea work back to the
directness of sense, like the solidity of object--that he have an
equivalent centre of self, whence the light and shadow must always
fall with a certain difference.
CHAPTER XXII.
"nous causame longtemp; elle etait simple et bonne.
Ne sachant pas le mal, elle faisait le bien;
Des richesse du coeur elle I fit l'aumone,
et tout en ecoutant comme le coeur se donne,
Sans oser y penser je lui donnai le mien;
Elle emporta ma vie, et n'en sut jamais rien."
--ALFRED DE MUSSET.
will Ladislaw be delightfully agreeable at dinner the next day, and
give no opportunity for Mr. Casaubon to show disapprobation. on the
contrary it seem to Dorothea that will have a happy way of draw
her husband into conversation and of deferentially listen to he
than she have ever observe in any one before. to be sure, the
listener about Tipton be not highly gifted! will talk a good deal
himself, but what he say be throw in with such rapidity, and with
such an unimportant air of say something by the way, that it seem
a gay little chime after the great bell. if Will be not always
perfect, this be certainly one of his good day. he describe touch
of incident among the poor people in Rome, only to be see by one who
could move about freely; he find himself in agreement with Mr.
Casaubon as to the unsound opinion of Middleton concern the
relation of Judaism and Catholicism; and pass easily to a
half-enthusiastic half-playful picture of the enjoyment he get out of
the very miscellaneousness of Rome, which make the mind flexible with
constant comparison, and save you from see the world's age as a
set of box-like partition without vital connection. Mr. Casaubon's
study, will observe, have always be of too broad a kind for that,
and he have perhaps never feel any such sudden effect, but for himself
he confess that Rome have give he quite a new sense of history as a
whole: the fragment stimulate his imagination and make he
constructive. then occasionally, but not too often, he appeal to
Dorothea, and discuss what she say, as if her sentiment be an item
to be consider in the final judgment even of the Madonna di Foligno
or the Laocoon. a sense of contribute to form the world's opinion
make conversation particularly cheerful; and Mr. Casaubon too be not
without his pride in his young wife, who speak well than most woman,
as indeed he have perceive in choose she.
since thing be go on so pleasantly, Mr. Casaubon's statement that
his labor in the Library would be suspend for a couple of day, and
that after a brief renewal he should have no further reason for stay
in Rome, encourage will to urge that Mrs. Casaubon should not go away
without see a studio or two. would not Mr. Casaubon take she? that
sort of thing ought not to be miss: it be quite special: it be a
form of life that grow like a small fresh vegetation with its
population of insect on huge fossil. will would be happy to conduct
they--not to anything wearisome, only to a few example.
Mr. Casaubon, see Dorothea look earnestly towards he, could not but
ask she if she would be interested in such visit: he be now at her
service during the whole day; and it be agree that will should come
on the morrow and drive with they.
will could not omit Thorwaldsen, a live celebrity about whom even Mr.
Casaubon inquire, but before the day be far advanced he lead the way
to the studio of his friend Adolf Naumann, whom he mention as one of
the chief renovator of christian art, one of those who have not only
revive but expand that grand conception of supreme event as
mystery at which the successive age be spectator, and in relation
to which the great soul of all period become as it be
contemporary. will add that he have make himself Naumann's pupil
for the nonce.
"I have be make some oil-sketch under he," say will. "I hate
copying. I must put something of my own in. Naumann have be paint
the saint draw the car of the Church, and I have be make a
sketch of Marlowe's Tamburlaine drive the Conquered king in his
Chariot. I be not so ecclesiastical as Naumann, and I sometimes twit
he with his excess of meaning. but this time I mean to outdo he in
breadth of intention. I take Tamburlaine in his chariot for the
tremendous course of the world's physical history lash on the
harness dynasty. in my opinion, that be a good mythical
interpretation." will here look at Mr. Casaubon, who receive this
offhand treatment of symbolism very uneasily, and bow with a neutral
air.
"the sketch must be very grand, if it convey so much," say Dorothea.
"I should need some explanation even of the meaning you give. do you
intend Tamburlaine to represent earthquake and volcano?"
"oh yes," say will, laughing, "and migration of race and clearing
of forest--and America and the steam-engine. everything you can
imagine!"
"what a difficult kind of shorthand!" say Dorothea, smile towards
her husband. "it would require all your knowledge to be able to read
it."
Mr. Casaubon blink furtively at Will. he have a suspicion that he be
be laugh at. but it be not possible to include Dorothea in the
suspicion.
they find Naumann paint industriously, but no model be present;
his picture be advantageously arrange, and his own plain vivacious
person set off by a dove-color blouse and a maroon velvet cap, so
that everything be as fortunate as if he have expect the beautiful
young english lady exactly at that time.
the painter in his confident English give little dissertation on his
finished and unfinished subject, seem to observe Mr. Casaubon as
much as he do Dorothea. will burst in here and there with ardent
word of praise, mark out particular merit in his friend's work;
and Dorothea feel that she be get quite new notion as to the
significance of Madonnas seat under inexplicable canopy throne
with the simple country as a background, and of saint with
architectural model in their hand, or knife accidentally wedge in
their skull. some thing which have seem monstrous to she be
gather intelligibility and even a natural meaning: but all this be
apparently a branch of knowledge in which Mr. Casaubon have not
interested himself.
"I think I would rather feel that painting be beautiful than have to
read it as an enigma; but I should learn to understand these picture
soon than your with the very wide meaning," say Dorothea, speak
to Will.
"donot speak of my painting before Naumann," say will. "he will tell
you, it be all pfuscherei, which be his most opprobrious word!"
"be that true?" say Dorothea, turn her sincere eye on Naumann, who
make a slight grimace and said--
"oh, he do not mean it seriously with painting. his walk must be
belle-lettre. that be wi-ide."
Naumann's pronunciation of the vowel seem to stretch the word
satirically. will do not half like it, but manage to laugh: and Mr.
Casaubon, while he feel some disgust at the artist's german accent,
begin to entertain a little respect for his judicious severity.
the respect be not diminish when Naumann, after draw will aside
for a moment and look, first at a large canvas, then at Mr.
Casaubon, come forward again and said--
"my friend Ladislaw think you will pardon I, sir, if I say that a
sketch of your head would be invaluable to I for the St. Thomas
Aquinas in my picture there. it be too much to ask; but I so seldom
see just what I want--the idealistic in the real."
"you astonish I greatly, sir," say Mr. Casaubon, his look improve
with a glow of delight; "but if my poor physiognomy, which I have be
accustom to regard as of the commonest order, can be of any use to
you in furnish some trait for the angelical doctor, I shall feel
honor. that be to say, if the operation will not be a lengthy one;
and if Mrs. Casaubon will not object to the delay."
as for Dorothea, nothing could have please she more, unless it have
be a miraculous voice pronounce Mr. Casaubon the wise and
worthiest among the son of man. in that case her tottering faith
would have become firm again.
Naumann's apparatus be at hand in wonderful completeness, and the
sketch go on at once as well as the conversation. Dorothea sit down
and subside into calm silence, feel happy than she have do for a
long while before. every one about she seem good, and she say to
herself that Rome, if she have only be less ignorant, would have be
full of beauty its sadness would have be wing with hope. no nature
could be less suspicious than her: when she be a child she believe
in the gratitude of wasp and the honorable susceptibility of sparrow,
and be proportionately indignant when their baseness be make manifest.
the adroit artist be ask Mr. Casaubon question about english
polity, which bring long answer, and, will meanwhile have perch
himself on some step in the background overlook all.
presently Naumann said--"now if I could lay this by for half an hour
and take it up again--come and look, Ladislaw--I think it be perfect so
far."
will vent those adjuring interjection which imply that admiration be
too strong for syntax; and Naumann say in a tone of piteous regret--
"ah--now--if I could but have have more--but you have other
engagement--I could not ask it--or even to come again to-morrow."
"oh, let we stay!" say Dorothea. "we have nothing to do to-day except
go about, have we?" she add, look entreatingly at Mr. Casaubon.
"it would be a pity not to make the head as good as possible."
"I be at your service, sir, in the matter," say Mr. Casaubon, with
polite condescension. "have give up the interior of my head to
idleness, it be as well that the exterior should work in this way."
"you be unspeakably good--now I be happy!" say Naumann, and then go
on in German to will, point here and there to the sketch as if he
be consider that. put it aside for a moment, he look round
vaguely, as if seek some occupation for his visitor, and afterwards
turn to Mr. Casaubon, said--
"perhaps the beautiful bride, the gracious lady, would not be unwilling
to let I fill up the time by try to make a slight sketch of
she--not, of course, as you see, for that picture--only as a single
study."
Mr. Casaubon, bow, doubt not that Mrs. Casaubon would oblige he,
and Dorothea say, at once, "where shall I put myself?"
Naumann be all apology in ask she to stand, and allow he to
adjust her attitude, to which she submit without any of the affected
air and laugh frequently think necessary on such occasion, when
the painter say, "it be as Santa Clara that I want you to
stand--lean so, with your cheek against your hand--so--look at
that stool, please, so!"
will be divide between the inclination to fall at the Saint's foot
and kiss her robe, and the temptation to knock Naumann down while he
be adjust her arm. all this be impudence and desecration, and he
repent that he have bring she.
the artist be diligent, and will recover himself move about and
occupy Mr. Casaubon as ingeniously as he could; but he do not in the
end prevent the time from seem long to that gentleman, as be clear
from his express a fear that Mrs. Casaubon would be tired. Naumann
take the hint and said--
"now, sir, if you can oblige I again; I will release the lady-wife."
so Mr. Casaubon's patience hold out far, and when after all it
turn out that the head of Saint Thomas Aquinas would be more perfect
if another sitting could be have, it be grant for the morrow. on the
morrow Santa Clara too be retouch more than once. the result of all
be so far from displease to Mr. Casaubon, that he arrange for the
purchase of the picture in which Saint Thomas Aquinas sit among the
doctor of the Church in a disputation too abstract to be represent,
but listen to with more or less attention by an audience above. the
Santa Clara, which be speak of in the second place, Naumann declare
himself to be dissatisfied with--he could not, in conscience, engage
to make a worthy picture of it; so about the Santa Clara the
arrangement be conditional.
I will not dwell on Naumann's joke at the expense of Mr. Casaubon that
evening, or on his dithyramb about Dorothea's charm, in all which will
join, but with a difference. no soon do Naumann mention any
detail of Dorothea's beauty, than will got exasperate at his
presumption: there be grossness in his choice of the most ordinary
word, and what business have he to talk of her lip? she be not a
woman to be speak of as other woman be. will could not say just
what he think, but he become irritable. and yet, when after some
resistance he have consent to take the casaubon to his friend's
studio, he have be allure by the gratification of his pride in be
the person who could grant Naumann such an opportunity of study she
loveliness--or rather her divineness, for the ordinary phrase which
might apply to mere bodily prettiness be not applicable to she.
(certainly all Tipton and its neighborhood, as well as Dorothea
herself, would have be surprised at her beauty be make so much of.
in that part of the world Miss Brooke have be only a "fine young
woman.")
"Oblige I by let the subject drop, Naumann. Mrs. Casaubon be not
to be talk of as if she be a model," say Will. Naumann star at
he.
"Schon! I will talk of my Aquinas. the head be not a bad type, after
all. I dare say the great scholastic himself would have be flatter
to have his portrait ask for. nothing like these starchy doctor for
vanity! it be as I think: he care much less for her portrait than
his own."
"hebe a cursed white-blooded pedantic coxcomb," say will, with
gnashing impetuosity. his obligation to Mr. Casaubon be not know
to his hearer, but will himself be think of they, and wish that
he could discharge they all by a check.
Naumann give a shrug and say, "it be good they go away soon, my dear.
they be spoil your fine temper."
all Will's hope and contrivance be now concentrate on see
Dorothea when she be alone. he only want she to take more emphatic
notice of he; he only want to be something more special in her
remembrance than he could yet believe himself likely to be. he be
rather impatient under that open ardent good-will, reach he see be her
usual state of feeling. the remote worship of a woman throne out of
their reach play a great part in man's life, but in most case the
worshipper long for some queenly recognition, some approve sign by
which his soul's sovereign may cheer he without descend from her
high place. that be precisely what will want. but there be
plenty of contradiction in his imaginative demand. it be beautiful
to see how Dorothea's eye turn with wifely anxiety and beseech to
Mr. Casaubon: she would have lose some of her halo if she have be
without that duteous preoccupation; and yet at the next moment the
husband's sandy absorption of such nectar be too intolerable; and
willbe longing to say damage thing about he be perhaps not the
less tormenting because he feel the strong reason for restrain
it.
will have not be invite to dine the next day. hence he persuade
himself that he be bind to call, and that the only eligible time be
the middle of the day, when Mr. Casaubon would not be at home.
Dorothea, who have not be make aware that her former reception of will
have displease her husband, have no hesitation about see he,
especially as he might be come to pay a farewell visit. when he
enter she be look at some cameo which she have be buy for
Celia. she greet Will as if his visit be quite a matter of course,
and say at once, have a cameo bracelet in her hand--
"I be so glad you be come. perhaps you understand all about cameo,
and can tell I if these be really good. I wish to have you with we
in choose they, but Mr. Casaubon object: he think there be not
time. he will finish his work to-morrow, and we shall go away in three
day. I have be uneasy about these cameo. pray sit down and look
at they."
"I be not particularly know, but there can be no great mistake about
these little homeric bit: they be exquisitely neat. and the color be
fine: it will just suit you."
"oh, they be for my sister, who have quite a different complexion. you
see she with I at Lowick: she be light-haired and very pretty--at
least I think so. we be never so long away from each other in our
life before. she be a great pet and never be naughty in her life. I
find out before I come away that she want I to buy she some cameo,
and I should be sorry for they not to be good--after their kind."
Dorothea add the last word with a smile.
"you seem not to care about cameo," say will, seat himself at some
distance from she, and observe she while she close the case.
"no, frankly, I donot think they a great object in life," say Dorothea
"I fear you be a heretic about art generally. how be that? I should
have expect you to be very sensitive to the beautiful everywhere."
"I suppose I be dull about many thing," say Dorothea, simply. "I
should like to make life beautiful--I mean everybody's life. and then
all this immense expense of art, that seem somehow to lie outside life
and make it no well for the world, pain one. it spoil my enjoyment
of anything when I be make to think that most people be shut out from
it."
"I call that the fanaticism of sympathy," say will, impetuously. "you
might say the same of landscape, of poetry, of all refinement. if you
carry it out you ought to be miserable in your own goodness, and turn
evil that you might have no advantage over other. the good piety be
to enjoy--when you can. you be do the most then to save the
earth's character as an agreeable planet. and enjoyment radiate. it
be of no use to try and take care of all the world; that be be take
care of when you feel delight--in art or in anything else. would you
turn all the youth of the world into a tragic chorus, wail and
moralize over misery? I suspect that you have some false belief in
the virtue of misery, and want to make your life a martyrdom." will
have go far than he intend, and check himself. but Dorothea's
thought be not take just the same direction as his own, and she
answer without any special emotion--
"indeed you mistake I. I be not a sad, melancholy creature. I be
never unhappy long together. I be angry and naughty--not like Celia: I
have a great outburst, and then all seem glorious again. I cannot
help believe in glorious thing in a blind sort of way. I should be
quite willing to enjoy the art here, but there be so much that I donot
know the reason of--so much that seem to I a consecration of ugliness
rather than beauty. the painting and sculpture may be wonderful, but
the feeling be often low and brutal, and sometimes even ridiculous.
here and there I see what take I at once as noble--something that I
might compare with the Alban Mountains or the sunset from the Pincian
Hill; but that make it the great pity that there be so little of the
good kind among all that mass of thing over which man have toil so."
"of course there be always a great deal of poor work: the rare thing
want that soil to grow in."
"oh dear," say Dorothea, take up that thought into the chief current
of her anxiety; "I see it must be very difficult to do anything good.
I have often feel since I have be in Rome that most of our life
would look much ugly and more bungling than the picture, if they
could be put on the wall."
Dorothea part her lip again as if she be go to say more, but
change her mind and pause.
"you be too young--it be an anachronism for you to have such
thought," say will, energetically, with a quick shake of the head
habitual to he. "you talk as if you have never know any youth. it be
monstrous--as if you have have a vision of Hades in your childhood, like
the boy in the legend. you have be bring up in some of those
horrible notion that choose the sweetest woman to devour--like
minotaur and now you will go and be shut up in that stone prison at
Lowick: you will be bury alive. it make I savage to think of it!
I would rather never have see you than think of you with such a
prospect."
will again fear that he have go too far; but the meaning we attach
to word depend on our feeling, and his tone of angry regret have so
much kindness in it for Dorothea's heart, which have always be give
out ardor and have never be feed with much from the live being
around she, that she feel a new sense of gratitude and answer with a
gentle smile--
"it be very good of you to be anxious about I. it be because you do
not like Lowick yourself: you have set your heart on another kind of
life. but Lowick be my choose home."
the last sentence be speak with an almost solemn cadence, and will
do not know what to say, since it would not be useful for he to
embrace her slipper, and tell she that he would die for she: it be
clear that she require nothing of the sort; and they be both silent
for a moment or two, when Dorothea begin again with an air of say at
last what have be in her mind beforehand.
"I want to ask you again about something you say the other day.
perhaps it be half of it your lively way of speak: I notice that
you like to put thing strongly; I myself often exaggerate when I speak
hastily."
"what be it?" say Will, observe that she speak with a timidity
quite new in she. "I have a hyperbolical tongue: it catch fire as it
go. I dare say I shall have to retract."
"I mean what you say about the necessity of know German--I mean,
for the subject that Mr. Casaubon be engage in. I have be think
about it; and it seem to I that with Mr. Casaubon's learning he must
have before he the same material as german scholar--have he not?"
Dorothea's timidity be due to an indistinct consciousness that she be
in the strange situation of consult a third person about the
adequacy of Mr. Casaubon's learning.
"not exactly the same material," say will, think that he would be
duly reserve. "he be not an Orientalist, you know. he do not
profess to have more than second-hand knowledge there."
"but there be very valuable book about antiquity which be write
a long while ago by scholar who know nothing about these modern
thing; and they be still use. why should Mr. Casaubon's not be
valuable, like theirs?" say Dorothea, with more remonstrant energy.
she be impel to have the argument aloud, which she have be have
in her own mind.
"that depend on the line of study take," say will, also get a
tone of rejoinder. "the subject Mr. Casaubon have choose be as change
as chemistry: new discovery be constantly make new point of view.
who want a system on the basis of the four element, or a book to
refute Paracelsus? do you not see that it be no use now to be crawl
a little way after man of the last century--man like Bryant--and
correct their mistakes?--living in a lumber-room and furbish up
break-legged theory about Chus and Mizraim?"
"how can you bear to speak so lightly?" say Dorothea, with a look
between sorrow and anger. "if it be as you say, what could be sad
than so much ardent labor all in vain? I wonder it do not affect you
more painfully, if you really think that a man like Mr. Casaubon, of so
much goodness, power, and learning, should in any way fail in what have
be the labor of his good year." she be begin to be shock that
she have get to such a point of supposition, and indignant with Will for
have lead she to it.
"you question I about the matter of fact, not of feel," say
will. "but if you wish to punish I for the fact, I submit. I be not
in a position to express my feeling toward Mr. Casaubon: it would be at
good a pensioner's eulogy."
"pray excuse I," say Dorothea, color deeply. "I be aware, as you
say, that I be in fault in have introduce the subject. indeed, I be
wrong altogether. failure after long perseverance be much grander than
never to have a strive good enough to be call a failure."
"I quite agree with you," say will, determine to change the
situation--"so much so that I have make up my mind not to run that
risk of never attain a failure. Mr. Casaubon's generosity have
perhaps be dangerous to I, and I mean to renounce the liberty it have
give I. I mean to go back to England shortly and work my own
way--depend on nobody else than myself."
"that be fine--I respect that feeling," say Dorothea, with return
kindness. "but Mr. Casaubon, I be sure, have never think of anything
in the matter except what be most for your welfare."
"she have obstinacy and pride enough to serve instead of love, now she
have marry he," say Will to himself. aloud he say, rising--
"I shall not see you again."
"oh, stay till Mr. Casaubon come," say Dorothea, earnestly. "I be so
glad we meet in Rome. I want to know you."?
"and I have make you angry," say will. "I have make you think ill of
I."
"oh no. my sister tell I I be always angry with people who do not
say just what I like. but I hope I be not give to think ill of they.
in the end I be usually oblige to think ill of myself for be so
impatient."
"still, you donot like I; I have make myself an unpleasant thought to
you."
"not at all," say Dorothea, with the most open kindness. "I like you
very much."
will be not quite content, think that he would apparently have
be of more importance if he have be dislike. he say nothing, but
look dull, not to say sulky.
"and I be quite interested to see what you will do," Dorothea go on
cheerfully. "I believe devoutly in a natural difference of vocation.
if it be not for that belief, I suppose I should be very narrow--there
be so many thing, besides painting, that I be quite ignorant
of. you would hardly believe how little I have take in of music and
literature, which you know so much of. I wonder what your vocation
will turn out to be: perhaps you will be a poet?"
"that depend. to be a poet be to have a soul so quick to discern that
no shade of quality escape it, and so quick to feel, that discernment
be but a hand play with finely order variety on the chord of
emotion--a soul in which knowledge pass instantaneously into feeling,
and feel flash back as a new organ of knowledge. one may have
that condition by fit only."
"but you leave out the poem," say Dorothea. "I think they be want
to complete the poet. I understand what you mean about knowledge
pass into feeling, for that seem to be just what I experience. but
I be sure I could never produce a poem."
"you _be_ a poem--and that be to be the good part of a poet--what
make up the poet's consciousness in his good mood," say will,
show such originality as we all share with the morning and the
spring-time and other endless renewal.
"I be very glad to hear it," say Dorothea, laugh out her word in a
bird-like modulation, and look at Will with playful gratitude in her
eye. "what very kind thing you say to I!"
"I wish I could ever do anything that would be what you call kind--that
I could ever be of the slight service to you I fear I shall never
have the opportunity." will speak with fervor.
"oh yes," say Dorothea, cordially. "it will come; and I shall
remember how well you wish I. I quite hop that we should be friend
when I first see you--because of your relationship to Mr. Casaubon."
there be a certain liquid brightness in her eye, and will be
conscious that his own be obey a law of nature and fill too.
the allusion to Mr. Casaubon would have spoil all if anything at that
moment could have spoil the subduing power, the sweet dignity, of her
noble unsuspicious inexperience.
"and there be one thing even now that you can do," say Dorothea,
rise and walk a little way under the strength of a recur
impulse. "promise I that you will not again, to any one, speak of
that subject--I mean about Mr. Casaubon's writing--I mean in that
kind of way. it be I who lead to it. it be my fault. but promise
I."
she have return from her brief pacing and stand opposite Will, look
gravely at he.
"certainly, I will promise you," say will, redden however. if he
never say a cutting word about Mr. Casaubon again and leave off
receive favor from he, it would clearly be permissible to hate he
the more. the poet must know how to hate, say Goethe; and will be at
least ready with that accomplishment. he say that he must go now
without wait for Mr. Casaubon, whom he would come to take leave of
at the last moment. Dorothea give he her hand, and they exchange a
simple "good-by."
but go out of the porte cochere he meet Mr. Casaubon, and that
gentleman, express the good wish for his cousin, politely waive
the pleasure of any further leave-taking on the morrow, which would be
sufficiently crowd with the preparation for departure.
"I have something to tell you about our cousin Mr. Ladislaw, which I
think will heighten your opinion of he," say Dorothea to her husband
in the coarse of the evening. she have mention immediately on his
entering that will have just go away, and would come again, but Mr.
Casaubon have say, "I meet he outside, and we make our final adieux, I
believe," say this with the air and tone by which we imply that any
subject, whether private or public, do not interest we enough to wish
for a further remark upon it. so Dorothea have wait.
"what be that, my love?" say Mr Casaubon (he always say "my love"
when his manner be the cold).
"he have make up his mind to leave off wander at once, and to give up
his dependence on your generosity. he mean soon to go back to
England, and work his own way. I think you would consider that a
good sign," say Dorothea, with an appealing look into her husband's
neutral face.
"do he mention the precise order of occupation to which he would
addict himself?"
"no. but he say that he feel the danger which lie for he in your
generosity. of course he will write to you about it. do you not think
well of he for his resolve?"
"I shall await his communication on the subject," say Mr. Casaubon.
"I tell he I be sure that the thing you consider in all you do for
he be his own welfare. I remember your goodness in what you say
about he when I first see he at Lowick," say Dorothea, put she
hand on her husband's.
"I have a duty towards he," say Mr. Casaubon, lay his other hand on
Dorothea's in conscientious acceptance of her caress, but with a glance
which he could not hinder from be uneasy. "the young man, I
confess, be not otherwise an object of interest to I, nor need we, I
think, discuss his future course, which it be not ours to determine
beyond the limit which I have sufficiently indicate." Dorothea do
not mention will again.
BOOK III.
wait for DEATH.
CHAPTER XXIII.
"your horse of the Sun," he say,
"and first-rate whip Apollo!
Whate'er they be, Iwill eat my head,
but I will beat they hollow."
Fred Vincy, we have see, have a debt on his mind, and though no such
immaterial burthen could depress that buoyant-hearted young gentleman
for many hour together, there be circumstance connect with this
debt which make the thought of it unusually importunate. the creditor
be Mr. Bambridge a horse-dealer of the neighborhood, whose company be
much seek in Middlemarch by young man understand to be "addict to
pleasure." during the vacation Fred have naturally require more
amusement than he have ready money for, and Mr. Bambridge have be
accommodate enough not only to trust he for the hire of horse and
the accidental expense of ruin a fine hunter, but also to make a
small advance by which he might be able to meet some loss at
billiard. the total debt be a hundred and sixty pound. Bambridge
be in no alarm about his money, be sure that young Vincy have
backer; but he have require something to show for it, and Fred have at
first give a bill with his own signature. three month later he have
renew this bill with the signature of Caleb Garth. on both occasion
Fred have feel confident that he should meet the bill himself, have
ample fund at disposal in his own hopefulness. you will hardly demand
that his confidence should have a basis in external fact; such
confidence, we know, be something less coarse and materialistic: it be
a comfortable disposition lead we to expect that the wisdom of
providence or the folly of our friend, the mystery of luck or the
still great mystery of our high individual value in the universe,
will bring about agreeable issue, such as be consistent with our good
taste in costume, and our general preference for the good style of
thing. Fred feel sure that he should have a present from his uncle,
that he should have a run of luck, that by dint of "swap" he should
gradually metamorphose a horse worth forty pound into a horse that
would fetch a hundred at any moment--"judgment" be always equivalent
to an unspecified sum in hard cash. and in any case, even suppose
negation which only a morbid distrust could imagine, Fred have always
(at that time) his father's pocket as a last resource, so that his
asset of hopefulness have a sort of gorgeous superfluity about they.
of what might be the capacity of his father's pocket, Fred have only a
vague notion: be not trade elastic? and would not the deficiency of
one year be make up for by the surplus of another? the Vincys live in
an easy profuse way, not with any new ostentation, but accord to the
family habit and tradition, so that the child have no standard of
economy, and the elder one retain some of their infantine notion
that their father might pay for anything if he would. Mr. Vincy
himself have expensive middlemarch habit--spend money on course, on
his cellar, and on dinner-giving, while mamma have those run
account with tradespeople, which give a cheerful sense of get
everything one want without any question of payment. but it be in
the nature of father, Fred know, to bully one about expense: there
be always a little storm over his extravagance if he have to disclose a
debt, and Fred dislike bad weather within door. he be too filial to
be disrespectful to his father, and he bear the thunder with the
certainty that it be transient; but in the mean time it be
disagreeable to see his mother cry, and also to be oblige to look
sulky instead of have fun; for Fred be so good-temper that if he
look glum under scold, it be chiefly for propriety's sake. the
easy course plainly, be to renew the bill with a friend's signature.
why not? with the superfluous security of hope at his command, there
be no reason why he should not have increase other people's
liability to any extent, but for the fact that man whose name be
good for anything be usually pessimist, indispose to believe that
the universal order of thing would necessarily be agreeable to an
agreeable young gentleman.
with a favor to ask we review our list of friend, do justice to their
more amiable quality, forgive their little offense, and concern
each in turn, try to arrive at the conclusion that he will be eager to
oblige we, our own eagerness to be oblige be as communicable as
other warmth. still there be always a certain number who be dismiss
as but moderately eager until the other have refuse; and it happen
that Fred check off all his friend but one, on the ground that
apply to they would be disagreeable; be implicitly convince that
he at least (whatever might be maintain about mankind generally) have
a right to be free from anything disagreeable. that he should ever
fall into a thoroughly unpleasant position--wear trouser shrunk with
washing, eat cold mutton, have to walk for want of a horse, or to "duck
under" in any sort of way--be an absurdity irreconcilable with those
cheerful intuition implant in he by nature. and Fred wince under
the idea of be look down upon as want fund for small debt.
thus it come to pass that the friend whom he choose to apply to be at
once the poor and the kind--namely, Caleb Garth.
the Garths be very fond of Fred, as he be of they; for when he and
Rosamond be little one, and the Garths be well off, the slight
connection between the two family through Mr. Featherstone's double
marriage (the first to Mr. Garth's sister, and the second to Mrs.
Vincy's) have lead to an acquaintance which be carry on between the
child rather than the parent: the child drink tea together out
of their toy teacup, and spend whole day together in play. Mary be
a little hoyden, and Fred at six year old think she the nice girl
in the world make she his wife with a brass ring which he have cut
from an umbrella. through all the stage of his education he have keep
his affection for the Garths, and his habit of go to their house as
a second home, though any intercourse between they and the elder of
his family have long cease. even when Caleb Garth be prosperous, the
Vincys be on condescend term with he and his wife, for there
be nice distinction of rank in Middlemarch; and though old
manufacturer could not any more than duke be connect with none but
equal, they be conscious of an inherent social superiority which be
define with great nicety in practice, though hardly expressible
theoretically. since then Mr. Garth have fail in the building
business, which he have unfortunately add to his other avocation of
surveyor, valuer, and agent, have conduct that business for a time
entirely for the benefit of his assignee, and have be live
narrowly, exert himself to the utmost that he might after all pay
twenty shilling in the pound. he have now achieve this, and from all
who do not think it a bad precedent, his honorable exertion have win
he due esteem; but in no part of the world be genteel visit found
on esteem, in the absence of suitable furniture and complete
dinner-service. Mrs. Vincy have never be at her ease with Mrs. Garth,
and frequently speak of she as a woman who have have to work for her
bread--mean that Mrs. Garth have be a teacher before her marriage;
in which case an intimacy with Lindley Murray and Mangnall's Questions
be something like a draper's discrimination of calico trademark, or a
courier's acquaintance with foreign country: no woman who be well
off need that sort of thing. and since Mary have be keep Mr.
Featherstone's house, Mrs. Vincy's want of like for the Garths have
be convert into something more positive, by alarm lest Fred should
engage himself to this plain girl, whose parent "live in such a small
way." Fred, be aware of this, never speak at home of his visit to
Mrs. Garth, which have of late become more frequent, the increase
ardor of his affection for Mary incline he the more towards those
who belong to she.
Mr. Garth have a small office in the town, and to this Fred go with
his request. he obtain it without much difficulty, for a large
amount of painful experience have not suffice to make Caleb Garth
cautious about his own affair, or distrustful of his fellow-man when
they have not prove themselves untrustworthy; and he have the high
opinion of Fred, be "sure the lad would turn out well--an open
affectionate fellow, with a good bottom to his character--you might
trust he for anything." such be Caleb's psychological argument. he
be one of those rare man who be rigid to themselves and indulgent to
other. he have a certain shame about his neighbor' error, and never
speak of they willingly; hence he be not likely to divert his mind
from the good mode of harden timber and other ingenious device in
order to preconceive those error. if he have to blame any one, it be
necessary for he to move all the paper within his reach, or describe
various diagram with his stick, or make calculation with the odd
money in his pocket, before he could begin; and he would rather do
other man's work than find fault with their doing. I fear he be a bad
disciplinarian.
when Fred state the circumstance of his debt, his wish to meet it
without trouble his father, and the certainty that the money would be
forthcoming so as to cause no one any inconvenience, Caleb push his
spectacle upward, listen, look into his favorite's clear young
eye, and believe he, not distinguish confidence about the future
from veracity about the past; but he feel that it be an occasion for a
friendly hint as to conduct, and that before give his signature he
must give a rather strong admonition. accordingly, he take the paper
and lower his spectacle, measure the space at his command, reach
his pen and examine it, dip it in the ink and examine it again,
then push the paper a little way from he, lift up his spectacle
again, show a deepen depression in the outer angle of his bushy
eyebrow, which give his face a peculiar mildness (pardon these detail
for once--you would have learn to love they if you have know Caleb
Garth), and say in a comfortable tone--
"it be a misfortune, eh, that break the horse's knee? and then,
these exchange, they donot answer when you have 'cute jockey to deal
with. youwill be wise another time, my boy."
Whereupon Caleb draw down his spectacle, and proceed to write his
signature with the care which he always give to that performance; for
whatever he do in the way of business he do well. he contemplate
the large well-proportion letter and final flourish, with his head a
trifle on one side for an instant, then hand it to Fred, say
"good-by," and return forthwith to his absorption in a plan for Sir
James Chettam's new farm-building.
either because his interest in this work thrust the incident of the
signature from his memory, or for some reason of which Caleb be more
conscious, Mrs. Garth remain ignorant of the affair.
since it occur, a change have come over Fred's sky, which alter his
view of the distance, and be the reason why his uncle Featherstone's
present of money be of importance enough to make his color come and
go, first with a too definite expectation, and afterwards with a
proportionate disappointment. his failure in pass his examination,
have make his accumulation of college debt the more unpardonable by his
father, and there have be an unprecedented storm at home. Mr. Vincy
have swear that if he have anything more of that sort to put up with,
Fred should turn out and get his living how he could; and he have never
yet quite recover his good-humor tone to his son, who have
especially enrage he by say at this stage of thing that he do
not want to be a clergyman, and would rather not "go on with that."
Fred be conscious that he would have be yet more severely deal with
if his family as well as himself have not secretly regard he as Mr.
Featherstone's heir; that old gentleman's pride in he, and apparent
fondness for he, serve in the stead of more exemplary conduct--just
as when a youthful nobleman steal jewellery we call the act
kleptomania, speak of it with a philosophical smile, and never think of
his be send to the house of correction as if he be a ragged boy
who have steal turnip. in fact, tacit expectation of what would be
do for he by uncle Featherstone determine the angle at which most
people view Fred Vincy in Middlemarch; and in his own consciousness,
what uncle Featherstone would do for he in an emergency, or what he
would do simply as an incorporated luck, form always an immeasurable
depth of aerial perspective. but that present of bank-note, once
make, be measurable, and be apply to the amount of the debt,
show a deficit which have still to be fill up either by Fred's
"judgment" or by luck in some other shape. for that little episode of
the alleged borrowing, in which he have make his father the agent in
get the Bulstrode certificate, be a new reason against go to
his father for money towards meet his actual debt. Fred be keen
enough to foresee that anger would confuse distinction, and that his
denial of have borrow expressly on the strength of his uncle's will
would be take as a falsehood. he have go to his father and tell he
one vexatious affair, and he have leave another untold: in such case the
complete revelation always produce the impression of a previous
duplicity. now Fred pique himself on keep clear of lie, and even
fib; he often shrug his shoulder and make a significant grimace at
what he call Rosamond's fib (it be only brother who can associate
such idea with a lovely girl); and rather than incur the accusation of
falsehood he would even incur some trouble and self-restraint. it be
under strong inward pressure of this kind that Fred have take the wise
step of deposit the eighty pound with his mother. it be a pity
that he have not at once give they to Mr. Garth; but he mean to make
the sum complete with another sixty, and with a view to this, he have
keep twenty pound in his own pocket as a sort of seed-corn, which,
plant by judgment, and water by luck, might yield more than
threefold--a very poor rate of multiplication when the field be a young
gentleman's infinite soul, with all the numeral at command.
Fred be not a gambler: he have not that specific disease in which the
suspension of the whole nervous energy on a chance or risk become as
necessary as the dram to the drunkard; he have only the tendency to that
diffusive form of gambling which have no alcoholic intensity, but be
carry on with the healthy chyle-feed blood, keep up a joyous
imaginative activity which fashion event accord to desire, and
have no fear about its own weather, only see the advantage there
must be to other in go aboard with it. Hopefulness have a pleasure
in make a throw of any kind, because the prospect of success be
certain; and only a more generous pleasure in offering as many as
possible a share in the stake. fred like play, especially billiard,
as he like hunt or rid a steeple-chase; and he only like it the
well because he want money and hop to win. but the twenty
pound' worth of seed-corn have be plant in vain in the seductive
green plot--all of it at least which have not be disperse by the
roadside--and Fred find himself close upon the term of payment with no
money at command beyond the eighty pound which he have deposit with
his mother. the break-wind horse which he ride represent a
present which have be make to he a long while ago by his uncle
Featherstone: his father always allow he to keep a horse, Mr.
Vincy's own habit make he regard this as a reasonable demand even
for a son who be rather exasperating. this horse, then, be Fred's
property, and in his anxiety to meet the imminent bill he determine to
sacrifice a possession without which life would certainly be worth
little. he make the resolution with a sense of heroism--heroism force
on he by the dread of break his word to Mr. Garth, by his love for
Mary and awe of her opinion. he would start for Houndsley horse-fair
which be to be hold the next morning, and--simply sell his horse,
bring back the money by coach?--Well, the horse would hardly fetch
more than thirty pound, and there be no knowing what might happen; it
would be folly to balk himself of luck beforehand. it be a hundred to
one that some good chance would fall in his way; the long he think
of it, the less possible it seem that he should not have a good
chance, and the less reasonable that he should not equip himself with
the powder and shoot for bring it down. he would ride to Houndsley
with Bambridge and with horrock "the vet," and without ask they
anything expressly, he should virtually get the benefit of their
opinion. before he set out, Fred get the eighty pound from his mother.
Most of those who see Fred riding out of Middlemarch in company with
Bambridge and Horrock, on his way of course to Houndsley horse-fair,
think that young Vincy be pleasure-seeking as usual; and but for an
unwonted consciousness of grave matter on hand, he himself would have
have a sense of dissipation, and of do what might be expect of a
gay young fellow. consider that Fred be not at all coarse, that he
rather look down on the manner and speech of young man who have not
be to the university, and that he have write stanzas as pastoral and
unvoluptuous as his flute-playing, his attraction towards Bambridge and
Horrock be an interesting fact which even the love of horse-flesh
would not wholly account for without that mysterious influence of
naming which determinate so much of mortal choice. under any other
name than "pleasure" the society of Messieurs Bambridge and horrock
must certainly have be regard as monotonous; and to arrive with
they at Houndsley on a drizzling afternoon, to get down at the Red Lion
in a street shade with coal-dust, and dine in a room furnish with a
dirt-enamel map of the county, a bad portrait of an anonymous horse
in a stable, his Majesty George the Fourth with leg and cravat, and
various leaden spittoon, might have seem a hard business, but for
the sustain power of nomenclature which determine that the pursuit
of these thing be "gay."
in Mr. Horrock there be certainly an apparent unfathomableness which
offer play to the imagination. Costume, at a glance, give he a
thrilling association with horse (enough to specify the hat-brim which
take the slight upward angle just to escape the suspicion of bend
downward), and nature have give he a face which by dint of mongolian
eye, and a nose, mouth, and chin seem to follow his hat-brim in a
moderate inclination upwards, give the effect of a subdue unchangeable
sceptical smile, of all expression the most tyrannous over a
susceptible mind, and, when accompany by adequate silence, likely to
create the reputation of an invincible understanding, an infinite fund
of humor--too dry to flow, and probably in a state of immovable
crust,--and a critical judgment which, if you could ever be fortunate
enough to know it, would be _the_ thing and no other. it be a
physiognomy see in all vocation, but perhaps it have never be more
powerful over the youth of England than in a judge of horse.
Mr. Horrock, at a question from Fred about his horse's fetlock, turn
sideway in his saddle, and watch the horse's action for the space of
three minute, then turn forward, twitch his own bridle, and
remain silent with a profile neither more nor less sceptical than it
have be.
the part thus play in dialogue by Mr. Horrock be terribly effective.
a mixture of passion be excited in Fred--a mad desire to thrash
Horrock's opinion into utterance, restrain by anxiety to retain the
advantage of his friendship. there be always the chance that horrock
might say something quite invaluable at the right moment.
Mr. Bambridge have more open manner, and appear to give forth his
idea without economy. he be loud, robust, and be sometimes speak
of as be "give to indulgence"--chiefly in swearing, drinking, and
beat his wife. some people who have lose by he call he a vicious
man; but he regard horse-dealing as the fine of the art, and might
have argue plausibly that it have nothing to do with morality. he be
undeniably a prosperous man, bear his drinking well than other bear
their moderation, and, on the whole, flourish like the green
bay-tree. but his range of conversation be limited, and like the fine
old tune, "drop of brandy," give you after a while a sense of
return upon itself in a way that might make weak head dizzy. but a
slight infusion of Mr. Bambridge be feel to give tone and character to
several circle in Middlemarch; and he be a distinguished figure in
the bar and billiard-room at the Green Dragon. he know some anecdote
about the hero of the turf, and various clever trick of Marquesses
and viscount which seem to prove that blood assert its
pre-eminence even among black-leg; but the minute retentiveness of his
memory be chiefly show about the horse he have himself buy and
sell; the number of mile they would trot you in no time without
turn a hair be, after the lapse of year, still a subject of
passionate asseveration, in which he would assist the imagination of
his hearer by solemnly swear that they never see anything like it.
in short, Mr. Bambridge be a man of pleasure and a gay companion.
Fred be subtle, and do not tell his friend that he be go to
Houndsley bent on sell his horse: he wish to get indirectly at
their genuine opinion of its value, not be aware that a genuine
opinion be the last thing likely to be extract from such eminent
critic. it be not Mr. Bambridge's weakness to be a gratuitous
flatterer. he have never before be so much strike with the fact that
this unfortunate bay be a roarer to a degree which require the
roundest word for perdition to give you any idea of it.
"you make a bad hand at swap when you go to anybody but I,
Vincy! why, you never throw your leg across a fine horse than that
chestnut, and you give he for this brute. if you set he canter,
he go on like twenty sawyer. I never hear but one bad roarer in
my life, and that be a roan: it belong to Pegwell, the corn-factor;
he use to drive he in his gig seven year ago, and he want I to
take he, but I say, 'thank you, Peg, I donot deal in
wind-instrument.' that be what I say. it go the round of the
country, that joke do. but, what the hell! the horse be a penny
trumpet to that roarer of your."
"why, you say just now his be bad than mine," say Fred, more
irritable than usual.
"I say a lie, then," say Mr. Bambridge, emphatically. "there benot
a penny to choose between them."
Fred spur his horse, and they trot on a little way. when they
slacken again, Mr. Bambridge said--
"not but what the roan be a well trotter than your."
"Ibe quite satisfied with his pace, I know," say Fred, who require
all the consciousness of be in gay company to support he; "I say
his trot be an uncommonly clean one, eh, Horrock?"
Mr. Horrock look before he with as complete a neutrality as if he
have be a portrait by a great master.
Fred give up the fallacious hope of get a genuine opinion; but on
reflection he see that Bambridge's depreciation and Horrock's silence
be both virtually encouraging, and indicate that they think well
of the horse than they choose to say.
that very evening, indeed, before the fair have set in, Fred think he
see a favorable opening for dispose advantageously of his horse, but
an opening which make he congratulate himself on his foresight in
bring with he his eighty pound. a young farmer, acquaint with
Mr. Bambridge, come into the Red Lion, and enter into conversation
about part with a hunter, which he introduce at once as Diamond,
imply that it be a public character. for himself he only want a
useful hack, which would draw upon occasion; be about to marry and
to give up hunting. the hunter be in a friend's stable at some little
distance; there be still time for gentleman to see it before dark.
the friend's stable have to be reach through a back street where you
might as easily have be poison without expense of drug as in any
grim street of that unsanitary period. Fred be not fortify against
disgust by brandy, as his companion be, but the hope of have at
last see the horse that would enable he to make money be
exhilarate enough to lead he over the same ground again the first
thing in the morning. he feel sure that if he do not come to a
bargain with the farmer, Bambridge would; for the stress of
circumstance, Fred feel, be sharpen his acuteness and endow he
with all the constructive power of suspicion. Bambridge have run down
Diamond in a way that he never would have do (the horse be a
friend's) if he have not think of buy it; every one who look at
the animal--even Horrock--be evidently impressed with its merit. to
get all the advantage of be with man of this sort, you must know how
to draw your inference, and not be a spoon who take thing literally.
the color of the horse be a dapple gray, and Fred happen to know
that Lord Medlicote's man be on the look-out for just such a horse.
after all his run down, Bambridge let it out in the course of the
evening, when the farmer be absent, that he have see bad horse go
for eighty pound. of course he contradict himself twenty time
over, but when you know what be likely to be true you can test a man's
admission. and Fred could not but reckon his own judgment of a horse
as worth something. the farmer have pause over Fred's respectable
though break-wind steed long enough to show that he think it worth
consideration, and it seem probable that he would take it, with
five-and-twenty pound in addition, as the equivalent of Diamond. in
that case Fred, when he have part with his new horse for at least
eighty pound, would be fifty-five pound in pocket by the transaction,
and would have a hundred and thirty-five pound towards meet the
bill; so that the deficit temporarily throw on Mr. Garth would at the
utmost be twenty-five pound. by the time he be hurry on his
clothe in the morning, he see so clearly the importance of not lose
this rare chance, that if Bambridge and Horrock have both dissuade he,
he would not have be delude into a direct interpretation of their
purpose: he would have be aware that those deep hand hold something
else than a young fellow's interest. with regard to horse, distrust
be your only clew. but scepticism, as we know, can never be
thoroughly apply, else life would come to a standstill: something we
must believe in and do, and whatever that something may be call, it
be virtually our own judgment, even when it seem like the most slavish
reliance on another. Fred believe in the excellence of his bargain,
and even before the fair have well set in, have get possession of the
dapple gray, at the price of his old horse and thirty pound in
addition--only five pound more than he have expect to give.
but he feel a little worried and weary, perhaps with mental debate,
and without wait for the further gayetie of the horse-fair, he set
out alone on his fourteen mile' journey, mean to take it very
quietly and keep his horse fresh.
CHAPTER XXIV.
"the offender's sorrow bring but small relief
to he who wear the strong offence's cross."
--SHAKESPEARE: sonnet.
I be sorry to say that only the third day after the propitious event
at Houndsley Fred Vincy have fall into bad spirit than he have know
in his life before. not that he have be disappoint as to the
possible market for his horse, but that before the bargain could be
conclude with Lord Medlicote's man, this Diamond, in which hope to the
amount of eighty pound have be invest, have without the slight
warning exhibit in the stable a most vicious energy in kicking, have
just miss kill the groom, and have end in lam himself severely
by catch his leg in a rope that overhang the stable-board. there be
no more redress for this than for the discovery of bad temper after
marriage--which of course old companion be aware of before the
ceremony. for some reason or other, Fred have none of his usual
elasticity under this stroke of ill-fortune: he be simply aware that
he have only fifty pound, that there be no chance of his get any
more at present, and that the bill for a hundred and sixty would be
present in five day. even if he have apply to his father on the
plea that Mr. Garth should be save from loss, Fred feel smartingly
that his father would angrily refuse to rescue Mr. Garth from the
consequence of what he would call encourage extravagance and deceit.
he be so utterly downcast that he could frame no other project than to
go straight to Mr. Garth and tell he the sad truth, carry with he
the fifty pound, and get that sum at least safely out of his own
hand. his father, be at the warehouse, do not yet know of the
accident: when he do, he would storm about the vicious brute be
bring into his stable; and before meet that less annoyance Fred
want to get away with all his courage to face the great. he take
his father's nag, for he have make up his mind that when he have tell Mr.
Garth, he would ride to Stone Court and confess all to Mary. in fact,
it be probable that but for Mary's existence and Fred's love for she,
his conscience would have be much less active both in previously
urge the debt on his thought and impel he not to spare himself
after his usual fashion by defer an unpleasant task, but to act as
directly and simply as he could. even much strong mortal than Fred
Vincy hold half their rectitude in the mind of the being they love
well. "the theatre of all my action be fall," say an antique
personage when his chief friend be dead; and they be fortunate who
get a theatre where the audience demand their good. certainly it
would have make a considerable difference to Fred at that time if Mary
Garth have have no decide notion as to what be admirable in character.
Mr. Garth be not at the office, and Fred ride on to his house, which
be a little way outside the town--a homely place with an orchard in
front of it, a rambling, old-fashion, half-timbere building, which
before the town have spread have be a farm-house, but be now
surround with the private garden of the townsman. we get the fonder
of our house if they have a physiognomy of their own, as our friend
have. the Garth family, which be rather a large one, for Mary have
four brother and one sister, be very fond of their old house, from
which all the good furniture have long be sell. Fred like it too,
know it by heart even to the attic which smell deliciously of apple
and quince, and until to-day he have never come to it without pleasant
expectation; but his heart beat uneasily now with the sense that he
should probably have to make his confession before Mrs. Garth, of whom
he be rather more in awe than of her husband. not that she be
inclined to sarcasm and to impulsive sally, as Mary be. in her
present matronly age at least, Mrs. Garth never commit herself by
over-hasty speech; have, as she say, bear the yoke in her youth,
and learn self-control. she have that rare sense which discern what
be unalterable, and submit to it without murmur. adore her
husband's virtue, she have very early make up her mind to his
incapacity of mind his own interest, and have meet the consequence
cheerfully. she have be magnanimous enough to renounce all pride in
teapot or child's frilling, and have never pour any pathetic
confidence into the ear of her feminine neighbor concern Mr.
Garth's want of prudence and the sum he might have have if he have be
like other man. hence these fair neighbor think she either proud or
eccentric, and sometimes speak of she to their husband as "your fine
Mrs. Garth." she be not without her criticism of they in return, be
more accurately instruct than most matron in Middlemarch, and--where
be the blameless woman?--apt to be a little severe towards her own sex,
which in her opinion be frame to be entirely subordinate. on the
other hand, she be disproportionately indulgent towards the failing
of man, and be often hear to say that these be natural. also, it
must be admit that Mrs. Garth be a trifle too emphatic in her
resistance to what she hold to be folly: the passage from governess
into housewife have work itself a little too strongly into her
consciousness, and she rarely forget that while her grammar and accent
be above the town standard, she wear a plain cap, cook the family
dinner, and darn all the stocking. she have sometimes take pupil
in a peripatetic fashion, make they follow she about in the kitchen
with their book or slate. she think it good for they to see that she
could make an excellent lather while she correct their blunder
"without looking,"--that a woman with her sleeve tuck up above her
elbow might know all about the Subjunctive Mood or the Torrid
Zone--that, in short, she might possess "education" and other good
thing end in "tion," and worthy to be pronounce emphatically,
without be a useless doll. when she make remark to this edifying
effect, she have a firm little frown on her brow, which yet do not
hinder her face from look benevolent, and her word which come forth
like a procession be utter in a fervid agreeable contralto.
certainly, the exemplary Mrs. Garth have her droll aspect, but her
character sustain her oddity, as a very fine wine sustain a flavor
of skin.
towards Fred Vincy she have a motherly feeling, and have always be
dispose to excuse his error, though she would probably not have
excuse Mary for engage herself to he, her daughter be include
in that more rigorous judgment which she apply to her own sex. but
this very fact of her exceptional indulgence towards he make it the
hard to Fred that he must now inevitably sink in her opinion. and
the circumstance of his visit turn out to be still more unpleasant
than he have expect; for Caleb Garth have go out early to look at
some repair not far off. Mrs. Garth at certain hour be always in
the kitchen, and this morning she be carry on several occupation
at once there--make her pie at the well-scour deal table on one
side of that airy room, observe Sally's movement at the oven and
dough-tub through an open door, and give lesson to her young boy
and girl, who be stand opposite to she at the table with their
book and slate before they. a tub and a clothe-horse at the other
end of the kitchen indicate an intermittent wash of small thing also
go on.
Mrs. Garth, with her sleeve turn above her elbow, deftly handle
her pastry--apply her roll-pin and give ornamental pinch,
while she expound with grammatical fervor what be the right view
about the concord of verb and pronoun with "noun of multitude or
signify many," be a sight agreeably amusing. she be of the same
curly-haire, square-face type as Mary, but handsomer, with more
delicacy of feature, a pale skin, a solid matronly figure, and a
remarkable firmness of glance. in her snowy-frille cap she remind
one of that delightful Frenchwoman whom we have all see marketing,
basket on arm. look at the mother, you might hope that the daughter
would become like she, which be a prospective advantage equal to a
dowry--the mother too often stand behind the daughter like a
malignant prophecy--"Such as I be, she will shortly be."
"now let we go through that once more," say Mrs. Garth, pinch an
apple-puff which seem to distract Ben, an energetic young male with a
heavy brow, from due attention to the lesson. "'not without regard to
the import of the word as convey unity or plurality of idea'--tell
I again what that mean, Ben."
(Mrs. Garth, like more celebrated educator, have her favorite ancient
path, and in a general wreck of society would have try to hold she
"Lindley Murray" above the wave.)
"oh--it mean--you must think what you mean," say Ben, rather
peevishly. "I hate grammar. whatbe the use of it?"
"to teach you to speak and write correctly, so that you can be
understand," say Mrs. Garth, with severe precision. "should you like
to speak as old Job do?"
"yes," say Ben, stoutly; "itbe funny. he say, 'Yo goo'--thatbe
just as good as 'you go.'"
"but he say, 'a ship's in the garden,' instead of 'a sheep,'" say
Letty, with an air of superiority. "you might think he mean a ship
off the sea."
"no, you mightnot, if you benot silly," say Ben. "how could a ship
off the sea come there?"
"these thing belong only to pronunciation, which be the least part of
grammar," say Mrs. Garth. "that apple-peel be to be eat by the
pig, Ben; if you eat it, I must give they your piece of pasty. Job
have only to speak about very plain thing. how do you think you would
write or speak about anything more difficult, if you know no more of
grammar than he do? you would use wrong word, and put word in the
wrong place, and instead of make people understand you, they would
turn away from you as a tiresome person. what would you do then?"
"I shouldnot care, I should leave off," say Ben, with a sense that
this be an agreeable issue where grammar be concern.
"I see you be get tired and stupid, Ben," say Mrs. Garth,
accustom to these obstructive argument from her male offspring.
have finish her pie, she move towards the clothe-horse, and
say, "come here and tell I the story I tell you on Wednesday, about
Cincinnatus."
"I know! he be a farmer," say Ben.
"now, Ben, he be a Roman--let _I_ tell," say Letty, use her elbow
contentiously.
"you silly thing, he be a roman farmer, and he be plough."
"yes, but before that--that donot come first--people want he," say
Letty.
"well, but you must say what sort of a man he be first," insist Ben.
"he be a wise man, like my father, and that make the people want his
advice. and he be a brave man, and could fight. and so could my
father--couldn't he, mother?"
"now, Ben, let I tell the story straight on, as mother tell it we,"
say Letty, frown. "please, mother, tell Ben not to speak."
"Letty, I be ashamed of you," say her mother, wring out the cap
from the tub. "when your brother begin, you ought to have wait to
see if he could not tell the story. how rude you look, push and
frowning, as if you want to conquer with your elbow! Cincinnatus, I
be sure, would have be sorry to see his daughter behave so." (Mrs.
Garth deliver this awful sentence with much majesty of enunciation,
and Letty feel that between repressed volubility and general disesteem,
that of the Romans inclusive, life be already a painful affair.) "now,
Ben."
"well--oh--well--why, there be a great deal of fighting, and they be
all blockhead, and--I cannot tell it just how you tell it--but they
want a man to be captain and king and everything--"
"Dictator, now," say Letty, with injured look, and not without a wish
to make her mother repent.
"very well, dictator!" say Ben, contemptuously. "but that benot a
good word: he donot tell they to write on slate."
"come, come, Ben, you be not so ignorant as that," say Mrs. Garth,
carefully serious. "Hark, there be a knock at the door! Run, Letty,
and open it."
the knock be Fred's; and when Letty say that her father be not in
yet, but that her mother be in the kitchen, Fred have no alternative.
he could not depart from his usual practice of go to see Mrs. Garth
in the kitchen if she happen to be at work there. he put his arm
round Letty's neck silently, and lead she into the kitchen without his
usual joke and caress.
Mrs. Garth be surprised to see Fred at this hour, but surprise be not
a feeling that she be give to express, and she only say, quietly
continue her work--
"you, Fred, so early in the day? you look quite pale. have anything
happen?"
"I want to speak to Mr. Garth," say Fred, not yet ready to say
more--"and to you also," he add, after a little pause, for he have no
doubt that Mrs. Garth know everything about the bill, and he must in the
end speak of it before she, if not to she solely.
"Caleb will be in again in a few minute," say Mrs. Garth, who
imagine some trouble between Fred and his father. "he be sure not to
be long, because he have some work at his desk that must be do this
morning. do you mind stay with I, while I finish my matter here?"
"but we neednot go on about Cincinnatus, need we?" say Ben, who have
take Fred's whip out of his hand, and be try its efficiency on the
cat.
"no, go out now. but put that whip down. how very mean of you to whip
poor old Tortoise! pray take the whip from he, Fred."
"come, old boy, give it I," say Fred, put out his hand.
"will you let I ride on your horse to-day?" say Ben, render up the
whip, with an air of not be oblige to do it.
"not to-day--another time. I be not rid my own horse."
"shall you see Mary to-day?"
"yes, I think so," say Fred, with an unpleasant twinge.
"tell she to come home soon, and play at forfeit, and make fun."
"enough, enough, Ben! run away," say Mrs. Garth, see that Fred be
tease. . .
"be Letty and Ben your only pupil now, Mrs. Garth?" say Fred, when
the child be go and it be needful to say something that would
pass the time. he be not yet sure whether he should wait for Mr.
Garth, or use any good opportunity in conversation to confess to Mrs.
Garth herself, give she the money and ride away.
"one--only one. Fanny Hackbutt come at half past eleven. I be not
get a great income now," say Mrs. Garth, smile. "I be at a low
ebb with pupil. but I have save my little purse for Alfred's
premium: I have ninety-two pound. he can go to Mr. Hanmer's now; he
be just at the right age."
this do not lead well towards the news that Mr. Garth be on the brink
of lose ninety-two pound and more. Fred be silent. "young
gentleman who go to college be rather more costly than that," Mrs.
Garth innocently continue, pull out the edging on a cap-border.
"and Caleb think that Alfred will turn out a distinguished engineer:
he want to give the boy a good chance. there he be! I hear he
come in. we will go to he in the parlor, shall we?"
when they enter the parlor Caleb have throw down his hat and be
seat at his desk.
"what! Fred, my boy!" he say, in a tone of mild surprise, hold his
pen still undippe; "you be here betime." but miss the usual
expression of cheerful greeting in Fred's face, he immediately add,
"be there anything up at home?--anythe the matter?"
"yes, Mr. Garth, I be come to tell something that I be afraid will give
you a bad opinion of I. I be come to tell you and Mrs. Garth that I
cannot keep my word. I cannot find the money to meet the bill after all.
I have be unfortunate; I have only get these fifty pound towards the
hundred and sixty."
while Fred be speak, he have take out the note and lay they on
the desk before Mr. Garth. he have burst forth at once with the plain
fact, feel boyishly miserable and without verbal resource. Mrs.
Garth be mutely astonish, and look at her husband for an
explanation. Caleb blush, and after a little pause said--
"oh, I donot tell you, Susan: I put my name to a bill for Fred; it be
for a hundred and sixty pound. he make sure he could meet it himself."
there be an evident change in Mrs. Garth's face, but it be like a
change below the surface of water which remain smooth. she fix her
eye on Fred, saying--
"I suppose you have ask your father for the rest of the money and he
have refuse you."
"no," say Fred, bite his lip, and speak with more difficulty;
"but I know it will be of no use to ask he; and unless it be of use,
I should not like to mention Mr. Garth's name in the matter."
"it have come at an unfortunate time," say Caleb, in his hesitating
way, look down at the note and nervously finger the paper,
"Christmas upon we--i'm rather hard up just now. you see, I have to
cut out everything like a tailor with short measure. what can we do,
Susan? I shall want every farthing we have in the bank. itbe a
hundred and ten pound, the deuce take it!"
"I must give you the ninety-two pound that I have put by for Alfred's
premium," say Mrs. Garth, gravely and decisively, though a nice ear
might have discern a slight tremor in some of the word. "and I have
no doubt that Mary have twenty pound save from her salary by this
time. she will advance it."
Mrs. Garth have not again look at Fred, and be not in the least
calculate what word she should use to cut he the most effectively.
like the eccentric woman she be, she be at present absorb in
consider what be to be do, and do not fancy that the end could
be well achieve by bitter remark or explosion. but she have make
Fred feel for the first time something like the tooth of remorse.
curiously enough, his pain in the affair beforehand have consist
almost entirely in the sense that he must seem dishonorable, and sink
in the opinion of the Garths: he have not occupy himself with the
inconvenience and possible injury that his breach might occasion they,
for this exercise of the imagination on other people's need be not
common with hopeful young gentleman. indeed we be most of we bring
up in the notion that the high motive for not do a wrong be
something irrespective of the being who would suffer the wrong. but
at this moment he suddenly see himself as a pitiful rascal who be
rob two woman of their saving.
"I shall certainly pay it all, Mrs. Garth--ultimately," he stammer
out.
"yes, ultimately," say Mrs. Garth, who have a special dislike to
fine word on ugly occasion, could not now repress an epigram. "but
boy cannot well be apprentice ultimately: they should be apprentice
at fifteen." she have never be so little inclined to make excuse for
Fred.
"I be the most in the wrong, Susan," say Caleb. "Fred make sure of
find the money. but Ihave no business to be finger bill. I
suppose you have look all round and try all honest mean?" he
add, fix his merciful gray eye on Fred. Caleb be too delicate,
to specify Mr. Featherstone.
"yes, I have try everything--I really have. I should have have a
hundred and thirty pound ready but for a misfortune with a horse which
I be about to sell. my uncle have give I eighty pound, and I pay
away thirty with my old horse in order to get another which I be go
to sell for eighty or more--I mean to go without a horse--but now it
have turn out vicious and lamed itself. I wish I and the horse too
have be at the devil, before I have bring this on you. therebe no
one else I care so much for: you and Mrs. Garth have always be so
kind to I. however, itbe no use say that. you will always think
I a rascal now."
Fred turn round and hurry out of the room, conscious that he be
get rather womanish, and feel confusedly that his be sorry
be not of much use to the Garths. they could see he mount, and
quickly pass through the gate.
"I be disappoint in Fred Vincy," say Mrs. Garth. "I would not have
believe beforehand that he would have draw you into his debt. I
know he be extravagant, but I do not think that he would be so mean
as to hang his risk on his old friend, who could the least afford
to lose."
"I be a fool, Susan:"
"that you be," say the wife, nod and smile. "but I should not
have go to publish it in the market-place. why should you keep such
thing from I? it be just so with your button: you let they burst
off without tell I, and go out with your wristband hanging. if I
have only know I might have be ready with some well plan."
"you be sadly cut up, I know, Susan," say Caleb, look feelingly at
she. "I cannot abide your lose the money youhave scrap together for
Alfred."
"it be very well that I _have_ scrap it together; and it be you who
will have to suffer, for you must teach the boy yourself. you must
give up your bad habit. some man take to drinking, and you have take
to work without pay. you must indulge yourself a little less in
that. and you must ride over to Mary, and ask the child what money she
have."
Caleb have push his chair back, and be lean forward, shake his
head slowly, and fit his finger-tip together with much nicety.
"Poor Mary!" he say. "Susan," he go on in a lowered tone, "Ibe
afraid she may be fond of Fred."
"oh no! she always laugh at he; and he be not likely to think of she
in any other than a brotherly way."
Caleb make no rejoinder, but presently lower his spectacle, draw up
his chair to the desk, and say, "deuce take the bill--I wish it be
at Hanover! these thing be a sad interruption to business!"
the first part of this speech comprise his whole store of maledictory
expression, and be utter with a slight snarl easy to imagine. but
it would be difficult to convey to those who never hear he utter the
word "business," the peculiar tone of fervid veneration, of religious
regard, in which he wrap it, as a consecrated symbol be wrap in
its gold-fringe linen.
Caleb Garth often shake his head in meditation on the value, the
indispensable might of that myriad-head, myriad-hand labor by which
the social body be feed, clothe, and house. it have lay hold of his
imagination in boyhood. the echo of the great hammer where roof or
keel be a-making, the signal-shout of the workman, the roar of the
furnace, the thunder and plash of the engine, be a sublime music to
he; the felling and lading of timber, and the huge trunk vibrate
star-like in the distance along the highway, the crane at work on the
wharf, the pile-up produce in warehouse, the precision and variety of
muscular effort wherever exact work have to be turn out,--all these
sight of his youth have act on he as poetry without the aid of the
poet, have make a philosophy for he without the aid of philosopher,
a religion without the aid of theology. his early ambition have be to
have as effective a share as possible in this sublime labor, which be
peculiarly dignified by he with the name of "business;" and though he
have only be a short time under a surveyor, and have be chiefly his
own teacher, he know more of land, building, and mining than most of
the special man in the county.
his classification of human employment be rather crude, and, like the
category of more celebrated man, would not be acceptable in these
advanced time. he divide they into "business, politic, preach,
learning, and amusement." he have nothing to say against the last four;
but he regard they as a reverential pagan regard other god than
his own. in the same way, he think very well of all rank, but he
would not himself have like to be of any rank in which he have not such
close contact with "business" as to get often honorably decorate with
mark of dust and mortar, the damp of the engine, or the sweet soil of
the wood and field. though he have never regard himself as other
than an orthodox Christian, and would argue on prevenient grace if the
subject be propose to he, I think his virtual divinity be good
practical scheme, accurate work, and the faithful completion of
undertaking: his prince of darkness be a slack workman. but there
be no spirit of denial in Caleb, and the world seem so wondrous to
he that he be ready to accept any number of system, like any number
of firmament, if they do not obviously interfere with the good
land-drainage, solid building, correct measuring, and judicious boring
(for coal). in fact, he have a reverential soul with a strong practical
intelligence. but he could not manage finance: he know value well,
but he have no keenness of imagination for monetary result in the shape
of profit and loss: and have ascertain this to his cost, he
determine to give up all form of his beloved "business" which
require that talent. he give himself up entirely to the many kind of
work which he could do without handle capital, and be one of those
precious man within his own district whom everybody would choose to
work for they, because he do his work well, charge very little, and
often decline to charge at all. it be no wonder, then, that the
Garths be poor, and "live in a small way." however, they do not
mind it.
CHAPTER XXV.
"love seeketh not itself to please,
nor for itself hath any care
but for another give its ease
and build a heaven in hell's despair.
. . . . . . .
love seeketh only self to please,
to bind another to its delight,
joy in another's loss of ease,
and build a hell in heaven's despite."
--W. blake: song of experience
Fred Vincy want to arrive at Stone Court when Mary could not expect
he, and when his uncle be not down-stair in that case she might be
sit alone in the wainscote parlor. he leave his horse in the yard
to avoid make a noise on the gravel in front, and enter the parlor
without other notice than the noise of the door-handle. Mary be in her
usual corner, laugh over Mrs. Piozzi's recollection of Johnson, and
look up with the fun still in her face. it gradually fade as she
see Fred approach she without speak, and stand before she with his
elbow on the mantel-piece, look ill. she too be silent, only
raise her eye to he inquiringly.
"Mary," he begin, "I be a good-for-nothing blackguard."
"I should think one of those epithet would do at a time," say Mary,
try to smile, but feel alarmed.
"I know you will never think well of I any more. you will think I a
liar. you will think I dishonest. you will think I donot care for
you, or your father and mother. you always do make the bad of I, I
know."
"I cannot deny that I shall think all that of you, Fred, if you give I
good reason. but please to tell I at once what you have do. I
would rather know the painful truth than imagine it."
"I owe money--a hundred and sixty pound. I ask your father to put
his name to a bill. I think it would not signify to he. I make
sure of pay the money myself, and I have try as hard as I could.
and now, I have be so unlucky--a horse have turn out badly--I can
only pay fifty pound. and I cannot ask my father for the money: he
would not give I a farthing. and my uncle give I a hundred a little
while ago. so what can I do? and now your father have no ready money
to spare, and your mother will have to pay away her ninety-two pound
that she have save, and she say your saving must go too. you see
what a--"
"oh, poor mother, poor father!" say Mary, her eye fill with tear,
and a little sob rise which she try to repress. she look
straight before she and take no notice of Fred, all the consequence at
home become present to she. he too remain silent for some moment,
feel more miserable than ever. "I wouldnot have hurt you for the
world, Mary," he say at last. "you can never forgive I."
"what do it matter whether I forgive you?" say Mary, passionately.
"would that make it any well for my mother to lose the money she have
be earn by lesson for four year, that she might send Alfred to
Mr. Hanmer's? should you think all that pleasant enough if I forgave
you?"
"say what you like, Mary. I deserve it all."
"I donot want to say anything," say Mary, more quietly, "and my anger
be of no use." she dry her eye, throw aside her book, rise and
fetch her sewing.
Fred follow she with his eye, hop that they would meet her, and
in that way find access for his imploring penitence. but no! Mary
could easily avoid look upward.
"I do care about your mother's money go," he say, when she be
seat again and sew quickly. "I want to ask you, Mary--don't
you think that Mr. Featherstone--if you be to tell he--tell he, I
mean, about apprentice Alfred--would advance the money?"
"my family be not fond of beg, Fred. we would rather work for our
money. besides, you say that Mr. Featherstone have lately give you a
hundred pound. he rarely make present; he have never make present
to we. I be sure my father will not ask he for anything; and even if
I choose to beg of he, it would be of no use."
"I be so miserable, Mary--if you know how miserable I be, you would be
sorry for I."
"there be other thing to be more sorry for than that. but selfish
people always think their own discomfort of more importance than
anything else in the world. I see enough of that every day."
"it be hardly fair to call I selfish. if you know what thing other
young man do, you would think I a good way off the bad."
"I know that people who spend a great deal of money on themselves
without know how they shall pay, must be selfish. they be always
think of what they can get for themselves, and not of what other
people may lose."
"any man may be unfortunate, Mary, and find himself unable to pay when
he mean it. there be not a well man in the world than your father,
and yet he get into trouble."
"how dare you make any comparison between my father and you, Fred?"
say Mary, in a deep tone of indignation. "he never get into trouble
by think of his own idle pleasure, but because he be always
think of the work he be do for other people. and he have fare
hard, and work hard to make good everybody's loss."
"and you think that I shall never try to make good anything, Mary. it
be not generous to believe the bad of a man. when you have get any
power over he, I think you might try and use it to make he well;
but that be what you never do. however, Ibe go," Fred end,
languidly. "I shall never speak to you about anything again. Ibe very
sorry for all the trouble Ihave cause--thatbe all."
Mary have drop her work out of her hand and look up. there be
often something maternal even in a girlish love, and Mary's hard
experience have work her nature to an impressibility very different
from that hard slight thing which we call girlishness. at Fred's last
word she feel an instantaneous pang, something like what a mother
feel at the imagine sob or cry of her naughty truant child, which
may lose itself and get harm. and when, look up, her eye meet his
dull despairing glance, her pity for he surmount her anger and all
her other anxiety.
"oh, Fred, how ill you look! sit down a moment. donot go yet. let I
tell uncle that you be here. he have be wonder that he have not
see you for a whole week." Mary speak hurriedly, say the word
that come first without know very well what they be, but say
they in a half-soothe half-beseech tone, and rise as if to go
away to Mr. Featherstone. of course Fred feel as if the cloud have
part and a gleam have come: he move and stand in her way.
"say one word, Mary, and I will do anything. say you will not think
the bad of I--will not give I up altogether."
"as if it be any pleasure to I to think ill of you," say Mary, in a
mournful tone. "as if it be not very painful to I to see you an
idle frivolous creature. how can you bear to be so contemptible, when
other be work and strive, and there be so many thing to be
do--how can you bear to be fit for nothing in the world that be
useful? and with so much good in your disposition, fred,--you might
be worth a great deal."
"I will try to be anything you like, Mary, if you will say that you
love I."
"I should be ashamed to say that I love a man who must always be
hang on other, and reckon on what they would do for he. what
will you be when you be forty? like Mr. Bowyer, I suppose--just as
idle, live in Mrs. Beck's front parlor--fat and shabby, hop
somebody will invite you to dinner--spend your morning in learn a
comic song--oh no! learn a tune on the flute."
Mary's lip have begin to curl with a smile as soon as she have ask
that question about Fred's future (young soul be mobile), and before
she end, her face have its full illumination of fun. to he it be
like the cessation of an ache that Mary could laugh at he, and with a
passive sort of smile he try to reach her hand; but she slip away
quickly towards the door and say, "I shall tell uncle. you _must_ see
he for a moment or two."
Fred secretly feel that his future be guarantee against the
fulfilment of Mary's sarcastic prophecy, apart from that "anything"
which he be ready to do if she would define it he never dare in
Mary's presence to approach the subject of his expectation from Mr.
Featherstone, and she always ignore they, as if everything depend on
himself. but if ever he actually come into the property, she must
recognize the change in his position. all this pass through his mind
somewhat languidly, before he go up to see his uncle. he stay but
a little while, excuse himself on the ground that he have a cold; and
Mary do not reappear before he leave the house. but as he ride home,
he begin to be more conscious of be ill, than of be melancholy.
when Caleb Garth arrive at Stone Court soon after dusk, Mary be not
surprised, although he seldom have leisure for pay she a visit, and
be not at all fond of have to talk with Mr. Featherstone. the old
man, on the other hand, feel himself ill at ease with a brother-in-law
whom he could not annoy, who do not mind about be consider poor,
have nothing to ask of he, and understand all kind of farming and
mining business well than he do. but Mary have feel sure that her
parent would want to see she, and if her father have not come, she
would have obtain leave to go home for an hour or two the next day.
after discuss price during tea with Mr. Featherstone Caleb rise to
bid he good-by, and say, "I want to speak to you, Mary."
she take a candle into another large parlor, where there be no fire,
and set down the feeble light on the dark mahogany table, turn
round to her father, and put her arm round his neck kiss he
with childish kiss which he delight in,--the expression of his
large brow soften as the expression of a great beautiful dog
soften when it be caress. Mary be his favorite child, and whatever
Susan might say, and right as she be on all other subject, Caleb
think it natural that Fred or any one else should think Mary more
lovable than other girl.
"Ihave get something to tell you, my dear," say Caleb in his hesitating
way. "no very good news; but then it might be bad."
"about money, father? I think I know what it be."
"ay? how can that be? you see, Ihave be a bit of a fool again, and
put my name to a bill, and now it come to pay; and your mother have
get to part with her saving, thatbe the bad of it, and even they
willnot quite make thing even. we want a hundred and ten pound: your
mother have ninety-two, and I have none to spare in the bank; and she
think that you have some saving."
"oh yes; I have more than four-and-twenty pound. I think you would
come, father, so I put it in my bag. see! beautiful white note and
gold."
Mary take out the fold money from her reticule and put it into her
father's hand.
"well, but how--we only want eighteen--here, put the rest back,
child,--but how do you know about it?" say Caleb, who, in his
unconquerable indifference to money, be begin to be chiefly
concerned about the relation the affair might have to Mary's affection.
"Fred tell I this morning."
"ah! do he come on purpose?"
"yes, I think so. he be a good deal distressed."
"Ibe afraid Fred be not to be trust, Mary," say the father, with
hesitate tenderness. "he mean well than he act, perhaps. but I
should think it a pity for any body's happiness to be wrap up in
he, and so would your mother."
"and so should I, father," say Mary, not look up, but put the
back of her father's hand against her cheek.
"I donot want to pry, my dear. but I be afraid there might be
something between you and Fred, and I want to caution you. you see,
Mary"--here Caleb's voice become more tender; he have be push his
hat about on the table and look at it, but finally he turn his
eye on his daughter--"a woman, let she be as good as she may, have get
to put up with the life her husband make for she. your mother have have
to put up with a good deal because of I."
Mary turn the back of her father's hand to her lip and smile at he.
"well, well, nobodybe perfect, but"--here Mr. Garth shake his head to
help out the inadequacy of words--"what I be think of be--what it
must be for a wife when shebe never sure of her husband, when he havenot
get a principle in he to make he more afraid of do the wrong thing
by other than of get his own toe pinch. thatbe the long and
the short of it, Mary. young folk may get fond of each other before
they know what life be, and they may think it all holiday if they can
only get together; but it soon turn into working day, my dear.
however, you have more sense than most, and you havenot be keep in
cotton-wool: there may be no occasion for I to say this, but a father
tremble for his daughter, and you be all by yourself here."
"donot fear for I, father," say Mary, gravely meet her father's
eye; "Fred have always be very good to I; he be kind-hearted and
affectionate, and not false, I think, with all his self-indulgence. but
I will never engage myself to one who have no manly independence, and
who go on loiter away his time on the chance that other will
provide for he. you and my mother have teach I too much pride for
that."
"thatbe right--thatbe right. then I be easy," say Mr. Garth, take
up his hat. "but itbe hard to run away with your earning, eh child."
"Father!" say Mary, in her deep tone of remonstrance. "take
pocketful of love besides to they all at home," be her last word
before he close the outer door on himself.
"I suppose your father want your earning," say old Mr.
Featherstone, with his usual power of unpleasant surmise, when Mary
return to he. "he make but a tight fit, I reckon. yoube of age
now; you ought to be save for yourself."
"I consider my father and mother the good part of myself, sir," say
Mary, coldly.
Mr. Featherstone grunt: he could not deny that an ordinary sort of
girl like she might be expect to be useful, so he think of another
rejoinder, disagreeable enough to be always apropos. "if Fred Vincy
come to-morrow, now, donot you keep he chatter: let he come up to
I."
CHAPTER XXVI.
"he beat I and I rail at he: o worthy satisfaction!
would it be otherwise--that I could beat he while
he rail at me.--"
--Troilus and Cressida.
but Fred do not go to Stone Court the next day, for reason that be
quite peremptory. from those visit to unsanitary Houndsley street in
search of Diamond, he have bring back not only a bad bargain in
horse-flesh, but the further misfortune of some ailment which for a day
or two have deem mere depression and headache, but which get so much
bad when he return from his visit to Stone Court that, go into
the dining-room, he throw himself on the sofa, and in answer to his
mother's anxious question, say, "I feel very ill: I think you must
send for Wrench."
Wrench come, but do not apprehend anything serious, speak of a "slight
derangement," and do not speak of come again on the morrow. he have
a due value for the Vincys' house, but the wary man be apt to be
dull by routine, and on worried morning will sometimes go through
their business with the zest of the daily bell-ringer. Mr. Wrench be
a small, neat, bilious man, with a well-dress wig: he have a laborious
practice, an irascible temper, a lymphatic wife and seven child; and
he be already rather late before set out on a four-mile drive to
meet Dr. Minchin on the other side of Tipton, the decease of Hicks, a
rural practitioner, have increase Middlemarch practice in that
direction. great statesman err, and why not small medical man? Mr.
Wrench do not neglect send the usual white parcel, which this time
have black and drastic content. their effect be not alleviate to
poor Fred, who, however, unwilling as he say to believe that he be
"in for an illness," rise at his usual easy hour the next morning and
go down-stair mean to breakfast, but succeed in nothing but in
sitting and shiver by the fire. Mr. Wrench be again send for, but
be go on his round, and Mrs. Vincy see her darling's change
look and general misery, begin to cry and say she would send for Dr.
Sprague.
"oh, nonsense, mother! itbe nothing," say Fred, put out his hot
dry hand to she, "I shall soon be all right. I must have take cold in
that nasty damp ride."
"Mamma!" say Rosamond, who be seat near the window (the dining-room
window look on that highly respectable street call Lowick Gate),
"there be Mr. Lydgate, stop to speak to some one. if I be you I
would call he in. he have cure Ellen Bulstrode. they say he cure
every one."
Mrs. Vincy spring to the window and open it in an instant, think
only of Fred and not of medical etiquette. Lydgate be only two yard
off on the other side of some iron palisading, and turn round at the
sudden sound of the sash, before she call to he. in two minute he
be in the room, and Rosamond go out, after wait just long enough
to show a pretty anxiety conflict with her sense of what be
become.
Lydgate have to hear a narrative in which Mrs. Vincy's mind insist
with remarkable instinct on every point of minor importance, especially
on what Mr. Wrench have say and have not say about come again. that
there might be an awkward affair with Wrench, Lydgate see at once; but
the ease be serious enough to make he dismiss that consideration: he
be convince that Fred be in the pink-skinned stage of typhoid fever,
and that he have take just the wrong medicine. he must go to bed
immediately, must have a regular nurse, and various appliance and
precaution must be use, about which Lydgate be particular. poor
Mrs. Vincy's terror at these indication of danger find vent in such
word as come most easily. she think it "very ill usage on the part
of Mr. Wrench, who have attend their house so many year in preference
to Mr. Peacock, though Mr. Peacock be equally a friend. why Mr.
Wrench should neglect her child more than other, she could not for
the life of her understand. he have not neglect Mrs. Larcher's when
they have the measle, nor indeed would Mrs. Vincy have wish that he
should. and if anything should happen--"
here poor Mrs. Vincy's spirit quite break down, and her niobe throat
and good-humor face be sadly convulse. this be in the hall out
of Fred's hearing, but Rosamond have open the drawing-room door, and
now come forward anxiously. Lydgate apologize for Mr. Wrench, say
that the symptom yesterday might have be disguise, and that this
form of fever be very equivocal in its beginning: he would go
immediately to the druggist's and have a prescription make up in order
to lose no time, but he would write to Mr. Wrench and tell he what have
be do.
"but you must come again--you must go on attend Fred. I cannot have
my boy leave to anybody who may come or not. I bear nobody ill-will,
thank God, and Mr. Wrench save I in the pleurisy, but hewould well
have let I die--if--if--"
"I will meet Mr. Wrench here, then, shall I?" say Lydgate, really
believe that Wrench be not well prepared to deal wisely with a case
of this kind.
"pray make that arrangement, Mr. Lydgate," say Rosamond, come to her
mother's aid, and support her arm to lead she away.
when Mr. Vincy come home he be very angry with Wrench, and do not
care if he never come into his house again. lydgate should go on now,
whether Wrench like it or not. it be no joke to have fever in the
house. everybody must be send to now, not to come to dinner on
Thursday. and Pritchard neednot get up any wine: brandy be the good
thing against infection. "I shall drink brandy," add Mr. Vincy,
emphatically--as much as to say, this be not an occasion for fire
with blank-cartridge. "hebe an uncommonly unfortunate lad, be Fred.
hewould need have--some luck by-and-by to make up for all this--else I
donot know whowould have an eld son."
"donot say so, Vincy," say the mother, with a quivering lip, "if you
donot want he to be take from I."
"it will worret you to death, Lucy; _that_ I can see," say Mr. Vincy,
more mildly. "however, Wrench shall know what I think of the matter."
(what Mr. Vincy think confusedly be, that the fever might somehow
have be hinder if Wrench have show the proper solicitude about
his--the Mayor's--family.) "Ibe the last man to give in to the cry
about new doctor, or new parson either--whether theybe Bulstrode's
man or not. but Wrench shall know what I think, take it as he will."
Wrench do not take it at all well. Lydgate be as polite as he could
be in his offhand way, but politeness in a man who have place you at a
disadvantage be only an additional exasperation, especially if he
happen to have be an object of dislike beforehand. country
practitioner use to be an irritable specie, susceptible on the point
of honor; and Mr. Wrench be one of the most irritable among they. he
do not refuse to meet Lydgate in the evening, but his temper be
somewhat try on the occasion. he have to hear Mrs. Vincy say--
"oh, Mr. Wrench, what have I ever do that you should use I so?-- to
go away, and never to come again! and my boy might have be stretch
a corpse!"
Mr. Vincy, who have be keep up a sharp fire on the enemy Infection,
and be a good deal heat in consequence, start up when he hear
Wrench come in, and go into the hall to let he know what he think.
"Iwill tell you what, Wrench, this be beyond a joke," say the Mayor,
who of late have have to rebuke offender with an official air, and how
broaden himself by put his thumb in his armholes.-- "to let
fever get unawares into a house like this. there be some thing that
ought to be actionable, and be not so-- thatbe my opinion."
but irrational reproach be easy to bear than the sense of be
instruct, or rather the sense that a young man, like Lydgate,
inwardly consider he in need of instruction, for "in point of fact,"
Mr. Wrench afterwards say, Lydgate parade flighty, foreign notion,
which would not wear. he swallow his ire for the moment, but he
afterwards write to decline further attendance in the case. the house
might be a good one, but Mr. Wrench be not go to truckle to anybody
on a professional matter. he reflect, with much probability on his
side, that Lydgate would by-and-by be catch trip too, and that his
ungentlemanly attempt to discredit the sale of drug by his
professional brother, would by-and-by recoil on himself. he throw out
bite remark on Lydgate's trick, worthy only of a quack, to get
himself a factitious reputation with credulous people. that cannot about
cure be never get up by sound practitioner.
this be a point on which Lydgate smart as much as Wrench could
desire. to be puff by ignorance be not only humiliating, but
perilous, and not more enviable than the reputation of the
weather-prophet. he be impatient of the foolish expectation amidst
which all work must be carry on, and likely enough to damage himself
as much as Mr. Wrench could wish, by an unprofessional openness.
however, Lydgate be instal as medical attendant on the Vincys, and
the event be a subject of general conversation in Middlemarch. some
say, that the Vincys have behave scandalously, that Mr. Vincy have
threaten Wrench, and that Mrs. Vincy have accuse he of poison her
son. other be of opinion that Mr. Lydgate's pass by be
providential, that he be wonderfully clever in fever, and that
Bulstrode be in the right to bring he forward. many people believe
that Lydgatebe come to the town at all be really due to Bulstrode;
and Mrs. Taft, who be always count stitch and gather she
information in mislead fragment catch between the row of she
knitting, have get it into her head that Mr. Lydgate be a natural son
of Bulstrode's, a fact which seem to justify her suspicion of
evangelical layman.
she one day communicate this piece of knowledge to Mrs. Farebrother,
who do not fail to tell her son of it, observing--
"I should not be surprised at anything in Bulstrode, but I should be
sorry to think it of Mr. Lydgate."
"why, mother," say Mr. Farebrother, after an explosive laugh, "you
know very well that Lydgate be of a good family in the North. he never
hear of Bulstrode before he come here."
"that be satisfactory so far as Mr. Lydgate be concern, Camden," say
the old lady, with an air of precision.--"but as to Bulstrode--the
report may be true of some other son."
CHAPTER XXVII.
let the high Muse chant love Olympian:
we be but mortal, and must sing of man.
an eminent philosopher among my friend, who can dignify even your ugly
furniture by lift it into the serene light of science, have show I
this pregnant little fact. your pier-glass or extensive surface of
polished steel make to be rub by a housemaid, will be minutely and
multitudinously scratch in all direction; but place now against it a
light candle as a centre of illumination, and lo! the scratch will
seem to arrange themselves in a fine series of concentric circle round
that little sun. it be demonstrable that the scratch be go
everywhere impartially and it be only your candle which produce the
flattering illusion of a concentric arrangement, its light fall with
an exclusive optical selection. these thing be a parable. the
scratch be event, and the candle be the egoism of any person now
absent--of Miss Vincy, for example. Rosamond have a providence of her
own who have kindly make she more charming than other girl, and who
seem to have arrange Fred's illness and Mr. Wrench's mistake in
order to bring she and lydgate within effective proximity. it would
have be to contravene these arrangement if Rosamond have consent to
go away to Stone Court or elsewhere, as her parent wish she to do,
especially since Mr. Lydgate think the precaution needless.
therefore, while Miss Morgan and the child be send away to a
farmhouse the morning after Fred's illness have declare itself,
Rosamond refuse to leave papa and mamma.
poor mamma indeed be an object to touch any creature bear of woman;
and Mr. Vincy, who dot on his wife, be more alarmed on her account
than on Fred's. but for his insistence she would have take no rest:
her brightness be all bedim; unconscious of her costume which have
always be so fresh and gay, she be like a sick bird with languid eye
and plumage ruffle, her sens dull to the sight and sound that
use most to interest she. Fred's delirium, in which he seem to be
wander out of her reach, tear her heart. after her first outburst
against-Mr. Wrench she go about very quietly: her one low cry be to
Lydgate. she would follow he out of the room and put her hand on his
arm moan out, "save my boy." once she plead, "he have always be
good to I, Mr. Lydgate: he never have a hard word for his mother,"--as
if poor Fred's suffering be an accusation against he. all the
deep fibre of the mother's memory be stir, and the young man
whose voice take a gentler tone when he speak to she, be one with the
babe whom she have love, with a love new to she, before he be bear.
"I have good hope, Mrs. Vincy," Lydgate would say. "come down with I
and let we talk about the food." in that way he lead she to the parlor
where Rosamond be, and make a change for she, surprise she into
take some tea or broth which have be prepare for she. there be a
constant understanding between he and Rosamond on these matter. he
almost always see she before go to the sickroom, and she appeal to
he as to what she could do for mamma. her presence of mind and
adroitness in carry out his hint be admirable, and it be not
wonderful that the idea of see Rosamond begin to mingle itself with
his interest in the case. especially when the critical stage be
pass, and he begin to feel confident of Fred's recovery. in the more
doubtful time, he have advise call in Dr. Sprague (who, if he could,
would rather have remain neutral on Wrench's account); but after two
consultation, the conduct of the case be leave to Lydgate, and there
be every reason to make he assiduous. morning and evening he be at
Mr. Vincy's, and gradually the visit become cheerful as Fred become
simply feeble, and lie not only in need of the utmost petting but
conscious of it, so that Mrs. Vincy feel as if, after all, the illness
have make a festival for her tenderness.
both father and mother hold it an add reason for good spirit, when
old Mr. Featherstone send message by Lydgate, say that Fred-must
make haste and get well, as he, Peter Featherstone, could not do
without he, and miss his visit sadly. the old man himself be
get bedridden. Mrs. Vincy tell these message to Fred when he
could listen, and he turn towards she his delicate, pinched face,
from which all the thick blond hair have be cut away, and in which the
eye seem to have get large, yearn for some word about
Mary--wonder what she feel about his illness. no word pass his
lip; but "to hear with eye belong to love's rare wit," and the
mother in the fulness of her heart not only divine Fred's longing, but
feel ready for any sacrifice in order to satisfy he.
"if I can only see my boy strong again," she say, in her love folly;
"and who knows?--perhap master of Stone Court! and he can marry
anybody he like then."
"not if they willnot have I, mother," say Fred. the illness have make
he childish, and tear come as he speak.
"oh, take a bit of jelly, my dear," say Mrs. Vincy, secretly
incredulous of any such refusal.
she never leave Fred's side when her husband be not in the house, and
thus Rosamond be in the unusual position of be much alone.
Lydgate, naturally, never think of stay long with she, yet it
seem that the brief impersonal conversation they have together be
create that peculiar intimacy which consist in shyness. they be
oblige to look at each other in speak, and somehow the look
could not be carry through as the matter of course which it really
be. Lydgate begin to feel this sort of consciousness unpleasant and
one day look down, or anywhere, like an ill-work puppet. but this
turn out badly: the next day, Rosamond look down, and the
consequence be that when their eye meet again, both be more
conscious than before. there be no help for this in science, and as
Lydgate do not want to flirt, there seem to be no help for it in
folly. it be therefore a relief when neighbor no long consider
the house in quarantine, and when the chance of see Rosamond alone
be very much reduced.
but that intimacy of mutual embarrassment, in which each feel that the
other be feel something, have once exist, its effect be not to
be do away with. talk about the weather and other well-breed topic
be apt to seem a hollow device, and behavior can hardly become easy
unless it frankly recognize a mutual fascination--which of course need
not mean anything deep or serious. this be the way in which Rosamond
and Lydgate slide gracefully into ease, and make their intercourse
lively again. visitor come and go as usual, there be once more
music in the drawing-room, and all the extra hospitality of Mr. Vincy's
mayoralty return. lydgate, whenever he could, take his seat by
Rosamond's side, and linger to hear her music, call himself her
captive--meaning, all the while, not to be her captive. the
preposterousness of the notion that he could at once set up a
satisfactory establishment as a married man be a sufficient guarantee
against danger. this play at be a little in love be agreeable, and
do not interfere with graver pursuit. Flirtation, after all, be not
necessarily a singeing process. Rosamond, for her part, have never
enjoy the day so much in her life before: she be sure of be
admire by some one worth captivate, and she do not distinguish
flirtation from love, either in herself or in another. she seem to
be sail with a fair wind just whither she would go, and her thought
be much occupy with a handsome house in Lowick Gate which she hop
would by-and-by be vacant. she be quite determined, when she be
married, to rid herself adroitly of all the visitor who be not
agreeable to she at her father's; and she imagine the drawing-room in
her favorite house with various style of furniture.
certainly her thought be much occupy with Lydgate himself; he
seem to she almost perfect: if he have know his note so that his
enchantment under her music have be less like an emotional elephant's,
and if he have be able to discriminate well the refinement of her
taste in dress, she could hardly have mention a deficiency in he.
how different he be from young Plymdale or Mr. Caius Larcher! those
young man have not a notion of French, and could speak on no subject
with strike knowledge, except perhaps the dyeing and carry trade,
which of course they be ashamed to mention; they be middlemarch
gentry, elated with their silver-head whip and satin stock, but
embarrassed in their manner, and timidly jocose: even Fred be above
they, have at least the accent and manner of a university man.
whereas Lydgate be always listen to, bore himself with the careless
politeness of conscious superiority, and seem to have the right
clothe on by a certain natural affinity, without ever have to think
about they. Rosamond be proud when he enter the room, and when he
approach she with a distinguish smile, she have a delicious sense
that she be the object of enviable homage. if Lydgate have be aware
of all the pride he excite in that delicate bosom, he might have be
just as well pleased as any other man, even the most densely ignorant
of humoral pathology or fibrous tissue: he hold it one of the prettiest
attitude of the feminine mind to adore a man's pre-eminence without
too precise a knowledge of what it consist in. but Rosamond be not
one of those helpless girl who betray themselves unawares, and whose
behavior be awkwardly drive by their impulse, instead of be
steer by wary grace and propriety. do you imagine that her rapid
forecast and rumination concern house-furniture and society be
ever discernible in her conversation, even with her mamma? on the
contrary, she would have express the prettiest surprise and
disapprobation if she have hear that another young lady have be
detect in that immodest prematureness--indeed, would probably have
disbelieve in its possibility. for Rosamond never show any
unbecoming knowledge, and be always that combination of correct
sentiment, music, dancing, drawing, elegant note-writing, private
album for extract verse, and perfect blond loveliness, which make the
irresistible woman for the doomed man of that date. think no unfair
evil of she, pray: she have no wicked plot, nothing sordid or
mercenary; in fact, she never think of money except as something
necessary which other people would always provide. she be not in the
habit of devise falsehood, and if her statement be no direct clew
to fact, why, they be not intend in that light--they be among
her elegant accomplishment, intend to please. nature have inspire
many art in finish Mrs. Lemon's favorite pupil, who by general
consent (Fred's excepted) be a rare compound of beauty, cleverness,
and amiability.
Lydgate find it more and more agreeable to be with she, and there be
no constraint now, there be a delightful interchange of influence in
their eye, and what they say have that superfluity of meaning for
they, which be observable with some sense of flatness by a third
person; still they have no interview or aside from which a third
person need have be exclude. in fact, they flirt; and Lydgate be
secure in the belief that they do nothing else. if a man could not
love and be wise, surely he could flirt and be wise at the same time?
really, the man in Middlemarch, except Mr. Farebrother, be great
bore, and Lydgate do not care about commercial politic or card:
what be he to do for relaxation? he be often invite to the
Bulstrodes'; but the girl there be hardly out of the schoolroom; and
Mrs. Bulstrode's _naive_ way of conciliate piety and worldliness, the
nothingness of this life and the desirability of cut glass, the
consciousness at once of filthy rag and the good damask, be not a
sufficient relief from the weight of her husband's invariable
seriousness. the Vincys' house, with all its fault, be the
pleasanter by contrast; besides, it nourish Rosamond--sweet to look
at as a half-open blush-rose, and adorn with accomplishment for
the refined amusement of man.
but he make some enemy, other than medical, by his success with Miss
Vincy. one evening he come into the drawing-room rather late, when
several other visitor be there. the card-table have draw off the
elder, and Mr. Ned Plymdale (one of the good match in Middlemarch,
though not one of its lead mind) be in tete-a-tete with Rosamond.
he have bring the last "Keepsake," the gorgeous water-silk
publication which mark modern progress at that time; and he
consider himself very fortunate that he could be the first to look
over it with she, dwell on the lady and gentleman with shiny
copper-plate cheek and copper-plate smile, and point to comic
verse as capital and sentimental story as interesting. Rosamond be
gracious, and Mr. Ned be satisfied that he have the very good thing in
art and literature as a medium for "pay addresses"--the very thing
to please a nice girl. he have also reason, deep rather than
ostensible, for be satisfied with his own appearance. to
superficial observer his chin have too vanish an aspect, look as
if it be be gradually reabsorb. and it do indeed cause he
some difficulty about the fit of his satin stock, for which chin be
at that time useful.
"I think the Honorable Mrs. S. be something like you," say Mr. Ned.
he keep the book open at the bewitching portrait, and look at it
rather languishingly.
"her back be very large; she seem to have sit for that," say
Rosamond, not mean any satire, but think how red young Plymdale's
hand be, and wonder why Lydgate do not come. she go on with
her tat all the while.
"I do not say she be as beautiful as you be," say Mr. Ned,
venture to look from the portrait to its rival.
"I suspect you of be an adroit flatterer," say Rosamond, feel
sure that she should have to reject this young gentleman a second time.
but now Lydgate come in; the book be close before he reach
Rosamond's corner, and as he take his seat with easy confidence on the
other side of she, young Plymdale's jaw fall like a barometer towards
the cheerless side of change. Rosamond enjoy not only Lydgate's
presence but its effect: she like to excite jealousy.
"what a late comer you be!" she say, as they shake hand. "Mamma have
give you up a little while ago. how do you find Fred?"
"as usual; go on well, but slowly. I want he to go away--to Stone
Court, for example. but your mamma seem to have some objection."
"poor fellow!" say Rosamond, prettily. "you will see Fred so
change," she add, turn to the other suitor; "we have look to
Mr. Lydgate as our guardian angel during this illness."
Mr. Ned smile nervously, while lydgate, draw the "Keepsake" towards
he and open it, give a short scornful laugh and toss up his
chill, as if in wonderment at human folly.
"what be you laugh at so profanely?" say Rosamond, with bland
neutrality.
"I wonder which would turn out to be the silly--the engraving or
the writing here," say Lydgate, in his most convinced tone, while he
turn over the page quickly, seem to see all through the book in
no time, and show his large white hand to much advantage, as
Rosamond think. "do look at this bridegroom come out of church:
do you ever see such a 'sugar invention'--as the Elizabethans use
to say? do any haberdasher ever look so smirk? yet I will answer
for it the story make he one of the first gentleman in the land."
"you be so severe, I be frightened at you," say Rosamond, keep she
amusement duly moderate. poor young Plymdale have linger with
admiration over this very engraving, and his spirit be stir.
"there be a great many celebrated people write in the 'keepsake,' at
all event," he say, in a tone at once pique and timid. "this be the
first time I have hear it call silly."
"I think I shall turn round on you and accuse you of be a Goth,"
say Rosamond, look at Lydgate with a smile. "I suspect you know
nothing about Lady Blessington and L. E. L." Rosamond herself be not
without relish for these writer, but she do not readily commit
herself by admiration, and be alive to the slight hint that
anything be not, accord to Lydgate, in the very high taste.
"but Sir Walter Scott--I suppose Mr. Lydgate know he," say young
Plymdale, a little cheer by this advantage.
"oh, I read no literature now," say Lydgate, shut the book, and
push it away. "I read so much when I be a lad, that I suppose it
will last I all my life. I use to know Scott's poem by heart."
"I should like to know when you leave off," say Rosamond, "because then
I might be sure that I know something which you do not know."
"Mr. Lydgate would say that be not worth know," say Mr. Ned,
purposely caustic.
"on the contrary," say Lydgate, show no smart; but smile with
exasperating confidence at Rosamond. "it would be worth know by the
fact that Miss Vincy could tell it I."
Young Plymdale soon go to look at the whist-playing, think that
Lydgate be one of the most conceited, unpleasant fellow it have ever
be his ill-fortune to meet.
"how rash you be!" say Rosamond, inwardly delight. "do you see
that you have give offence?"
"what! be it Mr. Plymdale's book? I be sorry. I donot think about
it."
"I shall begin to admit what you say of yourself when you first come
here--that you be a bear, and want teaching by the bird."
"well, there be a bird who can teach I what she will. donot I listen
to her willingly?"
to Rosamond it seem as if she and Lydgate be as good as engage.
that they be some time to be engage have long be an idea in her
mind; and idea, we know, tend to a more solid kind of existence, the
necessary material be at hand. it be true, Lydgate have the
counter-idea of remain unengaged; but this be a mere negative, a
shadow east by other resolve which themselves be capable of
shrink. circumstance be almost sure to be on the side of
Rosamond's idea, which have a shaping activity and look through
watchful blue eye, whereas Lydgate's lie blind and unconcerned as a
jelly-fish which get melt without know it.
that evening when he go home, he look at his phial to see how a
process of maceration be go on, with undisturbed interest; and he
write out his daily note with as much precision as usual. the
revery from which it be difficult for he to detach himself be
ideal construction of something else than Rosamond's virtue, and the
primitive tissue be still his fair unknown. moreover, he be
begin to feel some zest for the grow though half-suppress feud
between he and the other medical man, which be likely to become more
manifest, now that Bulstrode's method of manage the new hospital be
about to be declare; and there be various inspirit sign that his
non-acceptance by some of Peacock's patient might be counterbalance
by the impression he have produce in other quarter. only a few day
later, when he have happen to overtake Rosamond on the Lowick road and
have get down from his horse to walk by her side until he have quite
protect she from a pass drove, he have be stop by a servant on
horseback with a message call he in to a house of some importance
where Peacock have never attend; and it be the second instance of
this kind. the servant be Sir James Chettam's, and the house be
Lowick Manor.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
1st Gent. all time be good to seek your wed home
bring a mutual delight.
2d Gent. why, true.
the calendar hath not an evil day
for soul make one by love, and even death
be sweetness, if it come like rolling wave
while they two clasp each other, and foresaw
no life apart.
Mr. and Mrs. Casaubon, return from their wedding journey, arrive at
Lowick Manor in the middle of January. a light snow be fall as
they descend at the door, and in the morning, when Dorothea pass
from her dressing-room avenue the blue-green boudoir that we know of,
she see the long avenue of lime lift their trunk from a white
earth, and spread white branch against the dun and motionless sky.
the distant flat shrank in uniform whiteness and low-hang uniformity
of cloud. the very furniture in the room seem to have shrink since
she see it before: the slag in the tapestry look more like a ghost in
his ghostly blue-green world; the volume of polite literature in the
bookcase look more like immovable imitation of book. the bright
fire of dry oak-bough burn on the dog seem an incongruous
renewal of life and glow--like the figure of Dorothea herself as she
enter carry the red-leather case contain the cameo for Celia.
she be glow from her morning toilet as only healthful youth can
glow: there be gem-like brightness on her coil hair and in her hazel
eye; there be warm red life in her lip; her throat have a breathing
whiteness above the differ white of the fur which itself seem to
wind about her neck and cle down her blue-gray pelisse with a
tenderness gather from her own, a sentient commingle innocence which
keep its loveliness against the crystalline purity of the outdoor snow.
as she lay the cameo-case on the table in the bow-window, she
unconsciously keep her hand on they, immediately absorb in look
out on the still, white enclosure which make her visible world.
Mr. Casaubon, who have rise early complaining of palpitation, be in
the library give audience to his curate Mr. Tucker. by-and-by Celia
would come in her quality of bridesmaid as well as sister, and through
the next week there would be wedding visit receive and give; all in
continuance of that transitional life understand to correspond with the
excitement of bridal felicity, and keep up the sense of busy
ineffectiveness, as of a dream which the dreamer begin to suspect.
the duty of her married life, contemplate as so great beforehand,
seem to be shrink with the furniture and the white vapor-wall
landscape. the clear height where she expect to walk in full
communion have become difficult to see even in her imagination; the
delicious repose of the soul on a complete superior have be shake
into uneasy effort and alarm with dim presentiment. when would the
day begin of that active wifely devotion which be to strengthen her
husband's life and exalt her own? never perhaps, as she have
preconceive they; but somehow--still somehow. in this solemnly
pledge union of her life, duty would present itself in some new form
of inspiration and give a new meaning to wifely love.
meanwhile there be the snow and the low arch of dun vapor--there be
the stifle oppression of that gentlewoman's world, where everything
be do for she and none ask for her aid--where the sense of
connection with a manifold pregnant existence have to be keep up
painfully as an inward vision, instead of come from without in claim
that would have shape she energies.-- "what shall I do?" "whatever you
please, my dear:" that have be her brief history since she have leave
off learn morning lesson and practise silly rhythm on the hat
piano. marriage, which be to bring guidance into worthy and
imperative occupation, have not yet free she from the gentlewoman's
oppressive liberty: it have not even fill her leisure with the
ruminant joy of unchecked tenderness. her bloom full-pulse youth
stand there in a moral imprisonment which make itself one with the
chill, colorless, narrow landscape, with the shrunken furniture, the
never-read book, and the ghostly stag in a pale fantastic world that
seem to be vanish from the daylight.
in the first minute when Dorothea look out she feel nothing but the
dreary oppression; then come a keen remembrance, and turn away from
the window she walk round the room. the idea and hope which be
live in her mind when she first see this room nearly three month
before be present now only as memory: she judge they as we judge
transient and depart thing. all existence seem to beat with a
low pulse than her own, and her religious faith be a solitary cry,
the struggle out of a nightmare in which every object be wither and
shrink away from she. each remember thing in the room be
disenchant, be deaden as an unlit transparency, till her wandering
gaze come to the group of miniature, and there at last she see
something which have gather new breath and meaning: it be the
miniature of Mr. Casaubon's aunt Julia, who have make the unfortunate
marriage--of Will Ladislaw's grandmother. Dorothea could fancy that
it be alive now--the delicate woman's face which yet have a headstrong
look, a peculiarity difficult to interpret. be it only her friend
who think her marriage unfortunate? or do she herself find it out to
be a mistake, and taste the salt bitterness of her tear in the
merciful silence of the night? what breadth of experience Dorothea
seem to have pass over since she first look at this miniature!
she feel a new companionship with it, as if it have an ear for she and
could see how she be look at it. here be a woman who have know
some difficulty about marriage. Nay, the color deepen, the lip and
chin seem to get large, the hair and eye seem to be send out
light, the face be masculine and beam on she with that full gaze
which tell she on whom it fall that she be too interesting for the
slight movement of her eyelid to pass unnoticed and uninterpreted.
the vivid presentation come like a pleasant glow to Dorothea: she feel
herself smile, and turn from the miniature sit down and look up
as if she be again talk to a figure in front of she. but the
smile disappear as she go on meditating, and at last she say
aloud--
"oh, it be cruel to speak so! how sad--how dreadful!"
she rise quickly and go out of the room, hurry along the corridor,
with the irresistible impulse to go and see her husband and inquire if
she could do anything for he. perhaps Mr. Tucker be go and Mr.
Casaubon be alone in the library. she feel as if all her morning's
gloom would vanish if she could see her husband glad because of her
presence.
but when she reach the head of the dark oak there be Celia come
up, and below there be Mr. Brooke, exchange welcome and
congratulation with Mr. Casaubon.
"Dodo!" say Celia, in her quiet staccato; then kiss her sister,
whose arm encircle she, and say no more. I think they both cry a
little in a furtive manner, while Dorothea run down-stair to greet her
uncle.
"I need not ask how you be, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, after kiss
her forehead. "Rome have agree with you, I see--happiness, fresco,
the antique--that sort of thing. well, itbe very pleasant to have you
back again, and you understand all about art now, eh? but Casaubon be
a little pale, I tell he--a little pale, you know. study hard in
his holiday be carry it rather too far. I overdo it at one
time"--mr. Brooke still hold Dorothea's hand, but have turn his face
to Mr. Casaubon--"about topography, ruin, temple--I think I have a
clew, but I see it would carry I too far, and nothing might come of
it. you may go any length in that sort of thing, and nothing may come
of it, you know."
Dorothea's eye also be turn up to her husband's face with some
anxiety at the idea that those who see he afresh after absence might
be aware of sign which she have not notice.
"nothing to alarm you, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, observe her
expression. "a little english beef and mutton will soon make a
difference. it be all very well to look pale, sit for the
portrait of Aquinas, you know--we get your letter just in time. but
Aquinas, now--he be a little too subtle, benot he? do anybody read
aquina?"
"he be not indeed an author adapt to superficial mind," say Mr.
Casaubon, meet these timely question with dignified patience.
"you would like coffee in your own room, uncle?" say Dorothea, come
to the rescue.
"yes; and you must go to Celia: she have great news to tell you, you
know. I leave it all to she."
the blue-green boudoir look much more cheerful when Celia be seat
there in a pelisse exactly like her sister's, survey the cameo with
a placid satisfaction, while the conversation pass on to other topic.
"do you think it nice to go to Rome on a wedding journey?" say Celia,
with her ready delicate blush which Dorothea be use to on the
small occasion.
"it would not suit all--not you, dear, for example," say Dorothea,
quietly. no one would ever know what she think of a wedding journey
to Rome.
"Mrs. Cadwallader say it be nonsense, people go a long journey when
they be marry. she say they get tired to death of each other, and
cannot quarrel comfortably, as they would at home. and Lady Chettam
say she go to Bath." Celia's color change again and again--seem
"to come and go with tiding from the heart,
as it a run messenger have be."
it must mean more than Celia's blushing usually do.
"Celia! have something happen?" say Dorothea, in a tone full of
sisterly feel. "have you really any great news to tell I?"
"it be because you go away, Dodo. then there be nobody but I for
Sir James to talk to," say Celia, with a certain roguishness in her
eye.
"I understand. it be as I use to hope and believe," say Dorothea,
take her sister's face between her hand, and look at her half
anxiously. Celia's marriage seem more serious than it use to do.
"it be only three day ago," say Celia. "and Lady Chettam be very
kind."
"and you be very happy?"
"yes. we be not go to be marry yet. because every thing be to
be get ready. and I donot want to be marry so very soon, because I
think it be nice to be engage. and we shall be marry all our life
after."
"I do believe you could not marry well, Kitty. Sir James be a good,
honorable man," say Dorothea, warmly.
"he have go on with the cottage, Dodo. he will tell you about they
when he come. shall you be glad to see he?"
"of course I shall. how can you ask I?"
"only I be afraid you would be get so learn," say Celia,
regard Mr. Casaubon's learning as a kind of damp which might in due
time saturate a neighboring body.
CHAPTER XXIX.
"I find that no genius in another could please I. my
unfortunate paradox have entirely dry up that source of
comfort."--goldsmith.
one morning, some week after her arrival at Lowick, Dorothea--but why
always Dorothea? be her point of view the only possible one with
regard to this marriage? I protest against all our interest, all our
effort at understanding be give to the young skin that look
bloom in spite of trouble; for these too will get fade, and will
know the old and more eating grief which we be help to neglect.
in spite of the blink eye and white mole objectionable to Celia,
and the want of muscular curve which be morally painful to Sir James,
Mr. Casaubon have an intense consciousness within he, and be
spiritually a-hungered like the rest of we. he have do nothing
exceptional in marrying--nothing but what society sanction, and
consider an occasion for wreath and bouquet. it have occur to he
that he must not any long defer his intention of matrimony, and he
have reflect that in take a wife, a man of good position should
expect and carefully choose a bloom young lady--the young the
well, because more educable and submissive--of a rank equal to his
own, of religious principle, virtuous disposition, and good
understanding. on such a young lady he would make handsome
settlement, and he would neglect no arrangement for her happiness: in
return, he should receive family pleasure and leave behind he that
copy of himself which seem so urgently require of a man--to the
sonneteer of the sixteenth century. time have alter since then, and
no sonneteer have insist on Mr. Casaubon's leave a copy of himself;
moreover, he have not yet succeed in issue copy of his
mythological key; but he have always intend to acquit himself by
marriage, and the sense that he be fast leave the year behind he,
that the world be get dimmer and that he feel lonely, be a reason
to he for lose no more time in overtake domestic delight before
they too be leave behind by the year.
and when he have see Dorothea he believe that he have find even more
than he demand: she might really be such a helpmate to he as would
enable he to dispense with a hire secretary, an aid which Mr.
Casaubon have never yet employ and have a suspicious dread of. (Mr.
Casaubon be nervously conscious that he be expect to manifest a
powerful mind.) providence, in its kindness, have supply he with the
wife he need. a wife, a modest young lady, with the purely
appreciative, unambitious ability of her sex, be sure to think she
husband's mind powerful. whether Providence have take equal care of
Miss Brooke in present she with Mr. Casaubon be an idea which could
hardly occur to he. Society never make the preposterous demand that a
man should think as much about his own qualification for make a
charming girl happy as he think of hers for make himself happy. as
if a man could choose not only his wife hut his wife's husband! or as
if he be bind to provide charm for his posterity in his own
person!-- when Dorothea accept he with effusion, that be only
natural; and Mr. Casaubon believe that his happiness be go to
begin.
he have not have much foretaste of happiness in his previous life. to
know intense joy without a strong bodily frame, one must have an
enthusiastic soul. Mr. Casaubon have never have a strong bodily frame,
and his soul be sensitive without be enthusiastic: it be too
languid to thrill out of self-consciousness into passionate delight; it
go on flutter in the swampy ground where it be hatch, think
of its wing and never fly. his experience be of that pitiable
kind which shrink from pity, and fear most of all that it should be
know: it be that proud narrow sensitiveness which have not mass enough
to spare for transformation into sympathy, and quiver thread-like in
small current of self-preoccupation or at good of an egoistic
scrupulosity. and Mr. Casaubon have many scruple: he be capable of a
severe self-restraint; he be resolute in be a man of honor
accord to the code; he would be unimpeachable by any recognized
opinion. in conduct these end have be attain; but the difficulty
of make his key to all Mythologies unimpeachable weigh like lead
upon his mind; and the pamphlet--or "Parerga" as he call they--by
which he test his public and deposit small monumental record of
his march, be far from have be see in all their significance.
he suspect the Archdeacon of not have read they; he be in painful
doubt as to what be really think of they by the lead mind of
Brasenose, and bitterly convince that his old acquaintance Carp have
be the writer of that depreciatory recension which be keep lock in
a small drawer of Mr. Casaubon's desk, and also in a dark closet of his
verbal memory. these be heavy impression to struggle against, and
bring that melancholy embitterment which be the consequence of all
excessive claim: even his religious faith waver with his wavering
trust in his own authorship, and the consolation of the christian hope
in immortality seem to lean on the immortality of the still unwritten
Key to all Mythologies. for my part I be very sorry for he. it be an
uneasy lot at good, to be what we call highly teach and yet not to
enjoy: to be present at this great spectacle of life and never to be
liberate from a small hungry shivering self--never to be fully
possess by the glory we behold, never to have our consciousness
rapturously transform into the vividness of a thought, the ardor of a
passion, the energy of an action, but always to be scholarly and
uninspired, ambitious and timid, scrupulous and dim-sighted. become a
dean or even a bishop would make little difference, I fear, to Mr.
Casaubon's uneasiness. doubtless some ancient Greek have observe that
behind the big mask and the speak-trumpet, there must always be our
poor little eye peep as usual and our timorous lip more or less
under anxious control.
to this mental estate map out a quarter of a century before, to
sensibility thus fence in, Mr. Casaubon have think of annex
happiness with a lovely young bride; but even before marriage, as we
have see, he find himself under a new depression in the consciousness
that the new bliss be not blissful to he. inclination yearn back
to its old, easy custom. and the deep he go in domesticity the
more do the sense of acquit himself and act with propriety
predominate over any other satisfaction. marriage, like religion and
erudition, nay, like authorship itself, be fat to become an outward
requirement, and Edward Casaubon be bent on fulfil unimpeachably
all requirement. even draw Dorothea into use in his study,
accord to his own intention before marriage, be an effort which he
be always tempt to defer, and but for her pleading insistence it
might never have begin. but she have succeed in make it a matter of
course that she should take her place at an early hour in the library
and have work either of read aloud or copy assign she. the
work have be easy to define because Mr. Casaubon have adopt an
immediate intention: there be to be a new Parergon, a small monograph
on some lately trace indication concern the egyptian mystery
whereby certain assertion of Warburton's could be correct.
reference be extensive even here, but not altogether shoreless; and
sentence be actually to be write in the shape wherein they would
be scan by Brasenose and a less formidable posterity. these minor
monumental production be always exciting to Mr. Casaubon; digestion
be make difficult by the interference of citation, or by the rivalry
of dialectical phrase ring against each other in his brain. and
from the first there be to be a latin dedication about which
everything be uncertain except that it be not to be address to
carp: it be a poisonous regret to Mr. Casaubon that he have once
address a dedication to carp in which he have number that member of
the animal kingdom among the viros nullo aevo perituros, a mistake
which would infallibly lay the dedicator open to ridicule in the next
age, and might even be chuckle over by Pike and Tench in the present.
thus Mr. Casaubon be in one of his busy epoch, and as I begin to
say a little while ago, Dorothea join he early in the library where
he have breakfast alone. Celia at this time be on a second visit to
Lowick, probably the last before her marriage, and be in the
drawing-room expect Sir James.
Dorothea have learn to read the sign of her husband's mood, and she
see that the morning have become more foggy there during the last hour.
she be go silently to her desk when he say, in that distant tone
which imply that he be discharge a disagreeable duty--
"Dorothea, here be a letter for you, which be enclose in one
address to I."
it be a letter of two page, and she immediately look at the
signature.
"Mr. Ladislaw! what can he have to say to I?" she exclaim, in a
tone of pleased surprise. "but," she add, look at Mr. Casaubon,
"I can imagine what he have write to you about."
"you can, if you please, read the letter," say Mr. Casaubon, severely
point to it with his pen, and not look at she. "but I may as
well say beforehand, that I must decline the proposal it contain to
pay a visit here. I trust I may be excuse for desire an interval of
complete freedom from such distraction as have be hitherto
inevitable, and especially from guest whose desultory vivacity make
their presence a fatigue."
there have be no clashing of temper between Dorothea and her husband
since that little explosion in Rome, which have leave such strong trace
in her mind that it have be easy ever since to quell emotion than to
incur the consequence of vent it. but this ill-temper
anticipation that she could desire visit which might be disagreeable
to her husband, this gratuitous defence of himself against selfish
complaint on her part, be too sharp a sting to be meditate on until
after it have be resent. Dorothea have think that she could have
be patient with John Milton, but she have never imagine he behave
in this way; and for a moment Mr. Casaubon seem to be stupidly
undiscerne and odiously unjust. Pity, that "new-bear babe" which be
by-and-by to rule many a storm within she, do not "stride the blast"
on this occasion. with her first word, utter in a tone that shake
he, she startle Mr. Casaubon into look at she, and meet the
flash of her eye.
"why do you attribute to I a wish for anything that would annoy you?
you speak to I as if I be something you have to contend against.
wait at least till I appear to consult my own pleasure apart from
your."
"Dorothea, you be hasty," answer Mr. Casaubon, nervously.
decidedly, this woman be too young to be on the formidable level of
wifehood--unless she have be pale and feature less and take
everything for grant.
"I think it be you who be first hasty in your false supposition
about my feeling," say Dorothea, in the same tone. the fire be not
dissipate yet, and she think it be ignoble in her husband not to
apologize to she.
"we will, if you please, say no more on this subject, Dorothea. I have
neither leisure nor energy for this kind of debate."
here Mr. Casaubon dip his pen and make as if he would return to his
writing, though his hand tremble so much that the word seem to be
write in an unknown character. there be answer which, in turn
away wrath, only send it to the other end of the room, and to have a
discussion coolly waive when you feel that justice be all on your own
side be even more exasperating in marriage than in philosophy.
Dorothea leave Ladislaw's two letter unread on her husband's
writing-table and go to her own place, the scorn and indignation
within she reject the reading of these letter, just as we hurl away
any trash towards which we seem to have be suspect of mean
cupidity. she do not in the least divine the subtle source of her
husband's bad temper about these letter: she only know that they have
cause he to offend she. she begin to work at once, and her hand do
not tremble; on the contrary, in write out the quotation which have
be give to she the day before, she feel that she be form her
letter beautifully, and it seem to she that she see the construction
of the Latin she be copy, and which she be begin to
understand, more clearly than usual. in her indignation there be a
sense of superiority, but it go out for the present in firmness of
stroke, and do not compress itself into an inward articulate voice
pronounce the once "affable archangel" a poor creature.
there have be this apparent quiet for half an hour, and Dorothea have
not look away from her own table, when she hear the loud bang of a
book on the floor, and turn quickly see Mr. Casaubon on the library
step cling forward as if he be in some bodily distress. she
start up and bound towards he in an instant: he be evidently in
great strait for breath. jump on a stool she get close to his
elbow and say with her whole soul melt into tender alarm--
"can you lean on I, dear?"
he be still for two or three minute, which seem endless to she,
unable to speak or move, gasp for breath. when at last he descend
the three step and fall backward in the large chair which Dorothea have
draw close to the foot of the ladder, he no long gasp but seem
helpless and about to faint. Dorothea ring the bell violently, and
presently Mr. Casaubon be help to the couch: he do not faint, and
be gradually revive, when Sir James Chettam come in, have be meet
in the hall with the news that Mr. Casaubon have "have a fit in the
library."
"Good God! this be just what might have be expect," be his
immediate thought. if his prophetic soul have be urge to
particularize, it seem to he that "fit" would have be the
definite expression alight upon. he ask his informant, the butler,
whether the doctor have be send for. the butler never know his master
want the doctor before; but would it not be right to send for a
physician?
when Sir James enter the library, however, Mr. Casaubon could make
some sign of his usual politeness, and Dorothea, who in the reaction
from her first terror have be kneel and sob by his side now
rise and herself propose that some one should ride off for a medical
man.
"I recommend you to send for Lydgate," say Sir James. "my mother have
call he in, and she have find he uncommonly clever. she have have a
poor opinion of the physician since my father's death."
Dorothea appeal to her husband, and he make a silent sign of
approval. so Mr. Lydgate be send for and he come wonderfully soon,
for the messenger, who be Sir James Chettam's man and know Mr.
Lydgate, meet he lead his horse along the Lowick road and give his
arm to Miss Vincy.
Celia, in the drawing-room, have know nothing of the trouble till Sir
James tell she of it. after Dorothea's account, he no long
consider the illness a fit, but still something "of that nature."
"poor dear Dodo--how dreadful!" say Celia, feel as much grieve as
her own perfect happiness would allow. her little hand be clasp,
and enclose by Sir James's as a bud be enfold by a liberal calyx.
"it be very shocking that Mr. Casaubon should be ill; but I never do
like he. and I think he be not half fond enough of Dorothea; and he
ought to be, for I be sure no one else would have have he--do you
think they would?"
"I always think it a horrible sacrifice of your sister," say Sir
James.
"yes. but poor Dodo never do do what other people do, and I think she
never will."
"she be a noble creature," say the loyal-hearted Sir James. he have
just have a fresh impression of this kind, as he have see Dorothea
stretch her tender arm under her husband's neck and look at he
with unspeakable sorrow. he do not know how much penitence there be
in the sorrow.
"yes," say Celia, think it be very well for Sir James to say so,
but _he_ would not have be comfortable with Dodo. "shall I go to
she? could I help she, do you think?"
"I think it would be well for you just to go and see she before Lydgate
come," say Sir James, magnanimously. "only donot stay long."
while Celia be go he walk up and down remember what he have
originally feel about Dorothea's engagement, and feel a revival of
his disgust at Mr. Brooke's indifference. if Cadwallader--if every
one else have regard the affair as he, Sir James, have do, the
marriage might have be hinder. it be wicked to let a young girl
blindly decide her fate in that way, without any effort to save she.
Sir James have long cease to have any regret on his own account: his
heart be satisfied with his engagement to Celia. but he have a
chivalrous nature (be not the disinterested service of woman among the
ideal glory of old chivalry?): his disregarded love have not turn to
bitterness; its death have make sweet odor--float memory that
clung with a consecrating effect to Dorothea. he could remain her
brotherly friend, interpret her action with generous trustfulness.
CHAPTER XXX.
"Qui veut delasser hors de propos, lasse."--pascal.
Mr. Casaubon have no second attack of equal severity with the first, and
in a few day begin to recover his usual condition. but Lydgate seem
to think the case worth a great deal of attention. he not only use
his stethoscope (which have not become a matter of course in practice at
that time), but sit quietly by his patient and watch he. to Mr.
Casaubon's question about himself, he reply that the source of the
illness be the common error of intellectual man--a too eager and
monotonous application: the remedy be, to be satisfied with moderate
work, and to seek variety of relaxation. Mr. Brooke, who sit by on one
occasion, suggest that Mr. Casaubon should go fishing, as Cadwallader
do, and have a turning-room, make toy, table-leg, and that kind of
thing.
"in short, you recommend I to anticipate the arrival of my second
childhood," say poor Mr. Casaubon, with some bitterness. "these
thing," he add, look at Lydgate, "would be to I such relaxation
as tow-picking be to prisoner in a house of correction."
"I confess," say lydgate, smile, "amusement be rather an
unsatisfactory prescription. it be something like tell people to
keep up their spirit. perhaps I have well say, that you must submit
to be mildly bored rather than to go on work."
"yes, yes," say Mr. Brooke. "get Dorothea to play backgammon with you
in the evening. and shuttlecock, now--I donot know a fine game than
shuttlecock for the daytime. I remember it all the fashion. to be
sure, your eye might not stand that, Casaubon. but you must unbend,
you know. why, you might take to some light study: conchology, now: it
always think that must be a light study. or get Dorothea to read you
light thing, smollett--'roderick Random,' 'Humphrey Clinker:' they
be a little broad, but she may read anything now shebe marry, you
know. I remember they make I laugh uncommonly--therebe a droll bit
about a postilion's breech. we have no such humor now. I have go
through all these thing, but they might be rather new to you."
"as new as eat thistle," would have be an answer to represent Mr.
Casaubon's feeling. but he only bow resignedly, with due respect to
his wife's uncle, and observe that doubtless the work he mention
have "serve as a resource to a certain order of mind."
"you see," say the able magistrate to Lydgate, when they be outside
the door, "Casaubon have be a little narrow: it leave he rather at a
loss when you forbid he his particular work, which I believe be
something very deep indeed--in the line of research, you know. I would
never give way to that; I be always versatile. but a clergyman be
tie a little tight. if they would make he a bishop, now!--he do a
very good pamphlet for Peel. he would have more movement then, more
show; he might get a little flesh. but I recommend you to talk to Mrs.
Casaubon. she be clever enough for anything, be my niece. tell she,
her husband want liveliness, diversion: put she on amusing tactic."
without Mr. Brooke's advice, Lydgate have determine on speak to
Dorothea. she have not be present while her uncle be throw out
his pleasant suggestion as to the mode in which life at Lowick might
be enliven, but she be usually by her husband's side, and the
unaffected sign of intense anxiety in her face and voice about
whatever touch his mind or health, make a drama which Lydgate be
inclined to watch. he say to himself that he be only do right in
tell she the truth about her husband's probable future, but he
certainly think also that it would be interesting to talk
confidentially with she. a medical man like to make psychological
observation, and sometimes in the pursuit of such study be too
easily tempt into momentous prophecy which life and death easily set
at nought. Lydgate have often be satirical on this gratuitous
prediction, and he mean now to be guard.
he ask for Mrs. Casaubon, but be tell that she be out walk, he
be go away, when Dorothea and Celia appear, both glow from
their struggle with the March wind. when Lydgate beg to speak with
she alone, Dorothea open the library door which happen to be the
near, think of nothing at the moment but what he might have to
say about Mr. Casaubon. it be the first time she have enter this
room since her husband have be take ill, and the servant have choose
not to open the shutter. but there be light enough to read by from
the narrow upper pane of the window.
"you will not mind this sombre light," say Dorothea, stand in the
middle of the room. "since you forbid book, the library have be out
of the question. but Mr. Casaubon will soon be here again, I hope. be
he not make progress?"
"yes, much more rapid progress than I at first expect. indeed, he be
already nearly in his usual state of health."
"you do not fear that the illness will return?" say Dorothea, whose
quick ear have detect some significance in Lydgate's tone.
"such case be peculiarly difficult to pronounce upon," say Lydgate.
"the only point on which I can be confident be that it will be
desirable to be very watchful on Mr. Casaubon's account, lest he should
in any way strain his nervous power."
"I beseech you to speak quite plainly," say Dorothea, in an imploring
tone. "I cannot bear to think that there might be something which I
do not know, and which, if I have know it, would have make I act
differently." the word come out like a cry: it be evident that they
be the voice of some mental experience which lie not very far off.
"sit down," she add, place herself on the near chair, and
throw off her bonnet and glove, with an instinctive discarding of
formality where a great question of destiny be concern.
"what you say now justify my own view," say Lydgate. "I think it be
one's function as a medical man to hinder regret of that sort as far
as possible. but I beg you to observe that Mr. Casaubon's case be
precisely of the kind in which the issue be most difficult to pronounce
upon. he may possibly live for fifteen year or more, without much
bad health than he have have hitherto."
Dorothea have turn very pale, and when Lydgate pause she say in a
low voice, "you mean if we be very careful."
"yes--careful against mental agitation of all kind, and against
excessive application."
"he would be miserable, if he have to give up his work," say Dorothea,
with a quick prevision of that wretchedness.
"I be aware of that. the only course be to try by all mean, direct
and indirect, to moderate and vary his occupation. with a happy
concurrence of circumstance, there be, as I say, no immediate danger
from that affection of the heart, which I believe to have be the
cause of his late attack. on the other hand, it be possible that the
disease may develop itself more rapidly: it be one of those eas in
which death be sometimes sudden. nothing should be neglect which
might be affect by such an issue."
there be silence for a few moment, while Dorothea sit as if she have
be turn to marble, though the life within she be so intense that
her mind have never before sweep in brief time over an equal range of
scene and motif.
"help I, pray," she say, at last, in the same low voice as before.
"tell I what I can do."
"what do you think of foreign travel? you have be lately in Rome, I
think."
the memory which make this resource utterly hopeless be a new
current that shake Dorothea out of her pallid immobility.
"oh, that would not do--that would be bad than anything," she say
with a more childlike despondency, while the tear roll down.
"nothing will be of any use that he do not enjoy."
"I wish that I could have spar you this pain," say Lydgate, deeply
touch, yet wonder about her marriage. woman just like Dorothea
have not enter into his tradition.
"it be right of you to tell I. I thank you for tell I the truth."
"I wish you to understand that I shall not say anything to enlighten
Mr. Casaubon himself. I think it desirable for he to know nothing
more than that he must not overwork himself, and must observe certain
rule. anxiety of any kind would be precisely the most unfavorable
condition for he."
Lydgate rise, and Dorothea mechanically rise at the same time?
unclasp her cloak and throw it off as if it stifle she. he be
bow and quit she, when an impulse which if she have be alone
would have turn into a prayer, make she say with a sob in her voice--
"oh, you be a wise man, be you not? you know all about life and
death. advise I. think what I can do. he have be labor all his
life and look forward. he mind about nothing else.-- and I mind
about nothing else--"
for year after Lydgate remember the impression produce in he by
this involuntary appeal--this cry from soul to soul, without other
consciousness than their move with kindre nature in the same
embroil medium, the same troublous fitfully illuminated life. but
what could he say now except that he should see Mr. Casaubon again
to-morrow?
when he be go, Dorothea's tear gush forth, and relieve she
stifle oppression. then she dry her eye, remind that her
distress must not be betray to her husband; and look round the room
think that she must order the servant to attend to it as usual,
since Mr. Casaubon might now at any moment wish to enter. on his
writing-table there be letter which have lie untouched since the
morning when he be take ill, and among they, as Dorothea well
remember, there be young Ladislaw's letter, the one address to
she still unopened. the association of these letter have be make
the more painful by that sudden attack of illness which she feel that
the agitation cause by her anger might have help to bring on: it
would be time enough to read they when they be again thrust upon she,
and she have have no inclination to fetch they from the library. but now
it occur to she that they should be put out of her husband's sight:
whatever might have be the source of his annoyance about they, he
must, if possible, not be annoy again; and she run her eye first
over the letter address to he to assure herself whether or not it
would be necessary to write in order to hinder the offensive visit.
will write from Rome, and begin by say that his obligation to Mr.
Casaubon be too deep for all thank not to seem impertinent. it be
plain that if he be not grateful, he must be the poorest-spirit
rascal who have ever find a generous friend. to expand in wordy thank
would be like say, "I be honest." but will have come to perceive that
his defect--defect which Mr. Casaubon have himself often point
to--need for their correction that more strenuous position which his
relative's generosity have hitherto prevent from be inevitable. he
trust that he should make the good return, if return be possible,
by show the effectiveness of the education for which he be
indebted, and by cease in future to need any diversion towards
himself of fund on which other might have a well claim. he be
come to England, to try his fortune, as many other young man be
oblige to do whose only capital be in their brain. his friend
Naumann have desire he to take charge of the "dispute"--the picture
paint for Mr. Casaubon, with whose permission, and Mrs. Casaubon's,
will would convey it to Lowick in person. a letter address to the
Poste Restante in Paris within the fortnight would hinder he, if
necessary, from arrive at an inconvenient moment. he enclose a
letter to Mrs. Casaubon in which he continue a discussion about art,
begin with she in Rome.
open her own letter Dorothea see that it be a lively continuation
of his remonstrance with her fanatical sympathy and her want of sturdy
neutral delight in thing as they be--an outpouring of his young
vivacity which it be impossible to read just now. she have immediately
to consider what be to be do about the other letter: there be still
time perhaps to prevent Will from come to Lowick. Dorothea end by
give the letter to her uncle, who be still in the house, and beg
he to let will know that Mr. Casaubon have be ill, and that his
health would not allow the reception of any visitor.
no one more ready than Mr. Brooke to write a letter: his only
difficulty be to write a short one, and his idea in this case
expand over the three large page and the inward folding. he have
simply say to dorothea--
"to be sure, I will write, my dear. hebe a very clever young
fellow--this young Ladislaw--I dare say will be a rise young man.
itbe a good letter--mark his sense of thing, you know. however, I
will tell he about Casaubon."
but the end of Mr. Brooke's pen be a thinking organ, evolve
sentence, especially of a benevolent kind, before the rest of his mind
could well overtake they. it express regret and propose remedy,
which, when Mr. Brooke read they, seem felicitously
word--surprisingly the right thing, and determine a sequel which he
have never before thought of. in this case, his pen find it such a pity
young Ladislaw should not have come into the neighborhood just at
that time, in order that Mr. Brooke might make his acquaintance more
fully, and that they might go over the long-neglect italian drawing
together--it also feel such an interest in a young man who be start
in life with a stock of idea--that by the end of the second page it
have persuade Mr. Brooke to invite young Ladislaw, since he could not
be receive at Lowick, to come to Tipton Grange. why not? they could
find a great many thing to do together, and this be a period of
peculiar growth--the political horizon be expand, and--in short,
Mr. Brooke's pen go off into a little speech which it have lately
report for that imperfectly edit organ the "Middlemarch Pioneer."
while Mr. Brooke be seal this letter, he feel elated with an influx
of dim projects:--a young man capable of put idea into form, the
"Pioneer" purchase to clear the pathway for a new candidate, document
utilize--who know what might come of it all? since Celia be go to
marry immediately, it would be very pleasant to have a young fellow at
table with he, at least for a time.
but he go away without tell Dorothea what he have put into the
letter, for she be engage with her husband, and--in fact, these
thing be of no importance to she.
CHAPTER XXXI.
how will you know the pitch of that great bell
too large for you to stir? let but a flute
play 'neath the fine-mixed metal listen close
till the right note flow forth, a silvery rill.
then shall the huge bell tremble--then the mass
with myriad wave concurrent shall respond
in low soft unison.
lydgate that evening speak to Miss Vincy of Mrs. Casaubon, and lay
some emphasis on the strong feeling she appear to have for that
formal studious man thirty year old than herself.
"of course she be devoted to her husband," say Rosamond, imply a
notion of necessary sequence which the scientific man regard as the
prettiest possible for a woman; but she be think at the same time
that it be not so very melancholy to be mistress of Lowick Manor with
a husband likely to die soon. "do you think she very handsome?"
"she certainly be handsome, but I have not think about it," say
Lydgate.
"I suppose it would be unprofessional," say Rosamond, dimple. "but
how your practice be spread! you be call in before to the
Chettams, I think; and now, the casaubon."
"yes," say Lydgate, in a tone of compulsory admission. "but I donot
really like attend such people so well as the poor. the case be
more monotonous, and one have to go through more fuss and listen more
deferentially to nonsense."
"not more than in Middlemarch," say Rosamond. "and at least you go
through wide corridor and have the scent of rose-leaf everywhere."
"that be true, Mademoiselle de Montmorenci," say Lydgate, just bend
his head to the table and lift with his fourth finger her delicate
handkerchief which lie at the mouth of her reticule, as if to enjoy its
scent, while he look at she with a smile.
but this agreeable holiday freedom with which Lydgate hover about the
flower of Middlemarch, could not continue indefinitely. it be not
more possible to find social isolation in that town than elsewhere, and
two people persistently flirt could by no mean escape from "the
various entanglement, weight, blow, clashing, motion, by which
thing severally go on." whatever Miss Vincy do must be remark, and
she be perhaps the more conspicuous to admirer and critic because
just now Mrs. Vincy, after some struggle, have go with Fred to stay a
little while at Stone Court, there be no other way of at once
gratify old Featherstone and keep watch against Mary Garth, who
appear a less tolerable daughter-in-law in proportion as Fred's
illness disappear.
Aunt Bulstrode, for example, come a little oftener into Lowick Gate to
see Rosamond, now she be alone. for Mrs. Bulstrode have a true
sisterly feel for her brother; always think that he might have
marry well, but wish well to the child. now Mrs. Bulstrode
have a long-stand intimacy with Mrs. Plymdale. they have nearly the
same preference in silk, pattern for underclothe, china-ware, and
clergyman; they confide their little trouble of health and household
management to each other, and various little point of superiority on
Mrs. Bulstrode's side, namely, more decide seriousness, more
admiration for mind, and a house outside the town, sometimes serve to
give color to their conversation without divide they--well-mean
woman both, know very little of their own motif.
Mrs. Bulstrode, pay a morning visit to Mrs. Plymdale, happen to
say that she could not stay long, because she be go to see poor
Rosamond.
"why do you say 'poor Rosamond'?" say Mrs. Plymdale, a round-eye
sharp little woman, like a tame falcon.
"she be so pretty, and have be bring up in such thoughtlessness.
the mother, you know, have always that levity about she, which make I
anxious for the child."
"well, Harriet, if I be to speak my mind," say Mrs. Plymdale, with
emphasis, "I must say, anybody would suppose you and Mr. Bulstrode
would be delighted with what have happen, for you have do everything
to put Mr. Lydgate forward."
"Selina, what do you mean?" say Mrs. Bulstrode, in genuine surprise.
"not but what I be truly thankful for Ned's sake," say Mrs. Plymdale.
"he could certainly well afford to keep such a wife than some people
can; but I should wish he to look elsewhere. still a mother have
anxiety, and some young man would take to a bad life in consequence.
besides, if I be oblige to speak, I should say I be not fond of
stranger come into a town."
"I donot know, Selina," say Mrs. Bulstrode, with a little emphasis in
her turn. "Mr. Bulstrode be a stranger here at one time. Abraham and
Moses be stranger in the land, and we be tell to entertain
stranger. and especially," she add, after a slight pause, "when
they be unexceptionable."
"I be not speak in a religious sense, Harriet. I speak as a
mother."
"Selina, I be sure you have never hear I say anything against a niece
of mine marry your son."
"oh, it be pride in Miss Vincy--I be sure it be nothing else," say
Mrs. Plymdale, who have never before give all her confidence to
"Harriet" on this subject. "no young man in Middlemarch be good
enough for she: I have hear her mother say as much. that be not a
christian spirit, I think. but now, from all I hear, she have find a
man as proud as herself."
"you donot mean that there be anything between Rosamond and Mr.
Lydgate?" say Mrs. Bulstrode, rather mortified at find out her own
ignorance.
"be it possible you donot know, Harriet?"
"oh, I go about so little; and I be not fond of gossip; I really never
hear any. you see so many people that I donot see. your circle be
rather different from our."
"well, but your own niece and Mr. Bulstrode's great favorite--and
yours too, I be sure, Harriet! I think, at one time, you mean he
for Kate, when she be a little old."
"I donot believe there can be anything serious at present," say Mrs.
Bulstrode. "my brother would certainly have tell I."
"well, people have different way, but I understand that nobody can see
Miss Vincy and Mr. Lydgate together without take they to be engage.
however, it be not my business. shall I put up the pattern of mitten?"
after this Mrs. Bulstrode drive to her niece with a mind newly
weight. she be herself handsomely dress, but she notice with a
little more regret than usual that Rosamond, who be just come in and
meet she in walking-dress, be almost as expensively equip. Mrs.
Bulstrode be a feminine small edition of her brother, and have none
of her husband's low-toned pallor. she have a good honest glance and
use no circumlocution.
"you be alone, I see, my dear," she say, as they enter the
drawing-room together, look round gravely. Rosamond feel sure that
her aunt have something particular to say, and they sit down near each
other. nevertheless, the quilling inside Rosamond's bonnet be so
charming that it be impossible not to desire the same kind of thing
for Kate, and Mrs. Bulstrode's eye, which be rather fine, roll
round that ample quille circuit, while she speak.
"I have just hear something about you that have surprise I very much,
Rosamond."
"what be that, aunt?" Rosamond's eye also be roam over her
aunt's large embroidered collar.
"I can hardly believe it--that you should be engage without my knowing
it--without your father's tell I." here Mrs. Bulstrode's eye
finally rest on Rosamond's, who blush deeply, and said--
"I be not engage, aunt."
"how be it that every one say so, then--that it be the town's talk?"
"the town's talk be of very little consequence, I think," say
Rosamond, inwardly gratify.
"oh, my dear, be more thoughtful; donot despise your neighbor so.
remember you be turn twenty-two now, and you will have no fortune:
your father, I be sure, will not be able to spare you anything. Mr.
Lydgate be very intellectual and clever; I know there be an attraction
in that. I like talk to such man myself; and your uncle find he
very useful. but the profession be a poor one here. to be sure, this
life be not everything; but it be seldom a medical man have true
religious view--there be too much pride of intellect. and you be not
fit to marry a poor man.
"Mr. Lydgate be not a poor man, aunt. he have very high connection."
"he tell I himself he be poor."
"that be because he be use to people who have a high style
"my dear Rosamond, _you_ must not think of live in high style."
Rosamond look down and play with her reticule. she be not a fiery
young lady and have no sharp answer, but she mean to live as she
please.
"then it be really true?" say Mrs. Bulstrode, look very earnestly
at her niece. "you be think of Mr. Lydgate--there be some
understanding between you, though your father donot know. be open,
my dear Rosamond: Mr. Lydgate have really make you an offer?"
Poor Rosamond's feeling be very unpleasant. she have be quite easy
as to Lydgate's feeling and intention, but now when her aunt put this
question she do not like be unable to say yes. her pride be hurt,
but her habitual control of manner help she.
"pray excuse I, aunt. I would rather not speak on the subject."
"you would not give your heart to a man without a decide prospect, I
trust, my dear. and think of the two excellent offer I know of that
you have refused!--and one still within your reach, if you will not
throw it away. I know a very great beauty who marry badly at last,
by do so. Mr. Ned Plymdale be a nice young man--some might think
good-looking; and an only son; and a large business of that kind be
well than a profession. not that marry be everything. I would
have you seek first the kingdom of God. but a girl should keep she
heart within her own power."
"I should never give it to Mr. Ned Plymdale, if it be. I have
already refuse he. if I love, I should love at once and without
change," say Rosamond, with a great sense of be a romantic heroine,
and play the part prettily.
"I see how it be, my dear," say Mrs. Bulstrode, in a melancholy voice,
rise to go. "you have allow your affection to be engage without
return."
"no, indeed, aunt," say Rosamond, with emphasis.
"then you be quite confident that Mr. Lydgate have a serious attachment
to you?"
Rosamond's cheek by this time be persistently burn, and she feel
much mortification. she choose to be silent, and her aunt go away all
the more convinced.
Mr. Bulstrode in thing worldly and indifferent be dispose to do what
his wife bid he, and she now, without tell her reason, desire
he on the next opportunity to find out in conversation with Mr.
Lydgate whether he have any intention of marry soon. the result be
a decide negative. Mr. Bulstrode, on be cross-questioned, show
that Lydgate have speak as no man would who have any attachment that
could issue in matrimony. Mrs. Bulstrode now feel that she have a
serious duty before she, and she soon manage to arrange a tete-a-tete
with Lydgate, in which she pass from inquiry about Fred Vincy's
health, and expression of her sincere anxiety for her brother's large
family, to general remark on the danger which lie before young people
with regard to their settlement in life. young man be often wild and
disappointing, make little return for the money spend on they, and a
girl be expose to many circumstance which might interfere with her
prospect.
"especially when she have great attraction, and her parent see much
company," say Mrs. Bulstrode "gentleman pay her attention, and engross
she all to themselves, for the mere pleasure of the moment, and that
drive off other. I think it be a heavy responsibility, Mr. Lydgate,
to interfere with the prospect of any girl." here Mrs. Bulstrode fix
her eye on he, with an unmistakable purpose of warning, if not of
rebuke.
"clearly," say Lydgate, look at she--perhaps even star a little
in return. "on the other hand, a man must be a great coxcomb to go
about with a notion that he must not pay attention to a young lady lest
she should fall in love with he, or lest other should think she must."
"oh, Mr. Lydgate, you know well what your advantage be. you know
that our young man here cannot cope with you. where you frequent a
house it may militate very much against a girl's make a desirable
settlement in life, and prevent she from accept offer even if they
be make."
Lydgate be less flatter by his advantage over the Middlemarch
Orlandos than he be annoy by the perception of Mrs. Bulstrode's
meaning. she feel that she have speak as impressively as it be
necessary to do, and that in use the superior word "militate" she have
throw a noble drapery over a mass of particular which be still
evident enough.
Lydgate be fume a little, push his hair back with one hand, feel
curiously in his waistcoat-pocket with the other, and then stoop to
beckon the tiny black spaniel, which have the insight to decline his
hollow caress. it would not have be decent to go away, because he
have be din with other guest, and have just take tea. but Mrs.
Bulstrode, have no doubt that she have be understand, turn the
conversation.
Solomon's proverb, I think, have omit to say, that as the sore
palate findeth grit, so an uneasy consciousness heareth innuendoe.
the next day Mr. Farebrother, part from Lydgate in the street,
suppose that they should meet at Vincy's in the evening. lydgate
answer curtly, no--he have work to do--he must give up go out in
the evening.
"what! you be go to get lash to the mast, eh, and be stop
your ear?" say the Vicar. "well, if you donot mean to be win by the
siren, you be right to take precaution in time."
a few day before, Lydgate would have take no notice of these word as
anything more than the Vicar's usual way of put thing. they
seem now to convey an innuendo which confirm the impression that he
have be make a fool of himself and behave so as to be
misunderstood: not, he believe, by Rosamond herself; she, he feel
sure, take everything as lightly as he intend it. she have an
exquisite tact and insight in relation to all point of manner; but
the people she live among be blunderer and busybody. however,
the mistake should go no far. he resolve--and keep his
resolution--that he would not go to Mr. Vincy's except on business.
Rosamond become very unhappy. the uneasiness first stir by her
aunt's question grow and grow till at the end of ten day that she have
not see Lydgate, it grow into terror at the blank that might possibly
come--into foreboding of that ready, fatal sponge which so cheaply
wipe out the hope of mortal. the world would have a new dreariness
for she, as a wilderness that a magician's spell have turn for a
little while into a garden. she feel that she be begin to know
the pang of disappointed love, and that no other man could be the
occasion of such delightful aerial building as she have be enjoy
for the last six month. poor Rosamond lose her appetite and feel as
forlorn as Ariadne--as a charming stage Ariadne leave behind with all
her box full of costume and no hope of a coach.
there be many wonderful mixture in the world which be all alike
call love, and claim the privilege of a sublime rage which be an
apology for everything (in literature and the drama). Happily Rosamond
do not think of commit any desperate act: she plait her fair
hair as beautifully as usual, and keep herself proudly calm. her most
cheerful supposition be that her aunt Bulstrode have interfere in some
way to hinder Lydgate's visit: everything be well than a
spontaneous indifference in he. any one who imagine ten day too
short a time--not for fall into leanness, lightness, or other
measurable effect of passion, but--for the whole spiritual circuit of
alarmed conjecture and disappointment, be ignorant of what can go on in
the elegant leisure of a young lady's mind.
on the eleventh day, however, Lydgate when leave Stone Court be
request by Mrs. Vincy to let her husband know that there be a marked
change in Mr. Featherstone's health, and that she wish he to come to
Stone Court on that day. now Lydgate might have call at the
warehouse, or might have write a message on a leaf of his pocket-book
and leave it at the door. yet these simple device apparently do not
occur to he, from which we may conclude that he have no strong
objection to call at the house at an hour when Mr. Vincy be not at
home, and leave the message with Miss Vincy. a man may, from various
motif, decline to give his company, but perhaps not even a sage would
be gratify that nobody miss he. it would be a graceful, easy way
of piece on the new habit to the old, to have a few playful word
with Rosamond about his resistance to dissipation, and his firm resolve
to take long fast even from sweet sound. it must be confess, also,
that momentary speculation as to all the possible ground for Mrs.
Bulstrode's hint have manage to get weave like slight clinging hair
into the more substantial web of his thought.
Miss Vincy be alone, and blush so deeply when Lydgate come in that
he feel a corresponding embarrassment, and instead of any playfulness,
he begin at once to speak of his reason for call, and to beg she,
almost formally, to deliver the message to her father. Rosamond, who
at the first moment feel as if her happiness be return, be keenly
hurt by Lydgate's manner; her blush have depart, and she assent
coldly, without add an unnecessary word, some trivial chain-work
which she have in her hand enable she to avoid look at lydgate
high than his chin. in all failure, the beginning be certainly the
half of the whole. after sit two long moment while he move his
whip and could say nothing, Lydgate rise to go, and Rosamond, make
nervous by her struggle between mortification and the wish not to
betray it, drop her chain as if startle, and rise too,
mechanically. lydgate instantaneously stoop to pick up the chain.
when he rise he be very near to a lovely little face set on a fair
long neck which he have be use to see turn about under the most
perfect management of self-content grace. but as he raise his eye
now he see a certain helpless quivering which touch he quite newly,
and make he look at Rosamond with a questioning flash. at this moment
she be as natural as she have ever be when she be five year old:
she feel that her tear have rise, and it be no use to try to do
anything else than let they stay like water on a blue flower or let
they fall over her cheek, even as they would.
that moment of naturalness be the crystallize feather-touch: it
shake flirtation into love. remember that the ambitious man who be
look at those Forget-I-not under the water be very warm-hearted
and rash. he do not know where the chain go; an idea have thrill
through the recess within he which have a miraculous effect in
raise the power of passionate love lie bury there in no seal
sepulchre, but under the light, easily pierce mould. his word
be quite abrupt and awkward; but the tone make they sound like an
ardent, appeal avowal.
"what be the matter? you be distressed. tell I, pray."
Rosamond have never be speak to in such tone before. I be not sure
that she know what the word be: but she look at Lydgate and the
tear fall over her cheek. there could have be no more complete
answer than that silence, and Lydgate, forget everything else,
completely master by the outrush of tenderness at the sudden belief
that this sweet young creature depend on he for her joy, actually
put his arm round she, fold she gently and protectingly--he be
use to be gentle with the weak and suffering--and kiss each of
the two large tear. this be a strange way of arrive at an
understanding, but it be a short way. Rosamond be not angry, but she
move backward a little in timid happiness, and Lydgate could now sit
near she and speak less incompletely. Rosamond have to make her little
confession, and he pour out word of gratitude and tenderness with
impulsive lavishment. in half an hour he leave the house an engage
man, whose soul be not his own, but the woman's to whom he have bind
himself.
he come again in the evening to speak with Mr. Vincy, who, just
return from Stone Court, be feel sure that it would not be long
before he hear of Mr. Featherstone's demise. the felicitous word
"demise," which have seasonably occur to he, have raise his spirit
even above their usual evening pitch. the right word be always a
power, and communicate its definiteness to our action. consider as
a demise, old Featherstone's death assume a merely legal aspect, so
that Mr. Vincy could tap his snuff-box over it and be jovial, without
even an intermittent affectation of solemnity; and Mr. Vincy hat both
solemnity and affectation. who be ever awe strike about a testator,
or sing a hymn on the title to real property? Mr. Vincy be incline
to take a jovial view of all thing that evening: he even observe to
lydgate that Fred have get the family constitution after all, and would
soon be as fine a fellow as ever again; and when his approbation of
Rosamond's engagement be ask for, he give it with astonishing
facility, pass at once to general remark on the desirableness of
matrimony for young man and maiden, and apparently deduce from the
whole the appropriateness of a little more punch.
CHAPTER XXXII.
"theywill take suggestion as a cat lap milk."
--shakespeare: Tempest.
the triumphant confidence of the Mayor found on Mr. Featherstone's
insistent demand that Fred and his mother should not leave he, be a
feeble emotion compare with all that be agitate the breast of the
old man's blood-relation, who naturally manifest more their sense of
the family tie and be more visibly numerous now that he have become
bedridden. naturally: for when "poor Peter" have occupy his arm-chair
in the wainscoted parlor, no assiduous beetle for whom the cook
prepare boiling water could have be less welcome on a hearth which
they have reason for preferring, than those person whose Featherstone
blood be ill-nourished, not from penuriousness on their part, but from
poverty. Brother Solomon and Sister Jane be rich, and the family
candor and total abstinence from false politeness with which they be
always receive seem to they no argument that their brother in the
solemn act of make his will would overlook the superior claim of
wealth. themselves at least he have never be unnatural enough to
banish from his house, and it seem hardly eccentric that he should
have keep away Brother Jonah, Sister Martha, and the rest, who have no
shadow of such claim. they know Peter's maxim, that money be a good
egg, and should be lay in a warm nest.
but Brother Jonah, Sister Martha, and all the needy exile, hold a
different point of view. probability be as various as the face to
be see at will in fretwork or paper-hanging: every form be there,
from Jupiter to Judy, if you only look with creative inclination. to
the poor and least favor it seem likely that since Peter have do
nothing for they in his life, he would remember they at the last.
Jonah argue that man like to make a surprise of their will, while
Martha say that nobody need be surprised if he leave the good part of
his money to those who least expect it. also it be not to be
think but that an own brother "lie there" with dropsy in his leg
must come to feel that blood be thick than water, and if he donot
alter his will, he might have money by he. at any rate some
blood-relation should be on the premise and on the watch against
those who be hardly relation at all. such thing have be know as
forge will and dispute will, which seem to have the golden-hazy
advantage of somehow enable non-legatee to live out of they. again,
those who be no blood-relation might be catch make away with
thing--and poor Peter "lie there" helpless! somebody should be on
the watch. but in this conclusion they be at one with Solomon and
Jane; also, some nephew, niece, and cousin, argue with still
great subtilty as to what might be do by a man able to "will away"
his property and give himself large treat of oddity, feel in a
handsome sort of way that there be a family interest to be attend
to, and thought of Stone Court as a place which it would be nothing but
right for they to visit. Sister Martha, otherwise Mrs. Cranch, live
with some wheeziness in the Chalky Flats, could not undertake the
journey; but her son, as be poor Peter's own nephew, could represent
she advantageously, and watch lest his uncle Jonah should make an
unfair use of the improbable thing which seem likely to happen. in
fact there be a general sense run in the Featherstone blood that
everybody must watch everybody else, and that it would be well for
everybody else to reflect that the Almighty be watch he.
thus Stone Court continually see one or other blood-relation alighting
or depart, and Mary Garth have the unpleasant task of carry their
message to Mr. Featherstone, who would see none of they, and send she
down with the still more unpleasant task of tell they so. as
manager of the household she feel bind to ask they in good provincial
fashion to stay and eat; but she choose to consult Mrs. Vincy on the
point of extra down-stair consumption now that Mr. Featherstone be
lay up.
"oh, my dear, you must do thing handsomely where therebe last illness
and a property. God know, I donot grudge they every ham in the
house--only, save the good for the funeral. have some stuff veal
always, and a fine cheese in cut. you must expect to keep open house
in these last illness," say liberal Mrs. Vincy, once more of
cheerful note and bright plumage.
but some of the visitor alight and do not depart after the handsome
treating to veal and ham. Brother Jonah, for example (there be such
unpleasant people in most family; perhaps even in the high
aristocracy there be Brobdingnag specimen, gigantically in debt and
bloated at great expense)--brother Jonah, I say, have come down in
the world, be mainly support by a calling which he be modest enough
not to boast of, though it be much well than swindle either on
exchange or turf, but which do not require his presence at Brassing so
long as he have a good corner to sit in and a supply of food. he choose
the kitchen-corner, partly because he like it well, and partly because
he do not want to sit with Solomon, concern whom he have a strong
brotherly opinion. seat in a famous arm-chair and in his good suit,
constantly within sight of good cheer, he have a comfortable
consciousness of be on the premise, mingle with fleeting
suggestion of Sunday and the bar at the Green Man; and he inform
Mary Garth that he should not go out of reach of his brother Peter
while that poor fellow be above ground. the troublesome one in a
family be usually either the wit or the idiot. Jonah be the wit
among the Featherstones, and joke with the maid-servant when they
come about the hearth, but seem to consider Miss Garth a suspicious
character, and follow she with cold eye.
Mary would have bear this one pair of eye with comparative ease, but
unfortunately there be young Cranch, who, have come all the way from
the Chalky Flats to represent his mother and watch his uncle Jonah,
also feel it his duty to stay and to sit chiefly in the kitchen to give
his uncle company. Young Cranch be not exactly the balancing point
between the wit and the idiot,--verging slightly towards the latter
type, and squint so as to leave everything in doubt about his
sentiment except that they be not of a forcible character. when
Mary Garth enter the kitchen and Mr. Jonah Featherstone begin to
follow she with his cold detective eye, young Cranch turn his head
in the same direction seem to insist on it that she should remark how
he be squint, as if he do it with design, like the gypsy when
borrow read the New Testament to they. this be rather too much for
poor Mary; sometimes it make she bilious, sometimes it upset her
gravity. one day that she have an opportunity she could not resist
describe the kitchen scene to Fred, who would not be hinder from
immediately go to see it, affect simply to pass through. but no
soon do he face the four eye than he have to rush through the
near door which happen to lead to the dairy, and there under the
high roof and among the pan he give way to laughter which make a
hollow resonance perfectly audible in the kitchen. he flee by another
doorway, but Mr. Jonah, who have not before see Fred's white
complexion, long leg, and pinch delicacy of face, prepare many
sarcasm in which these point of appearance be wittily combine with
the low moral attribute.
"why, Tom, _you_ donot wear such gentlemanly trouser--you havenot get
half such fine long leg," say Jonah to his nephew, wink at the
same time, to imply that there be something more in these statement
than their undeniableness. Tom look at his leg, but leave it
uncertain whether he prefer his moral advantage to a more vicious
length of limb and reprehensible gentility of trouser.
in the large wainscote parlor too there be constantly pair of eye
on the watch, and own relative eager to be "sitter-up." many come,
lunch, and depart, but Brother Solomon and the lady who have be
Jane Featherstone for twenty-five year before she be Mrs. Waule find
it good to be there every day for hour, without other calculable
occupation than that of observe the cunning Mary Garth (who be so
deep that she could be find out in nothing) and give occasional dry
wrinkly indication of cry--as if capable of torrent in a wetter
season--at the thought that they be not allow to go into Mr.
Featherstone's room. for the old man's dislike of his own family
seem to get strong as he get less able to amuse himself by say
bite thing to they. too languid to sting, he have the more venom
refluent in his blood.
not fully believe the message send through Mary Garth, they have
present themselves together within the door of the bedroom, both in
black--Mrs. Waule have a white handkerchief partially unfold in her
hand--and both with face in a sort of half-mourn purple; while Mrs.
Vincy with her pink cheek and pink ribbon fly be actually
administer a cordial to their own brother, and the
light-complexion Fred, his short hair curl as might be expect in
a gambler's, be loll at his ease in a large chair.
Old Featherstone no soon catch sight of these funereal figure
appear in spite of his order than rage come to strengthen he more
successfully than the cordial. he be prop up on a bed-rest, and
always have his gold-head stick lie by he. he seize it now and
sweep it backwards and forwards in as large an area as he could,
apparently to ban these ugly spectre, cry in a hoarse sort of
screech--
"back, back, Mrs. Waule! back, Solomon!"
"oh, Brother. Peter," Mrs. Waule begin--but Solomon put his hand
before her repressingly. he be a large-cheeked man, nearly seventy,
with small furtive eye, and be not only of much blander temper but
think himself much deep than his brother Peter; indeed not likely
to be deceive in any of his fellow-man, inasmuch as they could not
well be more greedy and deceitful than he suspect they of be.
even the invisible power, he think, be likely to be soothe by a
bland parenthesis here and there--come from a man of property, who
might have be as impious as other.
"Brother Peter," he say, in a wheedling yet gravely official tone,
"itbe nothing but right I should speak to you about the Three Crofts
and the Manganese. the Almighty know what Ihave get on my mind--"
"then he know more than I want to know," say Peter, lay down his
stick with a show of truce which have a threat in it too, for he
reverse the stick so as to make the gold handle a club in case of
close fighting, and look hard at Solomon's bald head.
"therebe thing you might repent of, Brother, for want of speak to
I," say Solomon, not advance, however. "I could sit up with you
to-night, and Jane with I, willingly, and you might take your own time
to speak, or let I speak."
"yes, I shall take my own time--you neednot offer I your," say Peter.
"but you cannot take your own time to die in, Brother," begin Mrs.
Waule, with her usual woolly tone. "and when you lie speechless you
may be tired of have stranger about you, and you may think of I and
my children"--but here her voice break under the touching thought which
she be attribute to her speechless brother; the mention of ourselves
be naturally affect.
"no, I shallnot," say old Featherstone, contradictiously. "I shallnot
think of any of you. Ihave make my will, I tell you, Ihave make my
will." here he turn his head towards Mrs. Vincy, and swallow some
more of his cordial.
"some people would be ashamed to fill up a place belong by right to
other," say Mrs. Waule, turn her narrow eye in the same direction.
"oh, sister," say Solomon, with ironical softness, "you and I be not
fine, and handsome, and clever enough: we must be humble and let smart
people push themselves before we."
Fred's spirit could not bear this: rise and look at Mr.
Featherstone, he say, "shall my mother and I leave the room, sir, that
you may be alone with your friend?"
"sit down, I tell you," say old Featherstone, snappishly. "stop where
you be. good-by, Solomon," he add, try to wield his stick again,
but fail now that he have reverse the handle. "good-by, Mrs. Waule.
donot you come again."
"I shall be down-stair, Brother, whether or no," say Solomon. "I
shall do my duty, and it remain to be see what the Almighty will
allow."
"yes, in property go out of family," say Mrs. Waule, in
continuation,--"and where therebe steady young man to carry on. but I
pity they who be not such, and I pity their mother. good-by, Brother
Peter."
"remember, Ibe the eld after you, Brother, and prosper from the
first, just as you do, and have get land already by the name of
Featherstone," say Solomon, rely much on that reflection, as one
which might be suggest in the watch of the night. "but I bid you
good-by for the present."
their exit be hasten by their see old Mr. Featherstone pull his
wig on each side and shut his eye with his mouth-widen grimace, as
if he be determined to be deaf and blind.
none the less they come to Stone Court daily and sit below at the post
of duty, sometimes carry on a slow dialogue in an undertone in which
the observation and response be so far apart, that any one hearing
they might have imagine himself listen to speak automata, in
some doubt whether the ingenious mechanism would really work, or wind
itself up for a long time in order to stick and be silent. Solomon and
Jane would have be sorry to be quick: what that lead to might be see
on the other side of the wall in the person of Brother Jonah.
but their watch in the wainscoted parlor be sometimes vary by the
presence of other guest from far or near. now that Peter Featherstone
be up-stair, his property could be discuss with all that local
enlightenment to be find on the spot: some rural and middlemarch
neighbor express much agreement with the family and sympathy with
their interest against the Vincys, and feminine visitor be even
move to tear, in conversation with Mrs. Waule, when they recall the
fact that they themselves have be disappoint in time past by
codicil and marriage for spite on the part of ungrateful elderly
gentleman, who, it might have be suppose, have be spar for
something well. such conversation pause suddenly, like an organ
when the bellow be let drop, if Mary Garth come into the room; and
all eye be turn on she as a possible legatee, or one who might get
access to iron chest.
but the young man who be relative or connection of the family,
be dispose to admire she in this problematic light, as a girl who
show much conduct, and who among all the chance that be fly
might turn out to be at least a moderate prize. hence she have she
share of compliment and polite attention.
especially from Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, a distinguished bachelor and
auctioneer of those part, much concerned in the sale of land and
cattle: a public character, indeed, whose name be see on widely
distribute placard, and who might reasonably be sorry for those who
do not know of he. he be second cousin to Peter Featherstone, and
have be treat by he with more amenity than any other relative,
be useful in matter of business; and in that programme of his
funeral which the old man have himself dictate, he have be name as a
Bearer. there be no odious cupidity in Mr. Borthrop Trumbull--nothing
more than a sincere sense of his own merit, which, he be aware, in
case of rivalry might tell against competitor; so that if Peter
Featherstone, who so far as he, Trumbull, be concern, have
behave like as good a soul as ever breathe, should have do anything
handsome by he, all he could say be, that he have never fish and
fawn, but have advise he to the good of his experience, which now
extend over twenty year from the time of his apprenticeship at
fifteen, and be likely to yield a knowledge of no surreptitious kind.
his admiration be far from be confine to himself, but be
accustom professionally as well as privately to delight in estimate
thing at a high rate. he be an amateur of superior phrase, and
never use poor language without immediately correct himself--which
be fortunate, as he be rather loud, and give to predominate,
stand or walk about frequently, pull down his waistcoat with
the air of a man who be very much of his own opinion, trim himself
rapidly with his fore-finger, and mark each new series in these
movement by a busy play with his large seal. there be occasionally
a little fierceness in his demeanor, but it be direct chiefly
against false opinion, of which there be so much to correct in the
world that a man of some reading and experience necessarily have his
patience try. he feel that the Featherstone family generally be of
limited understanding, but be a man of the world and a public
character, take everything as a matter of course, and even go to
converse with Mr. Jonah and young Cranch in the kitchen, not doubt
that he have impress the latter greatly by his lead question
concern the Chalky Flats. if anybody have observe that Mr. Borthrop
Trumbull, be an auctioneer, be bind to know the nature of
everything, he would have smile and trim himself silently with the
sense that he come pretty near that. on the whole, in an auctioneering
way, he be an honorable man, not ashamed of his business, and feel
that "the celebrate Peel, now Sir Robert," if introduce to he, would
not fail to recognize his importance.
"I donot mind if I have a slice of that ham, and a glass of that ale,
Miss Garth, if you will allow I," he say, come into the parlor at
half-past eleven, after have have the exceptional privilege of see
old Featherstone, and stand with his back to the fire between Mrs.
Waule and Solomon.
"itbe not necessary for you to go out;--let I ring the bell."
"thank you," say Mary, "I have an errand."
"well, Mr. Trumbull, yoube highly favor," say Mrs. Waule.
"what! see the old man?" say the auctioneer, play with his seal
dispassionately. "ah, you see he have rely on I considerably." here
he press his lip together, and frown meditatively.
"might anybody ask what their brother have be say?" say Solomon,
in a soft tone of humility, in which he have a sense of luxurious
cunning, he be a rich man and not in need of it.
"oh yes, anybody may ask," say Mr. Trumbull, with loud and
good-humor though cut sarcasm. "anybody may interrogate. any
one may give their remark an interrogative turn," he continue, his
sonorousness rise with his style. "this be constantly do by good
speaker, even when they anticipate no answer. it be what we call a
figure of speech--speech at a high figure, as one may say." the
eloquent auctioneer smile at his own ingenuity.
"I shouldnot be sorry to hear hewould remember you, Mr. Trumbull," say
Solomon. "I never be against the deserving. itbe the undeserving Ibe
against."
"ah, there it be, you see, there it be," say Mr. Trumbull,
significantly. "it cannot be deny that undeserve people have be
legatee, and even residuary legatee. it be so, with testamentary
disposition." again he purse up his lip and frown a little.
"do you mean to say for certain, Mr. Trumbull, that my brother have leave
his land away from our family?" say Mrs. Waule, on whom, as an
unhopeful woman, those long word have a depressing effect.
"a man might as well turn his land into charity land at once as leave
it to some people," observe Solomon, his sister's question have
draw no answer.
"what, blue-Coat land?" say Mrs. Waule, again. "oh, Mr. Trumbull, you
never can mean to say that. it would be fly in the face of the
Almighty thatbe prosper he."
while Mrs. Waule be speak, Mr. Borthrop Trumbull walk away from
the fireplace towards the window, patrol with his fore-finger round
the inside of his stock, then along his whisker and the curve of his
hair. he now walk to Miss Garth's work-table, open a book which
lie there and read the title aloud with pompous emphasis as if he be
offer it for sale:
"'Anne of Geierstein' (pronounce Jeersteen) or the 'Maiden of the
Mist, by the author of Waverley.'" then turn the page, he begin
sonorously--"the course of four century have well-nigh elapse since
the series of event which be relate in the following chapter take
place on the continent." he pronounce the last truly admirable word
with the accent on the last syllable, not as unaware of vulgar usage,
but feel that this novel delivery enhance the sonorous beauty which
his reading have give to the whole.
and now the servant come in with the tray, so that the moment for
answer Mrs. Waule's question have go by safely, while she and
Solomon, watch Mr. Trumbull's movement, be think that high
learning interfere sadly with serious affair. Mr. Borthrop Trumbull
really know nothing about old Featherstone's will; but he could hardly
have be bring to declare any ignorance unless he have be arrest
for misprision of treason.
"I shall take a mere mouthful of ham and a glass of ale," he say,
reassuringly. "as a man with public business, I take a snack when I
can. I will back this ham," he add, after swallow some morsel
with alarming haste, "against any ham in the three kingdom. in my
opinion it be well than the ham at Freshitt Hall--and I think I be
a tolerable judge."
"some donot like so much sugar in their ham," say Mrs. Waule. "but
my poor brother would always have sugar."
"if any person demand well, he be at liberty to do so; but, God
bless I, what an aroma! I should be glad to buy in that quality, I
know. there be some gratification to a gentleman"--here Mr.
Trumbull's voice convey an emotional remonstrance--"in have this
kind of ham set on his table."
he push aside his plate, pour out his glass of ale and draw his
chair a little forward, profit by the occasion to look at the inner
side of his leg, which he stroke approvingly--Mr. Trumbull have
all those less frivolous air and gesture which distinguish the
predominant race of the north.
"you have an interesting work there, I see, Miss Garth," he observe,
when Mary re-enter. "it be by the author of 'Waverley': that be Sir
Walter Scott. I have buy one of his work myself--a very nice
thing, a very superior publication, entitle 'Ivanhoe.' you will not
get any writer to beat he in a hurry, I think--he will not, in my
opinion, be speedily surpass. I have just be read a portion at
the commencement of 'Anne of Jeersteen.' it commence well." (thing
never begin with Mr. Borthrop Trumbull: they always commence, both in
private life and on his handbill.) "you be a reader, I see. do you
subscribe to our Middlemarch library?"
"no," say Mary. "Mr. Fred Vincy bring this book."
"I be a great bookman myself," return Mr. Trumbull. "I have no less
than two hundred volume in calf, and I flatter myself they be well
select. also picture by Murillo, Rubens, Teniers, Titian, Vandyck,
and other. I shall be happy to lend you any work you like to mention,
Miss Garth."
"I be much oblige," say Mary, hasten away again, "but I have
little time for read."
"I should say my brother have do something for _her_ in his will,"
say Mr. Solomon, in a very low undertone, when she have shut the door
behind she, point with his head towards the absent Mary.
"his first wife be a poor match for he, though," say Mrs. Waule.
"she bring he nothing: and this young woman be only her niece,--and
very proud. and my brother have always pay her wage."
"a sensible girl though, in my opinion," say Mr. Trumbull, finish
his ale and start up with an emphatic adjustment of his waistcoat.
"I have observe she when she have be mix medicine in drop. she
mind what she be do, sir. that be a great point in a woman, and a
great point for our friend up-stair, poor dear old soul. a man whose
life be of any value should think of his wife as a nurse: that be what
I should do, if I marry; and I believe I have live single long
enough not to make a mistake in that line. some man must marry to
elevate themselves a little, but when I be in need of that, I hope some
one will tell I so--I hope some individual will apprise I of the
fact. I wish you good morning, Mrs. Waule. good morning, Mr. Solomon.
I trust we shall meet under less melancholy auspex."
when Mr. Trumbull have depart with a fine bow, Solomon, lean
forward, observe to his sister, "you may depend, Jane, my brother have
leave that girl a lump sum."
"anybody would think so, from the way Mr. Trumbull talk," say Jane.
then, after a pause, "he talk as if my daughter benot to be trust
to give drop."
"auctioneer talk wild," say Solomon. "not but what Trumbull have make
money."
CHAPTER XXXIII.
"close up his eye and draw the curtain close;
and let we all to meditation."
--2 Henry VI.
that night after twelve o'clock Mary Garth relieve the watch in Mr.
Featherstone's room, and sit there alone through the small hour. she
often choose this task, in which she find some pleasure,
notwithstanding the old man's testiness whenever he demand her
attention. there be interval in which she could sit perfectly
still, enjoy the outer stillness and the subdue light. the red
fire with its gently audible movement seem like a solemn existence
calmly independent of the petty passion, the imbecile desire, the
straining after worthless uncertainty, which be daily move her
contempt. Mary be fond of her own thought, and could amuse herself
well sit in twilight with her hand in her lap; for, have early
have strong reason to believe that thing be not likely to be arrange
for her peculiar satisfaction, she waste no time in astonishment and
annoyance at that fact. and she have already come to take life very
much as a comedy in which she have a proud, nay, a generous resolution
not to act the mean or treacherous part. Mary might have become
cynical if she have not have parent whom she honor, and a well of
affectionate gratitude within she, which be all the fuller because she
have learn to make no unreasonable claim.
she sit to-night revolving, as she be willnot, the scene of the day, her
lip often curl with amusement at the oddity to which her fancy
add fresh drollery: people be so ridiculous with their illusion,
carry their fool's cap unawares, think their own lie opaque
while everybody else's be transparent, make themselves exception
to everything, as if when all the world look yellow under a lamp they
alone be rosy. yet there be some illusion under Mary's eye which
be not quite comic to she. she be secretly convince, though she
have no other ground than her close observation of old Featherstone's
nature, that in spite of his fondness for have the Vincys about he,
they be as likely to be disappoint as any of the relation whom he
keep at a distance. she have a good deal of disdain for Mrs. Vincy's
evident alarm lest she and Fred should be alone together, but it do
not hinder she from think anxiously of the way in which Fred would
be affect, if it should turn out that his uncle have leave he as poor
as ever. she could make a butt of Fred when he be present, but she
do not enjoy his folly when he be absent.
yet she like her thought: a vigorous young mind not overbalance by
passion, find a good in make acquaintance with life, and watch its
own power with interest. Mary have plenty of merriment within.
her thought be not vein by any solemnity or pathos about the old man
on the bed: such sentiment be easy to affect than to feel about an
aged creature whose life be not visibly anything but a remnant of
vice. she have always see the most disagreeable side of Mr.
Featherstone: he be not proud of she, and she be only useful to he.
to be anxious about a soul that be always snap at you must be leave
to the saint of the earth; and Mary be not one of they. she have
never return he a harsh word, and have wait on he faithfully: that
be her utmost. Old Featherstone himself be not in the least anxious
about his soul, and have decline to see Mr. Tucker on the subject.
to-night he have not snap, and for the first hour or two he lay
remarkably still, until at last Mary hear he rattle his bunch of
key against the tin box which he always keep in the bed beside he.
about three o'clock he say, with remarkable distinctness, "Missy, come
here!"
Mary obey, and find that he have already draw the tin box from under
the clothe, though he usually ask to have this do for he; and he
have select the key. he now unlock the box, and, draw from it
another key, look straight at she with eye that seem to have
recover all their sharpness and say, "how many of them be in the
house?"
"you mean of your own relation, sir," say Mary, well use to the old
man's way of speech. he nod slightly and she go on.
"Mr. Jonah Featherstone and young Cranch be sleep here."
"oh ay, they stick, do they? and the rest--they come every day, Iwill
warrant--Solomon and Jane, and all the young un? they come peep,
and count and cast up?"
"not all of they every day. Mr. Solomon and Mrs. Waule be here every
day, and the other come often."
the old man listen with a grimace while she speak, and then say,
relax his face, "the more fool they. you hearken, missy. itbe
three o'clock in the morning, and Ihave get all my faculty as well as
ever I have in my life. I know all my property, and where the money's
put out, and everything. and Ihave make everything ready to change my
mind, and do as I like at the last. do you hear, missy? Ihave get my
faculty."
"well, sir?" say Mary, quietly.
he now lower his tone with an air of deep cunning. "Ihave make two
will, and Ibe go to burn one. now you do as I tell you. this be
the key of my iron chest, in the closet there. you push well at the
side of the brass plate at the top, till it go like a bolt: then you
can put the key in the front lock and turn it. see and do that; and
take out the topmost paper--last Will and Testament--big print."
"no, sir," say Mary, in a firm voice, "I cannot do that."
"not do it? I tell you, you must," say the old man, his voice
begin to shake under the shock of this resistance.
"I cannot touch your iron chest or your will. I must refuse to do
anything that might lay I open to suspicion."
"I tell you, Ibe in my right mind. shallnot I do as I like at the last?
I make two will on purpose. take the key, I say."
"no, sir, I will not," say Mary, more resolutely still. her repulsion
be get strong.
"I tell you, therebe no time to lose."
"I cannot help that, sir. I will not let the close of your life soil
the beginning of mine. I will not touch your iron chest or your will."
she move to a little distance from the bedside.
the old man pause with a blank stare for a little while, hold the
one key erect on the ring; then with an agitated jerk he begin to work
with his bony leave hand at empty the tin box before he.
"Missy," he begin to say, hurriedly, "look here! take the money--the
note and gold--look here--take it--you shall have it all--do as I
tell you."
he make an effort to stretch out the key towards she as far as
possible, and Mary again retreat.
"I will not touch your key or your money, sir. pray donot ask I to do
it again. if you do, I must go and call your brother."
he let his hand fall, and for the first time in her life Mary see old
Peter Featherstone begin to cry childishly. she say, in as gentle a
tone as she could command, "pray put up your money, sir;" and then go
away to her seat by the fire, hop this would help to convince he
that it be useless to say more. presently he rally and say
eagerly--
"look here, then. call the young chap. call Fred Vincy."
Mary's heart begin to beat more quickly. various idea rush through
her mind as to what the burning of a second will might imply. she have
to make a difficult decision in a hurry.
"I will call he, if you will let I call Mr. Jonah and other with
he."
"nobody else, I say. the young chap. I shall do as I like."
"wait till broad daylight, sir, when every one be stir. or let I
call Simmons now, to go and fetch the lawyer? he can be here in less
than two hour."
"Lawyer? what do I want with the lawyer? nobody shall know--I say,
nobody shall know. I shall do as I like."
"let I call some one else, sir," say Mary, persuasively. she do not
like her position--alone with the old man, who seem to show a strange
flaring of nervous energy which enable he to speak again and again
without fall into his usual cough; yet she desire not to push
unnecessarily the contradiction which agitate he. "let I, pray,
call some one else."
"you let I alone, I say. look here, missy. take the money. youwill
never have the chance again. itbe pretty nigh two hundred--therebe
more in the box, and nobody know how much there be. take it and do
as I tell you."
Mary, stand by the fire, see its red light fall on the old man,
prop up on his pillow and bed-rest, with his bony hand hold out
the key, and the money lie on the quilt before he. she never forget
that vision of a man want to do as he like at the last. but the
way in which he have put the offer of the money urge she to speak with
hard resolution than ever.
"it be of no use, sir. I will not do it. put up your money. I will
not touch your money. I will do anything else I can to comfort you;
but I will not touch your key or your money."
"anything else anything else!" say old Featherstone, with hoarse rage,
which, as if in a nightmare, try to be loud, and yet be only just
audible. "I want nothing else. you come here--you come here."
Mary approach he cautiously, know he too well. she see he
drop his key and try to grasp his stick, while he look at she
like an aged hyena, the muscle of his face get distort with the
effort of his hand. she pause at a safe distance.
"let I give you some cordial," she say, quietly, "and try to compose
yourself. you will perhaps go to sleep. and to-morrow by daylight you
can do as you like."
he lift the stick, in spite of her be beyond his reach, and throw
it with a hard effort which be but impotence. it fall, slip over
the foot of the bed. Mary let it lie, and retreat to her chair by
the fire. by-and-by she would go to he with the cordial. fatigue
would make he passive. it be get towards the chill moment of
the morning, the fire have get low, and she could see through the chink
between the moreen window-curtain the light whiten by the blind.
have put some wood on the fire and throw a shawl over she, she sit
down, hop that Mr. Featherstone might now fall asleep. if she go
near he the irritation might be keep up. he have say nothing after
throw the stick, but she have see he take his key again and
lay his right hand on the money. he do not put it up, however, and
she think that he be drop off to sleep.
but Mary herself begin to be more agitated by the remembrance of what
she have go through, than she have be by the reality--question
those act of hers which have come imperatively and exclude all
question in the critical moment.
presently the dry wood send out a flame which illuminate every
crevice, and Mary see that the old man be lie quietly with his head
turn a little on one side. she go towards he with inaudible
step, and think that his face look strangely motionless; but the
next moment the movement of the flame communicate itself to all
object make her uncertain. the violent beating of her heart render
her perception so doubtful that even when she touch he and listen
for his breathing, she could not trust her conclusion. she go to
the window and gently prop aside the curtain and blind, so that the
still light of the sky fall on the bed.
the next moment she run to the bell and ring it energetically. in a
very little while there be no long any doubt that Peter Featherstone
be dead, with his right hand clasp the key, and his left hand
lie on the heap of note and gold.
BOOK IV.
three love PROBLEMS.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
1st gent. such man as this be feather, chip, and straw.
carry no weight, no force.
2d Gent. but levity
be causal too, and make the sum of weight.
for power find its place in lack of power;
Advance be cession, and the drive ship
may run aground because the helmsman's thought
lack force to balance opposite."
it be on a morning of May that Peter Featherstone be bury. in the
prosaic neighborhood of Middlemarch, May be not always warm and sunny,
and on this particular morning a chill wind be blow the blossom
from the surround garden on to the green mound of Lowick
churchyard. swiftly move cloud only now and then allow a gleam to
light up any object, whether ugly or beautiful, that happen to stand
within its golden shower. in the churchyard the object be
remarkably various, for there be a little country crowd wait to see
the funeral. the news have spread that it be to be a "big burying;"
the old gentleman have leave write direction about everything and
mean to have a funeral "beyond his better." this be true; for old
Featherstone have not be a Harpagon whose passion have all be
devour by the ever-lean and ever-hungry passion of saving, and who
would drive a bargain with his undertaker beforehand. he love money,
but he also love to spend it in gratify his peculiar taste, and
perhaps he love it well of all as a means of make other feel his
power more or less uncomfortably. if any one will here contend that
there must have be trait of goodness in old Featherstone, I will not
presume to deny this; but I must observe that goodness be of a modest
nature, easily discourage, and when much privacy, elbow in early
life by unabashed vice, be apt to retire into extreme privacy, so that
it be more easily believe in by those who construct a selfish old
gentleman theoretically, than by those who form the narrow judgment
base on his personal acquaintance. in any case, he have be bent on
have a handsome funeral, and on have person "bid" to it who would
rather have stay at home. he have even desire that female relative
should follow he to the grave, and poor sister Martha have take a
difficult journey for this purpose from the Chalky Flats. she and Jane
would have be altogether cheer (in a tearful manner) by this sign
that a brother who dislike see they while he be live have be
prospectively fond of their presence when he should have become a
testator, if the sign have not be make equivocal by be extend to
Mrs. Vincy, whose expense in handsome crape seem to imply the most
presumptuous hope, aggravate by a bloom of complexion which tell
pretty plainly that she be not a blood-relation, but of that generally
objectionable class call wife's kin.
we be all of we imaginative in some form or other, for image be the
brood of desire; and poor old Featherstone, who laugh much at the way
in which other cajole themselves, do not escape the fellowship of
illusion. in write the programme for his burial he certainly do not
make clear to himself that his pleasure in the little drama of which it
form a part be confine to anticipation. in chuckle over the
vexation he could inflict by the rigid clutch of his dead hand, he
inevitably mingle his consciousness with that livid stagnant presence,
and so far as he be preoccupy with a future life, it be with one of
gratification inside his coffin. thus old Featherstone be
imaginative, after his fashion.
however, the three mourning-coach be fill accord to the
write order of the deceased. there be pall-bearer on horseback,
with the rich scarf and hatband, and even the under-bearer have
trapping of woe which be of a good well-price quality. the black
procession, when dismount, look the large for the smallness of the
churchyard; the heavy human face and the black drapery shiver in
the wind seem to tell of a world strangely incongruous with the
lightly drop blossom and the gleam of sunshine on the daisy.
the clergyman who meet the procession be Mr. Cadwallader--also
accord to the request of Peter Featherstone, prompt as usual by
peculiar reason. have a contempt for curate, whom he always call
understrapper, he be resolve to be bury by a benefice clergyman.
Mr. Casaubon be out of the question, not merely because he decline
duty of this sort, but because Featherstone have an especial dislike to
he as the rector of his own parish, who have a lien on the land in the
shape of tithe, also as the deliverer of morning sermon, which the old
man, be in his pew and not at all sleepy, have be oblige to sit
through with an inward snarl. he have an objection to a parson stick up
above his head preach to he. but his relation with Mr.
Cadwallader have be of a different kind: the trout-stream which run
through Mr. Casaubon's land take its course through Featherstone's
also, so that Mr. Cadwallader be a parson who have have to ask a favor
instead of preach. moreover, he be one of the high gentry live
four mile away from Lowick, and be thus exalt to an equal sky with
the sheriff of the county and other dignity vaguely regard as
necessary to the system of thing. there would be a satisfaction in
be bury by Mr. Cadwallader, whose very name offer a fine
opportunity for pronounce wrongly if you like.
this distinction confer on the Rector of Tipton and Freshitt be the
reason why Mrs. Cadwallader make one of the group that watch old
Featherstone's funeral from an upper window of the manor. she be not
fond of visit that house, but she like, as she say, to see
collection of strange animal such as there would be at this funeral;
and she have persuade Sir James and the young Lady Chettam to drive the
Rector and herself to Lowick in order that the visit might be
altogether pleasant.
"I will go anywhere with you, Mrs. Cadwallader," Celia have say; "but I
donot like funeral."
"oh, my dear, when you have a clergyman in your family you must
accommodate your taste: I do that very early. when I marry
Humphrey I make up my mind to like sermon, and I set out by like the
end very much. that soon spread to the middle and the beginning,
because I couldnot have the end without they."
"no, to be sure not," say the Dowager Lady Chettam, with stately
emphasis.
the upper window from which the funeral could be well see be in the
room occupy by Mr. Casaubon when he have be forbid to work; but
he have resume nearly his habitual style of life now in spite of
warning and prescription, and after politely welcome Mrs.
Cadwallader have slip again into the library to chew a cud of erudite
mistake about Cush and Mizraim.
but for her visitor Dorothea too might have be shut up in the
library, and would not have witness this scene of old Featherstone's
funeral, which, aloof as it seem to be from the tenor of her life,
always afterwards come back to she at the touch of certain sensitive
point in memory, just as the vision of St. Peter's at Rome be inweave
with mood of despondency. scene which make vital change in our
neighbor' lot be but the background of our own, yet, like a
particular aspect of the field and tree, they become associate for
we with the epoch of our own history, and make a part of that unity
which lie in the selection of our keen consciousness.
the dream-like association of something alien and ill-understand with
the deep secret of her experience seem to mirror that sense of
loneliness which be due to the very ardor of Dorothea's nature. the
country gentry of old time live in a rarefied social air: dot apart
on their station up the mountain they look down with imperfect
discrimination on the belt of thick life below. and Dorothea be
not at ease in the perspective and chilliness of that height.
"I shall not look any more," say Celia, after the train have enter
the church, place herself a little behind her husband's elbow so that
she could slyly touch his coat with her cheek. "I dare say Dodo like
it: she be fond of melancholy thing and ugly people."
"I be fond of know something about the people I live among," say
Dorothea, who have be watch everything with the interest of a monk
on his holiday tour. "it seem to I we know nothing of our neighbor,
unless they be cottager. one be constantly wonder what sort of
live other people lead, and how they take thing. I be quite oblige
to Mrs. Cadwallader for come and call I out of the library."
"quite right to feel obliged to I," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "your rich
Lowick farmer be as curious as any buffalo or bison, and I dare
say you donot half see they at church. they be quite different from
your uncle's tenant or Sir James's--monster--farmer without
landlord--one cannot tell how to class they."
"Most of these follower be not Lowick people," say Sir James; "I
suppose they be legatee from a distance, or from Middlemarch.
Lovegood tell I the old fellow have leave a good deal of money as well
as land."
"think of that now! when so many young son cannot dine at their own
expense," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "ah," turn round at the sound of
the opening door, "here be Mr. Brooke. I feel that we be incomplete
before, and here be the explanation. you be come to see this odd
funeral, of course?"
"no, I come to look after Casaubon--to see how he go on, you know.
and to bring a little news--a little news, my dear," say Mr. Brooke,
nod at Dorothea as she come towards he. "I look into the
library, and I see Casaubon over his book. I tell he it wouldnot do:
I say, 'this will never do, you know: think of your wife, Casaubon.'
and he promise I to come up. I donot tell he my news: I say, he
must come up."
"ah, now they be come out of church," Mrs. Cadwallader exclaim.
"dear I, what a wonderfully mixed set! Mr. Lydgate as doctor, I
suppose. but that be really a good look woman, and the fair young
man must be her son. who be they, Sir James, do you know?"
"I see Vincy, the Mayor of Middlemarch; they be probably his wife and
son," say Sir James, look interrogatively at Mr. Brooke, who nod
and said--
"yes, a very decent family--a very good fellow be vincy; a credit to
the manufacturing interest. you have see he at my house, you know."
"ah, yes: one of your secret committee," say Mrs. Cadwallader,
provokingly.
"a course fellow, though," say Sir James, with a fox-hunter's
disgust.
"and one of those who suck the life out of the wretched handloom
weaver in Tipton and Freshitt. that be how his family look so fair
and sleek," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "those dark, purple-face people
be an excellent foil. dear I, they be like a set of jug! do look
at Humphrey: one might fancy he an ugly archangel tower above they
in his white surplice."
"itbe a solemn thing, though, a funeral," say Mr. Brooke, "if you take
it in that light, you know."
"but I be not take it in that light. I cannot wear my solemnity too
often, else it will go to rag. it be time the old man die, and none
of these people be sorry."
"how piteous!" say Dorothea. "this funeral seem to I the most
dismal thing I ever see. it be a blot on the morning I cannot bear to
think that any one should die and leave no love behind."
she be go to say more, but she see her husband enter and seat
himself a little in the background. the difference his presence make
to she be not always a happy one: she feel that he often inwardly
object to her speech.
"positively," exclaim Mrs. Cadwallader, "there be a new face come out
from behind that broad man queerer than any of they: a little round
head with bulge eye--a sort of frog-face--do look. he must be of
another blood, I think."
"let I see!" say Celia, with awakened curiosity, stand behind Mrs.
Cadwallader and lean forward over her head. "oh, what an odd face!"
then with a quick change to another sort of surprised expression, she
add, "why, Dodo, you never tell I that Mr. Ladislaw be come again!"
Dorothea feel a shock of alarm: every one notice she sudden paleness
as she look up immediately at her uncle, while Mr. Casaubon look at
she.
"he come with I, you know; he be my guest--put up with I at the
Grange," say Mr. Brooke, in his easy tone, nod at Dorothea, as
if the announcement be just what she might have expect. "and we
have bring the picture at the top of the carriage. I know you would
be pleased with the surprise, Casaubon. there you be to the very
life--as Aquinas, you know. quite the right sort of thing. and you
will hear young Ladislaw talk about it. he talk uncommonly
well--point out this, that, and the other--know art and everything of
that kind--companionable, you know--be up with you in any track--what
Ihave be want a long while."
Mr. Casaubon bow with cold politeness, master his irritation, but
only so far as to be silent. he remember Will's letter quite as well
as Dorothea do; he have notice that it be not among the letter which
have be reserve for he on his recovery, and secretly conclude that
Dorothea have send word to will not to come to Lowick, he have shrink
with proud sensitiveness from ever recur to the subject. he now
infer that she have ask her uncle to invite Will to the Grange; and
she feel it impossible at that moment to enter into any explanation.
Mrs. Cadwallader's eye, divert from the churchyard, see a good deal
of dumb show which be not so intelligible to she as she could have
desire, and could not repress the question, "who be Mr. Ladislaw?"
"a young relative of Mr. Casaubon's," say Sir James, promptly. his
good-nature often make he quick and clear-seeing in personal matter,
and he have divine from Dorothea's glance at her husband that there be
some alarm in her mind.
"a very nice young fellow--Casaubon have do everything for he,"
explain Mr. Brooke. "he repay your expense in he, Casaubon," he
go on, nod encouragingly. "I hope he will stay with I a long
while and we shall make something of my document. I have plenty of
idea and fact, you know, and I can see he be just the man to put they
into shape--remember what the right quotation be, omne tulit
punctum, and that sort of thing--give subject a kind of turn. I
invite he some time ago when you be ill, Casaubon; Dorothea say
you couldnot have anybody in the house, you know, and she ask I to
write."
Poor Dorothea feel that every word of her uncle's be about as pleasant
as a grain of sand in the eye to Mr. Casaubon. it would be altogether
unfit now to explain that she have not wish her uncle to invite
Will Ladislaw. she could not in the least make clear to herself the
reason for her husband's dislike to his presence--a dislike painfully
impressed on she by the scene in the library; but she feel the
unbecomingness of say anything that might convey a notion of it to
other. Mr. Casaubon, indeed, have not thoroughly represent those
mixed reason to himself; irritated feeling with he, as with all of
we, seek rather for justification than for self-knowledge. but he
wish to repress outward sign, and only Dorothea could discern the
change in her husband's face before he observe with more of dignified
bend and sing-song than usual--
"you be exceedingly hospitable, my dear sir; and I owe you
acknowledgment for exercise your hospitality towards a relative of
mine."
the funeral be end now, and the churchyard be be clear.
"now you can see he, Mrs. Cadwallader," say Celia. "he be just like
a miniature of Mr. Casaubon's aunt that hang in Dorothea's
boudoir--quite nice-looking."
"a very pretty sprig," say Mrs. Cadwallader, dryly. "what be your
nephew to be, Mr. Casaubon?"
"Pardon I, he be not my nephew. he be my cousin."
"well, you know," interpose Mr. Brooke, "he be try his wing. he
be just the sort of young fellow to rise. I should be glad to give he
an opportunity. he would make a good secretary, now, like Hobbes,
Milton, Swift--that sort of man."
"I understand," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "one who can write speech."
"Iwill fetch he in now, eh, Casaubon?" say Mr. Brooke. "he wouldnot
come in till I have announce he, you know. and wewill go down and look
at the picture. there you be to the life: a deep subtle sort of
thinker with his fore-finger on the page, while Saint Bonaventure or
somebody else, rather fat and florid, be look up at the Trinity.
everything be symbolical, you know--the high style of art: I like
that up to a certain point, but not too far--itbe rather strain to
keep up with, you know. but you be at home in that, Casaubon. and
your painter's flesh be good--solidity, transparency, everything of
that sort. I go into that a great deal at one time. however, Iwill
go and fetch Ladislaw."
CHAPTER XXXV.
"Non, je ne comprend pas de plus charmant plaisir
Que de voir d'heritiers une troupe affligee
Le maintien interdit, et la mine allongee,
Lire un long testament ou pale, etonne
on leur laisse un bonsoir avec un pied de nez.
pour voir au naturel leur tristesse profonde
Je reviendrais, je crois, expre de l'autre monde."
--REGNARD: Le Legataire Universel.
when the animal enter the Ark in pair, one may imagine that ally
specie make much private remark on each other, and be tempt to
think that so many form feed on the same store of fodder be
eminently superfluous, as tend to diminish the ration. (I fear the
part play by the vulture on that occasion would be too painful for
art to represent, those bird be disadvantageously naked about the
gullet, and apparently without rite and ceremony.)
the same sort of temptation befell the Christian Carnivora who form
Peter Featherstone's funeral procession; most of they have their
mind bent on a limited store which each would have like to get the
most of. the long-recognize blood-relation and connection by
marriage make already a goodly number, which, multiply by
possibility, present a fine range for jealous conjecture and
pathetic hopefulness. Jealousy of the Vincys have create a fellowship
in hostility among all person of the Featherstone blood, so that in
the absence of any decide indication that one of themselves be to
have more than the rest, the dread lest that long-legged Fred Vincy
should have the land be necessarily dominant, though it leave abundant
feeling and leisure for vaguer jealousy, such as be entertain
towards Mary Garth. Solomon find time to reflect that Jonah be
undeserving, and Jonah to abuse Solomon as greedy; Jane, the eld
sister, hold that Martha's child ought not to expect so much as the
young Waules; and Martha, more lax on the subject of primogeniture, be
sorry to think that Jane be so "have." these near of kin be
naturally impressed with the unreasonableness of expectation in
cousin and second cousin, and use their arithmetic in reckon the
large sum that small legacy might mount to, if there be too many
of they. two cousin be present to hear the will, and a second
cousin besides Mr. Trumbull. this second cousin be a middlemarch
mercer of polite manner and superfluous aspirate. the two cousin
be elderly man from Brassing, one of they conscious of claim on the
score of inconvenient expense sustain by he in present of oyster
and other eatable to his rich cousin Peter; the other entirely
saturnine, lean his hand and chin on a stick, and conscious of
claim base on no narrow performance but on merit generally: both
blameless citizen of Brassing, who wish that Jonah Featherstone do
not live there. the wit of a family be usually well receive among
stranger.
"why, Trumbull himself be pretty sure of five hundred--_that_ you may
depend,--i shouldnot wonder if my brother promise he," say Solomon,
muse aloud with his sister, the evening before the funeral.
"dear, dear!" say poor sister Martha, whose imagination of hundred
have be habitually narrow to the amount of her unpaid rent.
but in the morning all the ordinary current of conjecture be
disturb by the presence of a strange mourner who have plash among
they as if from the moon. this be the stranger describe by Mrs.
Cadwallader as frog-face: a man perhaps about two or three and thirty,
whose prominent eye, thin-lipped, downward-curve mouth, and hair
sleekly brush away from a forehead that sink suddenly above the ridge
of the eyebrow, certainly give his face a batrachian unchangeableness
of expression. here, clearly, be a new legatee; else why be he
bid as a mourner? here be new possibility, raise a new
uncertainty, which almost check remark in the mourning-coach. we
be all humiliate by the sudden discovery of a fact which have exist
very comfortably and perhaps be star at we in private while we
have be make up our world entirely without it. no one have see
this questionable stranger before except Mary Garth, and she know
nothing more of he than that he have twice be to Stone Court when Mr.
Featherstone be down-stair, and have sit alone with he for several
hour. she have find an opportunity of mention this to her father,
and perhaps Caleb's be the only eye, except the lawyer's, which
examine the stranger with more of inquiry than of disgust or
suspicion. Caleb Garth, have little expectation and less cupidity,
be interested in the verification of his own guess, and the calmness
with which he half smilingly rub his chin and shoot intelligent
glance much as if he be value a tree, make a fine contrast with
the alarm or scorn visible in other face when the unknown mourner,
whose name be understand to be Rigg, enter the wainscoted parlor and
take his seat near the door to make part of the audience when the will
should be read. just then Mr. Solomon and Mr. Jonah be go
up-stair with the lawyer to search for the will; and Mrs. Waule,
see two vacant seat between herself and Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, have
the spirit to move next to that great authority, who be handle his
watch-seal and trim his outline with a determination not to show
anything so compromise to a man of ability as wonder or surprise.
"I suppose you know everything about what my poor brother's do, Mr.
Trumbull," say Mrs. Waule, in the low of her woolly tone, while
she turn her crape-shadow bonnet towards Mr. Trumbull's ear.
"my good lady, whatever be tell I be tell in confidence," say the
auctioneer, put his hand up to screen that secret.
"they whohave make sure of their good-luck may be disappoint yet,"
Mrs. Waule continue, find some relief in this communication.
"hope be often delusive," say Mr. Trumbull, still in confidence.
"ah!" say Mrs. Waule, look across at the Vincys, and then move
back to the side of her sister Martha.
"itbe wonderful how close poor Peter be," she say, in the same
undertone. "we none of we know what he might have have on his mind. I
only hope and trust he benot a bad liver than we think of, Martha."
Poor Mrs. Cranch be bulky, and, breathe asthmatically, have the
additional motive for make her remark unexceptionable and give
they a general bearing, that even her whisper be loud and liable to
sudden burst like those of a derange barrel-organ.
"I never _be_ covetous, Jane," she reply; "but I have six child
and have bury three, and I donot marry into money. the eld, that
sit there, be but nineteen--so I leave you to guess. and stock always
short, and land most awkward. but if ever Ihave beg and pray; itbe
be to God above; though where therebe one brother a bachelor and the
other childless after twice marrying--anybody might think!"
meanwhile, Mr. Vincy have glance at the passive face of Mr. Rigg, and
have take out his snuff-box and tap it, but have put it again
unopened as an indulgence which, however clarify to the judgment,
be unsuited to the occasion. "I shouldnot wonder if Featherstone have
well feeling than any of we give he credit for," he observe, in
the ear of his wife. "this funeral show a thought about everybody: it
look well when a man want to be follow by his friend, and if they
be humble, not to be ashamed of they. I should be all the well
pleased if hewould leave lot of small legacy. they may be uncommonly
useful to fellow in a small way."
"everything be as handsome as could be, crape and silk and everything,"
say Mrs. Vincy, contentedly.
but I be sorry to say that Fred be under some difficulty in repress
a laugh, which would have be more unsuitable than his father's
snuff-box. Fred have overhear Mr. Jonah suggest something about a
"love-child," and with this thought in his mind, the stranger's face,
which happen to be opposite he, affect he too ludicrously. Mary
Garth, discern his distress in the twitching of his mouth, and his
recourse to a cough, come cleverly to his rescue by ask he to
change seat with she, so that he get into a shadowy corner. Fred be
feel as good-naturedly as possible towards everybody, include
Rigg; and have some relent towards all these people who be less
lucky than he be aware of be himself, he would not for the world
have behave amiss; still, it be particularly easy to laugh.
but the entrance of the lawyer and the two brother draw every one's
attention. the lawyer be Mr. Standish, and he have come to Stone Court
this morning believe that he know thoroughly well who would be
pleased and who disappoint before the day be over. the will he
expect to read be the last of three which he have draw up for Mr.
Featherstone. Mr. Standish be not a man who vary his manner: he
behave with the same deep-voice, off-hand civility to everybody, as
if he see no difference in they, and talk chiefly of the hay-crop,
which would be "very fine, by God!" of the last bulletin concern
the king, and of the Duke of Clarence, who be a sailor every inch of
he, and just the man to rule over an island like Britain.
Old Featherstone have often reflect as he sit look at the fire that
Standish would be surprise some day: it be true that if he have do as
he like at the last, and burn the will draw up by another lawyer, he
would not have secure that minor end; still he have have his pleasure in
ruminating on it. and certainly Mr. Standish be surprised, but not at
all sorry; on the contrary, he rather enjoy the zest of a little
curiosity in his own mind, which the discovery of a second will add
to the prospective amazement on the part of the Featherstone family.
as to the sentiment of Solomon and Jonah, they be hold in utter
suspense: it seem to they that the old will would have a certain
validity, and that there might be such an interlacement of poor Peter's
former and latter intention as to create endless "lawe" before
anybody come by their own--an inconvenience which would have at least
the advantage of go all round. hence the brother show a
thoroughly neutral gravity as they re-enter with Mr. Standish; but
Solomon take out his white handkerchief again with a sense that in any
case there would be affect passage, and cry at funeral, however
dry, be customarily serve up in lawn.
perhaps the person who feel the most throbbing excitement at this
moment be Mary Garth, in the consciousness that it be she who have
virtually determine the production of this second will, which might
have momentous effect on the lot of some person present. no soul
except herself know what have pass on that final night.
"the will I hold in my hand," say Mr. Standish, who, seat at the
table in the middle of the room, take his time about everything,
include the cough with which he show a disposition to clear his
voice, "be draw up by myself and execute by our deceased friend on
the 9th of August, 1825. but I find that there be a subsequent
instrument hitherto unknown to I, bear date the 20th of July, 1826,
hardly a year later than the previous one. and there be far, I
see"--mr. Standish be cautiously travel over the document with his
spectacles--"a codicil to this latter will, bear date March 1, 1828."
"dear, dear!" say sister Martha, not mean to be audible, but drive
to some articulation under this pressure of date.
"I shall begin by read the early will," continue Mr. Standish,
"since such, as appear by his not have destroy the document, be
the intention of deceased."
the preamble be feel to be rather long, and several besides Solomon
shake their head pathetically, look on the ground: all eye avoid
meet other eye, and be chiefly fix either on the spot in the
table-cloth or on Mr. Standish's bald head; except Mary Garth's.
when all the rest be try to look nowhere in particular, it be
safe for she to look at they. and at the sound of the first "give and
bequeath" she could see all complexion change subtly, as if some
faint vibration be pass through they, save that of Mr. Rigg. he
sit in unaltered calm, and, in fact, the company, preoccupy with more
important problem, and with the complication of listen to bequest
which might or might not be revoke, have cease to think of he. Fred
blush, and Mr. Vincy find it impossible to do without his snuff-box
in his hand, though he keep it close.
the small bequest come first, and even the recollection that there be
another will and that poor Peter might have think well of it, could
not quell the rise disgust and indignation. one like to be do
well by in every tense, past, present, and future. and here be Peter
capable five year ago of leave only two hundred apiece to his own
brother and sister, and only a hundred apiece to his own nephew and
niece: the Garths be not mention, but Mrs. Vincy and Rosamond be
each to have a hundred. Mr. Trumbull be to have the gold-head cane
and fifty pound; the other second cousin and the cousin present be
each to have the like handsome sum, which, as the saturnine cousin
observe, be a sort of legacy that leave a man nowhere; and there be
much more of such offensive dribble in favor of person not
present--problematical, and, it be to be fear, low connection.
altogether, reckon hastily, here be about three thousand disposed of.
where then have Peter mean the rest of the money to go--and where the
land? and what be revoke and what not revoke--and be the revocation
for well or for bad? all emotion must be conditional, and might turn
out to be the wrong thing. the man be strong enough to bear up and
keep quiet under this confused suspense; some let their low lip
fall, other purse it up, accord to the habit of their muscle.
but Jane and Martha sink under the rush of question, and begin to cry;
poor Mrs. Cranch be half move with the consolation of get any
hundred at all without work for they, and half aware that her share
be scanty; whereas Mrs. Waule's mind be entirely flood with the
sense of be an own sister and get little, while somebody else
be to have much. the general expectation now be that the "much"
would fall to Fred Vincy, but the Vincys themselves be surprised when
ten thousand pound in specify investment be declare to be
bequeath to him:--was the land come too? fred bite his lip: it be
difficult to help smile, and Mrs. Vincy feel herself the happy of
woman--possible revocation shrink out of sight in this dazzling
vision.
there be still a residue of personal property as well as the land, but
the whole be leave to one person, and that person be--O
possibility! o expectation found on the favor of "close" old
gentleman! o endless vocative that would still leave expression
slip helpless from the measurement of mortal folly!--that
residuary legatee be Joshua Rigg, who be also sole executor, and who
be to take thenceforth the name of Featherstone.
there be a rustling which seem like a shudder run round the
room. every one star afresh at Mr. Rigg, who apparently experience
no surprise.
"a most singular testamentary disposition!" exclaim Mr. Trumbull,
prefer for once that he should be consider ignorant in the past.
"but there be a second will--there be a further document. we have not
yet hear the final wish of the deceased."
Mary Garth be feel that what they have yet to hear be not the
final wish. the second will revoke everything except the legacy
to the low person before mention (some alteration in these be
the occasion of the codicil), and the bequest of all the land lie in
Lowick parish with all the stock and household furniture, to Joshua
Rigg. the residue of the property be to be devoted to the erection
and endowment of almshouse for old man, to be call Featherstone's
Alms-Houses, and to be build on a piece of land near Middlemarch
already buy for the purpose by the testator, he wish--so the
document declare--to please God Almighty. nobody present have a
farthing; but Mr. Trumbull have the gold-head cane. it take some time
for the company to recover the power of expression. Mary dare not
look at Fred.
Mr. Vincy be the first to speak--after use his snuff-box
energetically--and he speak with loud indignation. "the most
unaccountable will I ever hear! I should say he be not in his right
mind when he make it. I should say this last will be void," add Mr.
Vincy, feel that this expression put the thing in the true light.
"eh standish?"
"our deceased friend always know what he be about, I think," say Mr.
Standish. "everything be quite regular. here be a letter from
Clemmens of Brassing tie with the will. he draw it up. a very
respectable solicitor."
"I never notice any alienation of mind--any aberration of intellect in
the late Mr. Featherstone," say Borthrop Trumbull, "but I call this
will eccentric. I be always willingly of service to the old soul; and
he intimate pretty plainly a sense of obligation which would show
itself in his will. the gold-head cane be farcical consider as an
acknowledgment to I; but happily I be above mercenary consideration."
"therebe nothing very surprising in the matter that I can see," say
Caleb Garth. "anybody might have have more reason for wonder if the
will have be what you might expect from an open-minded straightforward
man. for my part, I wish there be no such thing as a will."
"thatbe a strange sentiment to come from a christian man, by God!" say
the lawyer. "I should like to know how you will back that up, Garth!"
"oh," say Caleb, lean forward, adjust his finger-tip with
nicety and look meditatively on the ground. it always seem to he
that word be the hard part of "business."
but here Mr. Jonah Featherstone make himself hear. "well, he always
be a fine hypocrite, be my brother Peter. but this will cut out
everything. if Ihave know, a wagon and six horse shouldnot have draw
I from Brassing. Iwill put a white hat and drab coat on to-morrow."
"dear, dear," weep Mrs. Cranch, "and wehave be at the expense of
travelling, and that poor lad sit idle here so long! itbe the
first time I ever hear my brother Peter be so wishful to please God
Almighty; but if I be to be strike helpless I must say itbe hard--I
can think no other."
"itwill do he no good where hebe go, thatbe my belief," say Solomon,
with a bitterness which be remarkably genuine, though his tone could
not help be sly. "Peter be a bad liver, and almshouse willnot cover
it, when hebe have the impudence to show it at the last."
"and all the while have get his own lawful family--brother and sister
and nephew and niece--and have sit in church with them whenever he
think well to come," say Mrs. Waule. "and might have leave his
property so respectable, to they thatbe never be use to extravagance
or unsteadiness in no manner of way--and not so poor but what they
could have save every penny and make more of it. and I--the trouble
Ihave be at, time and time, to come here and be sisterly--and he
with thing on his mind all the while that might make anybody's flesh
creep. but if the Almighty's allow it, he mean to punish he for
it. Brother Solomon, I shall be go, if youwill drive I."
"Ihave no desire to put my foot on the premise again," say Solomon.
"Ihave get land of my own and property of my own to will away."
"itbe a poor tale how luck go in the world," say Jonah. "it never
answer to have a bit of spirit in you. youwould well be a dog in the
manger. but those above ground might learn a lesson. one fool's will
be enough in a family."
"therebe more way than one of be a fool," say Solomon. "I shallnot
leave my money to be pour down the sink, and I shallnot leave it to
foundling from Africay. I like Feather, stone that be brew such,
and not turn featherstone with stick the name on them."
Solomon address these remark in a loud aside to Mrs. Waule as he
rise to accompany she. brother Jonah feel himself capable of much more
sting wit than this, but he reflect that there be no use in
offend the new proprietor of Stone Court, until you be certain
that he be quite without intention of hospitality towards witty man
whose name he be about to bear.
Mr. Joshua Rigg, in fact, appear to trouble himself little about any
innuendo, but show a notable change of manner, walk coolly up to
Mr. Standish and put business question with much coolness. he have
a high chirping voice and a vile accent. Fred, whom he no long move
to laughter, think he the low monster he have ever see. but Fred
be feel rather sick. the Middlemarch mercer wait for an
opportunity of engage Mr. Rigg in conversation: there be no knowing
how many pair of leg the new proprietor might require hose for, and
profit be more to be rely on than legacy. also, the mercer, as
a second cousin, be dispassionate enough to feel curiosity.
Mr. Vincy, after his one outburst, have remain proudly silent, though
too much preoccupy with unpleasant feeling to think of move, till
he observe that his wife have go to Fred's side and be cry
silently while she hold her darling's hand. he rise immediately, and
turn his back on the company while he say to she in an
undertone,--"don't give way, Lucy; donot make a fool of yourself, my
dear, before these people," he add in his usual loud voice--"go and
order the phaeton, Fred; I have no time to waste."
Mary Garth have before this be get ready to go home with her
father. she meet Fred in the hall, and now for the first time have the
courage to look at he. he have that wither sort of paleness which
will sometimes come on young face, and his hand be very cold when she
shake it. Mary too be agitate; she be conscious that fatally,
without will of her own, she have perhaps make a great difference to
Fred's lot.
"good-by," she say, with affectionate sadness. "be brave, Fred. I do
believe you be well without the money. what be the good of it to
Mr. Featherstone?"
"thatbe all very fine," say Fred, pettishly. "what be a fellow to do?
I must go into the Church now." (he know that this would vex Mary:
very well; then she must tell he what else he could do.) "and I
think I should be able to pay your father at once and make everything
right. and you have not even a hundred pound leave you. what shall
you do now, Mary?"
"take another situation, of course, as soon as I can get one. my
father have enough to do to keep the rest, without I. good-by."
in a very short time Stone Court be clear of well-brew
Featherstones and other long-accustomed visitor. another stranger have
be bring to settle in the neighborhood of Middlemarch, but in the
case of Mr. Rigg Featherstone there be more discontent with immediate
visible consequence than speculation as to the effect which his
presence might have in the future. no soul be prophetic enough to
have any foreboding as to what might appear on the trial of Joshua Rigg.
and here I be naturally lead to reflect on the mean of elevate a low
subject. historical parallel be remarkably efficient in this way.
the chief objection to they be, that the diligent narrator may lack
space, or (what be often the same thing) may not be able to think of
they with any degree of particularity, though he may have a
philosophical confidence that if know they would be illustrative. it
seem an easy and short way to dignity, to observe that--since
there never be a true story which could not be tell in parable, where
you might put a monkey for a margrave, and vice versa--whatever have
be or be to be narrate by I about low people, may be ennoble by
be consider a parable; so that if any bad habit and ugly
consequence be bring into view, the reader may have the relief of
regard they as not more than figuratively ungenteel, and may feel
himself virtually in company with person of some style. thus while I
tell the truth about loobie, my reader's imagination need not be
entirely exclude from an occupation with lord; and the petty sum
which any bankrupt of high standing would be sorry to retire upon, may
be lift to the level of high commercial transaction by the
inexpensive addition of proportional cipher.
as to any provincial history in which the agent be all of high moral
rank, that must be of a date long posterior to the first Reform Bill,
and Peter Featherstone, you perceive, be dead and bury some month
before Lord Grey come into office.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
"'tis strange to see the humor of these man,
these great aspire spirit, that should be wise:
. . . . . . . .
for be the nature of great spirit to love
to be where they may be most eminent;
they, rating of themselves so farre above
Us in conceit, with whom they do frequent,
imagine how we wonder and esteeme
all that they do or say; which make they strive
to make our admiration more extreme,
which they suppose they cannot, 'less they give
notice of their extreme and high thought.
--DANIEL: Tragedy of Philotas.
Mr. Vincy go home from the reading of the will with his point of view
considerably change in relation to many subject. he be an
open-minded man, but give to indirect mode of express himself:
when he be disappoint in a market for his silk braid, he swear at
the groom; when his brother-in-law Bulstrode have vex he, he make
cut remark on methodism; and it be now apparent that he regard
Fred's idleness with a sudden increase of severity, by his throw an
embroider cap out of the smoking-room on to the hall-floor.
"well, sir," he observe, when that young gentleman be move off to
bed, "I hope youhave make up your mind now to go up next term and pass
your examination. Ihave take my resolution, so I advise you to lose no
time in take your."
Fred make no answer: he be too utterly depressed. twenty-four hour
ago he have think that instead of need to know what he should do,
he should by this time know that he need to do nothing: that he
should hunt in pink, have a first-rate hunter, ride to cover on a fine
hack, and be generally respect for do so; moreover, that he should
be able at once to pay Mr. Garth, and that Mary could no long have
any reason for not marry he. and all this be to have come without
study or other inconvenience, purely by the favor of providence in the
shape of an old gentleman's caprice. but now, at the end of the
twenty-four hour, all those firm expectation be upset. it be
"rather hard line" that while he be smart under this
disappointment he should be treat as if he could have help it. but
he go away silently and his mother plead for he.
"donot be hard on the poor boy, Vincy. hewill turn out well yet, though
that wicked man have deceive he. I feel as sure as I sit here, Fred
will turn out well--else why be he bring back from the brink of the
grave? and I call it a robbery: it be like give he the land, to
promise it; and what be promise, if make everybody believe be not
promise? and you see he do leave he ten thousand pound, and then
take it away again."
"took it away again!" say Mr. Vincy, pettishly. "I tell you the lad's
an unlucky lad, Lucy. and youhave always spoil he."
"well, Vincy, he be my first, and you make a fine fuss with he when
he come. you be as proud as proud," say Mrs. Vincy, easily
recover her cheerful smile.
"who know what baby will turn to? I be fool enough, I dare say,"
say the husband--more mildly, however.
"but who have handsomer, well child than our? Fred be far beyond
other people's son: you may hear it in his speech, that he have keep
college company. and Rosamond--where be there a girl like she? she
might stand beside any lady in the land, and only look the well for
it. you see--Mr. Lydgate have keep the high company and be
everywhere, and he fall in love with she at once. not but what I could
have wish Rosamond have not engage herself. she might have meet
somebody on a visit who would have be a far well match; I mean at
her schoolfellow Miss Willoughby's. there be relation in that family
quite as high as Mr. Lydgate's."
"Damn relation!" say Mr. Vincy; "Ihave have enough of they. I donot
want a son-in-law who have get nothing but his relation to recommend
he."
"why, my dear," say Mrs. Vincy, "you seem as pleased as could be
about it. itbe true, I benot at home; but Rosamond tell I you havenot
a word to say against the engagement. and she have begin to buy in the
good linen and cambric for her underclothing."
"not by my will," say Mr. Vincy. "I shall have enough to do this
year, with an idle scamp of a son, without pay for wedding-clothe.
the time be as tight as can be; everybody be be ruin; and I
donot believe Lydgate have get a farthing. I shallnot give my consent to
their marrying. let them wait, as their elder have do before them."
"rosamond will take it hard, Vincy, and you know you never could bear
to cross she."
"yes, I could. the soon the engagement's off, the well. I donot
believe hewill ever make an income, the way he go on. he make
enemy; thatbe all I hear of his making."
"but he stand very high with Mr. Bulstrode, my dear. the marriage
would please _he_, I should think."
"please the deuce!" say Mr. Vincy. "Bulstrode willnot pay for their
keep. and if Lydgate think Ibe go to give money for they to set up
housekeeping, hebe mistaken, thatbe all. I expect I shall have to put
down my horse soon. youwould well tell Rosy what I say."
this be a not infrequent procedure with Mr. Vincy--to be rash in
jovial assent, and on become subsequently conscious that he have be
rash, to employ other in make the offensive retractation. however,
Mrs. Vincy, who never willingly oppose her husband, lose no time the
next morning in let Rosamond know what he have say. Rosamond,
examine some muslin-work, listen in silence, and at the end give a
certain turn of her graceful neck, of which only long experience could
teach you that it mean perfect obstinacy.
"what do you say, my dear?" say her mother, with affectionate
deference.
"Papa do not mean anything of the kind," say Rosamond, quite calmly.
"he have always say that he wish I to marry the man I love. and I
shall marry Mr. Lydgate. it be seven week now since papa give his
consent. and I hope we shall have Mrs. Bretton's house."
"well, my dear, I shall leave you to manage your papa. you always do
manage everybody. but if we ever do go and get damask, Sadler's be the
place--far well than Hopkins's. Mrs. Bretton's be very large, though:
I should love you to have such a house; but it will take a great deal
of furniture--carpeting and everything, besides plate and glass. and
you hear, your papa say he will give no money. do you think Mr.
Lydgate expect it?"
"you cannot imagine that I should ask he, mamma. of course he
understand his own affair."
"but he may have be look for money, my dear, and we all think of
your have a pretty legacy as well as fred;--and now everything be so
dreadful--therebe no pleasure in thinking of anything, with that poor
boy disappoint as he be."
"that have nothing to do with my marriage, mamma. Fred must leave off
be idle. I be go up-stair to take this work to Miss Morgan: she
do the open hemming very well. Mary Garth might do some work for I
now, I should think. her sewing be exquisite; it be the nice thing I
know about Mary. I should so like to have all my cambric frilling
double-hem. and it take a long time."
Mrs. Vincy's belief that Rosamond could manage her papa be well
found. apart from his dinner and his coursing, Mr. Vincy,
bluster as he be, have as little of his own way as if he have be a
prime minister: the force of circumstance be easily too much for he,
as it be for most pleasure-love florid man; and the circumstance
call Rosamond be particularly forcible by mean of that mild
persistence which, as we know, enable a white soft live substance to
make its way in spite of oppose rock. Papa be not a rock: he have no
other fixity than that fixity of alternate impulse sometimes call
habit, and this be altogether unfavorable to his take the only
decisive line of conduct in relation to his daughter's
engagement--namely, to inquire thoroughly into Lydgate's circumstance,
declare his own inability to furnish money, and forbid alike either a
speedy marriage or an engagement which must be too lengthy. that seem
very simple and easy in the statement; but a disagreeable resolve
form in the chill hour of the morning have as many condition against
it as the early frost, and rarely persist under the warming
influence of the day. the indirect though emphatic expression of
opinion to which Mr. Vincy be prone suffer much restraint in this
case: Lydgate be a proud man towards whom innuendo be obviously
unsafe, and throw his hat on the floor be out of the question. Mr.
Vincy be a little in awe of he, a little vain that he want to marry
Rosamond, a little indisposed to raise a question of money in which his
own position be not advantageous, a little afraid of be worst in
dialogue with a man well educate and more highly breed than himself,
and a little afraid of do what his daughter would not like. the
part Mr. Vincy preferred playing be that of the generous host whom
nobody criticise. in the early half of the day there be business
to hinder any formal communication of an adverse resolve; in the later
there be dinner, wine, whist, and general satisfaction. and in the
mean while the hour be each leave their little deposit and
gradually form the final reason for inaction, namely, that action
be too late. the accepted lover spend most of his evening in Lowick
Gate, and a love-making not at all dependent on money-advance from
father-in-law, or prospective income from a profession, go on
flourishingly under Mr. Vincy's own eye. young love-making--that
gossamer web! even the point it cling to--the thing whence its
subtle interlacing be swing--be scarcely perceptible: momentary
touch of fingertip, meeting of ray from blue and dark orb,
unfinished phrase, light change of cheek and lip, faint
tremor. the web itself be make of spontaneous belief and indefinable
joy, yearning of one life towards another, vision of completeness,
indefinite trust. and Lydgate fall to spin that web from his
inward self with wonderful rapidity, in spite of experience suppose to
be finish off with the drama of Laure--in spite too of medicine and
biology; for the inspection of macerate muscle or of eye present in
a dish (like Santa Lucia's), and other incident of scientific inquiry,
be observe to be less incompatible with poetic love than a native
dulness or a lively addiction to the low prose. as for Rosamond,
she be in the water-lily's expand wonderment at its own full
life, and she too be spin industriously at the mutual web. all
this go on in the corner of the drawing-room where the piano stand,
and subtle as it be, the light make it a sort of rainbow visible to
many observer besides Mr. Farebrother. the certainty that Miss Vincy
and Mr. Lydgate be engage become general in Middlemarch without the
aid of formal announcement.
Aunt Bulstrode be again stir to anxiety; but this time she
address herself to her brother, go to the warehouse expressly to
avoid Mrs. Vincy's volatility. his reply be not satisfactory.
"Walter, you never mean to tell I that you have allow all this to go
on without inquiry into Mr. Lydgate's prospect?" say Mrs. Bulstrode,
open her eye with wide gravity at her brother, who be in his
peevish warehouse humor. "think of this girl bring up in luxury--in
too worldly a way, I be sorry to say--what will she do on a small
income?"
"oh, confound it, Harriet! what can I do when man come into the town
without any asking of mine? do you shut your house up against
Lydgate? Bulstrode have push he forward more than anybody. I never
make any fuss about the young fellow. you should go and talk to your
husband about it, not I."
"well, really, Walter, how can Mr. Bulstrode be to blame? I be sure he
do not wish for the engagement."
"oh, if Bulstrode have not take he by the hand, I should never have
invite he."
"but you call he in to attend on Fred, and I be sure that be a
mercy," say Mrs. Bulstrode, lose her clew in the intricacy of the
subject.
"I donot know about mercy," say Mr. Vincy, testily. "I know I be
worry more than I like with my family. I be a good brother to you,
Harriet, before you marry Bulstrode, and I must say he donot always
show that friendly spirit towards your family that might have be
expect of he." Mr. Vincy be very little like a jesuit, but no
accomplish Jesuit could have turn a question more adroitly.
Harriet have to defend her husband instead of blame her brother, and
the conversation end at a point as far from the beginning as some
recent sparring between the brother-in-law at a vestry meeting.
Mrs. Bulstrode do not repeat her brother's complaint to her husband,
but in the evening she speak to he of Lydgate and Rosamond. he do
not share her warm interest, however; and only speak with resignation
of the risk attendant on the beginning of medical practice and the
desirability of prudence.
"I be sure we be bind to pray for that thoughtless girl--bring up
as she have be," say Mrs. Bulstrode, wish to rouse her husband's
feeling.
"truly, my dear," say Mr. Bulstrode, assentingly. "those who be not
of this world can do little else to arrest the error of the
obstinately worldly. that be what we must accustom ourselves to
recognize with regard to your brother's family. I could have wish
that Mr. Lydgate have not enter into such a union; but my relation
with he be limit to that use of his gift for God's purpose which
be teach we by the divine government under each dispensation."
Mrs. Bulstrode say no more, attribute some dissatisfaction which she
feel to her own want of spirituality. she believe that her husband
be one of those man whose memoir should be write when they die.
as to lydgate himself, have be accept, he be prepared to accept
all the consequence which he believe himself to foresee with perfect
clearness. of course he must be marry in a year--perhaps even in
half a year. this be not what he have intend; but other scheme
would not be hinder: they would simply adjust themselves anew.
marriage, of course, must be prepare for in the usual way. a house
must be take instead of the room he at present occupy; and Lydgate,
have hear Rosamond speak with admiration of old Mrs. Bretton's house
(situate in Lowick Gate), take notice when it fall vacant after the
old lady's death, and immediately enter into treaty for it.
he do this in an episodic way, very much as he give order to his
tailor for every requisite of perfect dress, without any notion of
be extravagant. on the contrary, he would have despise any
ostentation of expense; his profession have familiarize he with all
grade of poverty, and he care much for those who suffer hardship.
he would have behave perfectly at a table where the sauce be serve
in a jug with the handle off, and he would have remember nothing
about a grand dinner except that a man be there who talk well. but
it have never occur to he that he should live in any other than what
he would have call an ordinary way, with green glass for hock, and
excellent wait at table. in warm himself at french social
theory he have bring away no smell of scorching. we may handle even
extreme opinion with impunity while our furniture, our dinner-giving,
and preference for armorial bearing in our own case, link we
indissolubly with the establish order. and Lydgate's tendency be
not towards extreme opinion: he would have like no barefooted
doctrine, be particular about his boot: he be no radical in
relation to anything but medical reform and the prosecution of
discovery. in the rest of practical life he walk by hereditary
habit; half from that personal pride and unreflecte egoism which I
have already call commonness, and half from that naivete which
belong to preoccupation with favorite idea.
any inward debate Lydgate have as to the consequence of this engagement
which have steal upon he, turn on the paucity of time rather than of
money. certainly, be in love and be expect continually by some
one who always turn out to be pretty than memory could represent
she to be, do interfere with the diligent use of spare hour which
might serve some "plod fellow of a german" to make the great,
imminent discovery. this be really an argument for not defer the
marriage too long, as he imply to Mr. Farebrother, one day that the
Vicar come to his room with some pond-product which he want to
examine under a well microscope than his own, and, find Lydgate's
tableful of apparatus and specimen in confusion, say sarcastically--
"Eros have degenerate; he begin by introduce order and harmony, and
now he bring back chaos."
"yes, at some stage," say Lydgate, lift his brow and smile,
while he begin to arrange his microscope. "but a well order will
begin after."
"soon?" say the Vicar.
"I hope so, really. this unsettled state of affair use up the time,
and when one have notion in science, every moment be an opportunity. I
feel sure that marriage must be the good thing for a man who want to
work steadily. he have everything at home then--no teasing with
personal speculation--he can get calmness and freedom."
"you be an enviable dog," say the Vicar, "to have such a
prospect--rosamond, calmness and freedom, all to your share. here be
I with nothing but my pipe and pond-animalcule. now, be you ready?"
Lydgate do not mention to the Vicar another reason he have for wish
to shorten the period of courtship. it be rather irritate to he,
even with the wine of love in his vein, to be oblige to mingle so
often with the family party at the Vincys', and to enter so much into
middlemarch gossip, protract good cheer, whist-playing, and general
futility. he have to be deferential when Mr. Vincy decide question
with trenchant ignorance, especially as to those liquor which be the
good inward pickle, preserve you from the effect of bad air. Mrs.
Vincy's openness and simplicity be quite unstreaked with suspicion as
to the subtle offence she might give to the taste of her intended
son-in-law; and altogether Lydgate have to confess to himself that he
be descend a little in relation to Rosamond's family. but that
exquisite creature herself suffer in the same sort of way:--it be
at least one delightful thought that in marry she, he could give she
a much-need transplantation.
"dear!" he say to her one evening, in his gentle tone, as he sit
down by she and look closely at her face--
but I must first say that he have find she alone in the drawing-room,
where the great old-fashioned window, almost as large as the side of
the room, be open to the summer scent of the garden at the back of
the house. her father and mother be go to a party, and the rest
be all out with the butterfly.
"Dear! your eyelid be red."
"be they?" say Rosamond. "I wonder why." it be not in her nature
to pour forth wish or grievance. they only come forth gracefully on
solicitation.
"as if you could hide it from I!"? say Lydgate, lay his hand
tenderly on both of her. "donot I see a tiny drop on one of the
lash? thing trouble you, and you donot tell I. that be unloving."
"why should I tell you what you cannot alter? they be every-day
things:--perhap they have be a little bad lately."
"family annoyance. donot fear speak. I guess they."
"Papa have be more irritable lately. Fred make he angry, and this
morning there be a fresh quarrel because Fred threaten to throw his
whole education away, and do something quite beneath he. and
besides--"
Rosamond hesitate, and her cheek be gather a slight flush.
Lydgate have never see she in trouble since the morning of their
engagement, and he have never feel so passionately towards she as at
this moment. he kiss the hesitate lip gently, as if to encourage
they.
"I feel that papa be not quite pleased about our engagement," Rosamond
continue, almost in a whisper; "and he say last night that he should
certainly speak to you and say it must be give up."
"will you give it up?" say Lydgate, with quick energy--almost angrily.
"I never give up anything that I choose to do," say Rosamond,
recover her calmness at the touching of this chord.
"God bless you!" say Lydgate, kiss she again. this constancy of
purpose in the right place be adorable. he go on:--
"it be too late now for your father to say that our engagement must be
give up. you be of age, and I claim you as mine. if anything be
do to make you unhappy,--that be a reason for hasten our marriage."
an unmistakable delight shine forth from the blue eye that meet his,
and the radiance seem to light up all his future with mild sunshine.
ideal happiness (of the kind know in the Arabian Nights, in which you
be invite to step from the labor and discord of the street into a
paradise where everything be give to you and nothing claim) seem
to be an affair of a few week' waiting, more or less.
"why should we defer it?" he say, with ardent insistence. "I have
take the house now: everything else can soon be get ready--can it
not? you will not mind about new clothe. those can be buy
afterwards."
"what original notion you clever man have!" say Rosamond, dimple
with more thorough laughter than usual at this humorous incongruity.
"this be the first time I ever hear of wedding-clothe be buy
after marriage."
"but you donot mean to say you would insist on my waiting month for
the sake of clothe?" say lydgate, half think that Rosamond be
torment he prettily, and half fear that she really shrink from
speedy marriage. "remember, we be look forward to a well sort of
happiness even than this--be continually together, independent of
other, and order our life as we will. come, dear, tell I how
soon you can be altogether mine."
there be a serious pleading in Lydgate's tone, as if he feel that she
would be injure he by any fantastic delay. Rosamond become serious
too, and slightly meditative; in fact, she be go through many
intricacy of lace-edging and hosiery and petticoat-tucking, in order
to give an answer that would at least be approximative.
"six week would be ample--say so, Rosamond," insist Lydgate,
release her hand to put his arm gently round she.
one little hand immediately go to pat her hair, while she give she
neck a meditative turn, and then say seriously--
"there would be the house-linen and the furniture to be prepare.
still, mamma could see to those while we be away."
"yes, to be sure. we must be away a week or so."
"oh, more than that!" say Rosamond, earnestly. she be think of
her evening dress for the visit to Sir Godwin Lydgate's, which she
have long be secretly hop for as a delightful employment of at
least one quarter of the honeymoon, even if she defer her
introduction to the uncle who be a doctor of divinity (also a pleasing
though sober kind of rank, when sustain by blood). she look at her
lover with some wonder remonstrance as she speak, and he readily
understand that she might wish to lengthen the sweet time of double
solitude.
"whatever you wish, my darling, when the day be fix. but let we take
a decided course, and put an end to any discomfort you may be
suffer. six weeks!--i be sure they would be ample."
"I could certainly hasten the work," say Rosamond. "will you, then,
mention it to papa?--i think it would be well to write to he." she
blush and look at he as the garden flower look at we when we walk
forth happily among they in the transcendent evening light: be there
not a soul beyond utterance, half nymph, half child, in those delicate
petal which glow and breathe about the centre of deep color?
he touch her ear and a little bit of neck under it with his lip, and
they sit quite still for many minute which flow by they like a small
gurgling brook with the kiss of the sun upon it. Rosamond think
that no one could be more in love than she be; and Lydgate think
that after all his wild mistake and absurd credulity, he have find
perfect womanhood--feel as if already breathe upon by exquisite wed
affection such as would be bestow by an accomplished creature who
venerate his high musing and momentous labor and would never
interfere with they; who would create order in the home and account
with still magic, yet keep her finger ready to touch the lute and
transform life into romance at any moment; who be instruct to the
true womanly limit and not a hair's-breadth beyond--docile, therefore,
and ready to carry out behest which come from that limit. it be
plainer now than ever that his notion of remain much long a
bachelor have be a mistake: marriage would not be an obstruction but a
furtherance. and happen the next day to accompany a patient to
Brassing, he see a dinner-service there which strike he as so exactly
the right thing that he buy it at once. it save time to do these
thing just when you think of they, and Lydgate hat ugly crockery.
the dinner-service in question be expensive, but that might be in the
nature of dinner-service. Furnishing be necessarily expensive; but
then it have to be do only once.
"it must be lovely," say Mrs. Vincy, when Lydgate mention his
purchase with some descriptive touch. "just what Rosy ought to have.
I trust in heaven it willnot be break!"
"one must hire servant who will not break thing," say Lydgate.
(certainly, this be reason with an imperfect vision of sequence.
but at that period there be no sort of reasoning which be not more or
less sanction by man of science.)
of course it be unnecessary to defer the mention of anything to mamma,
who do not readily take view that be not cheerful, and be a
happy wife herself, have hardly any feeling but pride in her daughter's
marriage. but Rosamond have good reason for suggest to lydgate that
papa should be appeal to in writing. she prepare for the arrival of
the letter by walk with her papa to the warehouse the next morning,
and tell he on the way that Mr. Lydgate wish to be marry soon.
"Nonsense, my dear!" say Mr. Vincy. "what have he get to marry on?
youwould much well give up the engagement. Ihave tell you so pretty
plainly before this. what have you have such an education for, if you
be to go and marry a poor man? itbe a cruel thing for a father to
see."
"Mr. Lydgate be not poor, papa. he buy Mr. Peacock's practice,
which, they say, be worth eight or nine hundred a-year."
"stuff and nonsense! whatbe buy a practice? he might as well buy
next year's swallow. itwill all slip through his finger."
"on the contrary, papa, he will increase the practice. see how he have
be call in by the Chettams and Casaubons."
"I hope he know I shallnot give anything--with this disappointment about
Fred, and Parliament go to be dissolve, and machine-break
everywhere, and an election come on--"
"dear papa! what can that have to do with my marriage?"
"a pretty deal to do with it! we may all be ruin for what I know--the
country's in that state! some say itbe the end of the world, and
be hang if I donot think it look like it! anyhow, itbe not a time
for I to be draw money out of my business, and I should wish
Lydgate to know that."
"I be sure he expect nothing, papa. and he have such very high
connection: he be sure to rise in one way or another. he be engage
in make scientific discovery."
Mr. Vincy be silent.
"I cannot give up my only prospect of happiness, papa Mr. Lydgate be a
gentleman. I could never love any one who be not a perfect gentleman.
you would not like I to go into a consumption, as Arabella Hawley do.
and you know that I never change my mind."
again papa be silent.
"promise I, papa, that you will consent to what we wish. we shall
never give each other up; and you know that you have always object to
long courtship and late marriage."
there be a little more urgency of this kind, till Mr. Vincy say,
"well, well, child, he must write to I first before I can answer
him,"--and Rosamond be certain that she have gain her point.
Mr. Vincy's answer consist chiefly in a demand that Lydgate should
insure his life--a demand immediately concede. this be a
delightfully reassuring idea suppose that Lydgate die, but in the
mean time not a self-support idea. however, it seem to make
everything comfortable about Rosamond's marriage; and the necessary
purchase go on with much spirit. not without prudential
consideration, however. a bride (who be go to visit at a
baronet's) must have a few first-rate pocket-handkerchief; but beyond
the absolutely necessary half-dozen, Rosamond content herself without
the very high style of embroidery and valencienne. Lydgate also,
find that his sum of eight hundred pound have be considerably
reduce since he have come to Middlemarch, restrain his inclination
for some plate of an old pattern which be show to he when he go
into Kibble's establishment at Brassing to buy fork and spoon. he
be too proud to act as if he presuppose that Mr. Vincy would advance
money to provide furniture-; and though, since it would not be
necessary to pay for everything at once, some bill would be leave
stand over, he do not waste time in conjecture how much his
father-in-law would give in the form of dowry, to make payment easy.
he be not go to do anything extravagant, but the requisite thing
must be buy, and it would be bad economy to buy they of a poor
quality. all these matter be by the bye. lydgate foresee that
science and his profession be the object he should alone pursue
enthusiastically; but he could not imagine himself pursue they in
such a home as Wrench have--the door all open, the oil-cloth wear, the
child in soil pinafore, and lunch linger in the form of bone,
black-handle knife, and willow-pattern. but Wrench have a wretched
lymphatic wife who make a mummy of herself indoor in a large shawl;
and he must have altogether begin with an ill-choose domestic apparatus.
Rosamond, however, be on her side much occupy with conjecture,
though her quick imitative perception warn she against betray they
too crudely.
"I shall like so much to know your family," she say one day, when the
wedding journey be be discuss. "we might perhaps take a
direction that would allow we to see they as we return. which of
your uncle do you like good?"
"Oh,--my uncle Godwin, I think. he be a good-natured old fellow."
"you be constantly at his house at Quallingham, when you be a boy,
be you not? I should so like to see the old spot and everything you
be use to. do he know you be go to be marry?"
"no," say Lydgate, carelessly, turn in his chair and rub his
hair up.
"do send he word of it, you naughty undutiful nephew. he will perhaps
ask you to take I to Quallingham; and then you could show I about the
ground, and I could imagine you there when you be a boy. remember,
you see I in my home, just as it have be since I be a child. it be
not fair that I should be so ignorant of your. but perhaps you would
be a little ashamed of I. I forget that."
Lydgate smile at her tenderly, and really accept the suggestion that
the proud pleasure of show so charming a bride be worth some
trouble. and now he come to think of it, he would like to see the old
spot with Rosamond.
"I will write to he, then. but my cousin be bore."
it seem magnificent to Rosamond to be able to speak so slightingly of
a baronet's family, and she feel much contentment in the prospect of
be able to estimate they contemptuously on her own account.
but mamma be near spoil all, a day or two later, by saying--
"I hope your uncle Sir Godwin will not look down on Rosy, Mr. Lydgate.
I should think he would do something handsome. a thousand or two can
be nothing to a baronet."
"Mamma!" say Rosamond, blushing deeply; and Lydgate pity she so much
that he remain silent and go to the other end of the room to
examine a print curiously, as if he have be absent-minded. Mamma have a
little filial lecture afterwards, and be docile as usual. but
Rosamond reflect that if any of those high-breed cousin who be
bore, should be induce to visit Middlemarch, they would see many
thing in her own family which might shock they. hence it seem
desirable that Lydgate should by-and-by get some first-rate position
elsewhere than in Middlemarch; and this could hardly be difficult in
the case of a man who have a title uncle and could make discovery.
Lydgate, you perceive, have talk fervidly to Rosamond of his hope as
to the high us of his life, and have find it delightful to be
listen to by a creature who would bring he the sweet furtherance of
satisfy affection--beauty--repose--such help as our thought get
from the summer sky and the flower-fringe meadow.
Lydgate rely much on the psychological difference between what for
the sake of variety I will call goose and gander: especially on the
innate submissiveness of the goose as beautifully correspond to the
strength of the gander.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
"Thrice happy she that be so well assure
Unto herself and settle so in heart
that neither will for well be allure
Ne fear to bad with any chance to start,
but like a steddy ship doth strongly part
the rag wave and keep she course aright;
Ne aught for tempest doth from it depart,
Ne aught for fair weather's false delight.
such self-assurance need not fear the spight
of grudging foe; ne favour seek of friend;
but in the stay of her own stedfast might
neither to one herself nor other bend.
most happy she that most assure doth rest,
but he most happy who such one love good."
--SPENSER.
the doubt hint by Mr. Vincy whether it be only the general election
or the end of the world that be come on, now that George the Fourth
be dead, Parliament dissolve, Wellington and Peel generally
depreciate and the new King apologetic, be a feeble type of the
uncertainty in provincial opinion at that time. with the glow-worm
light of country place, how could man see which be their own
thought in the confusion of a Tory Ministry pass liberal measure,
of Tory noble and elector be anxious to return Liberals rather
than friend of the recreant Ministers, and of outcry for remedy
which seem to have a mysteriously remote bearing on private interest,
and be make suspicious by the advocacy of disagreeable neighbor?
buyer of the middlemarch newspaper find themselves in an anomalous
position: during the agitation on the Catholic Question many have give
up the "Pioneer"--which have a motto from Charles James Fox and be in
the van of progress--because it have take Peel's side about the
Papists, and have thus blot its Liberalism with a toleration of
Jesuitry and Baal; but they be ill-satisfied with the "Trumpet,"
which--since its blast against Rome, and in the general flaccidity of
the public mind (nobody know who would support whom)--had become
feeble in its blowing.
it be a time, accord to a noticeable article in the "Pioneer," when
the cry need of the country might well counteract a reluctance to
public action on the part of man whose mind have from long experience
acquire breadth as well as concentration, decision of judgment as well
as tolerance, dispassionateness as well as energy--in fact, all those
quality which in the melancholy experience of mankind have be the
least disposed to share lodging.
Mr. Hackbutt, whose fluent speech be at that time float more widely
than usual, and leave much uncertainty as to its ultimate channel,
be hear to say in Mr. Hawley's office that the article in question
"emanate" from Brooke of Tipton, and that Brooke have secretly buy
the "Pioneer" some month ago.
"that mean mischief, eh?" say Mr. Hawley. "hebe get the freak of
be a popular man now, after dangle about like a stray tortoise.
so much the bad for he. Ihave have my eye on he for some time. he
shall be prettily pump upon. hebe a damned bad landlord. what
business have an old county man to come curry favor with a low set of
dark-blue freeman? as to his paper, I only hope he may do the writing
himself. it would be worth our pay for."
"I understand he have get a very brilliant young fellow to edit it, who
can write the high style of lead article, quite equal to anything
in the London paper. and he mean to take very high ground on Reform."
"let Brooke reform his rent-roll. hebe a cursed old screw, and the
building all over his estate be go to rack. I suppose this young
fellow be some loose fish from London."
"his name be Ladislaw. he be say to be of foreign extraction."
"I know the sort," say Mr. Hawley; "some emissary. hewill begin with
flourish about the Rights of Man and end with murder a wench.
thatbe the style."
"you must concede that there be abuse, Hawley," say Mr. Hackbutt,
foresee some political disagreement with his family lawyer. "I
myself should never favor immoderate view--in fact I take my stand
with Huskisson--but I cannot blind myself to the consideration that the
non-representation of large towns--"
"large town be damn!" say Mr. Hawley, impatient of exposition. "I
know a little too much about middlemarch election. let them quash
every pocket borough to-morrow, and bring in every mushroom town in the
kingdom--they'll only increase the expense of get into Parliament.
I go upon fact."
Mr. Hawley's disgust at the notion of the "Pioneer" be edit by an
emissary, and of Brooke become actively political--as if a tortoise
of desultory pursuit should protrude its small head ambitiously and
become rampant--be hardly equal to the annoyance feel by some member
of Mr. Brooke's own family. the result have ooze forth gradually, like
the discovery that your neighbor have set up an unpleasant kind of
manufacture which will be permanently under your nostril without legal
remedy. the "Pioneer" have be secretly buy even before Will
Ladislaw's arrival, the expect opportunity have offer itself in
the readiness of the proprietor to part with a valuable property which
do not pay; and in the interval since Mr. Brooke have write his
invitation, those germinal idea of make his mind tell upon the world
at large which have be present in he from his young year, but have
hitherto lain in some obstruction, have be sprout under cover.
the development be much further by a delight in his guest which
prove great even than he have anticipate. for it seem that will
be not only at home in all those artistic and literary subject which
Mr. Brooke have go into at one time, but that he be strikingly ready
at seize the point of the political situation, and deal with they
in that large spirit which, aid by adequate memory, lend itself to
quotation and general effectiveness of treatment.
"he seem to I a kind of Shelley, you know," Mr. Brooke take an
opportunity of say, for the gratification of Mr. Casaubon. "I donot
mean as to anything objectionable--laxity or atheism, or anything of
that kind, you know--Ladislaw's sentiment in every way I be sure be
good--indeed, we be talk a great deal together last night. but he
have the same sort of enthusiasm for liberty, freedom, emancipation--a
fine thing under guidance--under guidance, you know. I think I shall
be able to put he on the right tack; and I be the more pleased because
he be a relation of your, Casaubon."
if the right tack imply anything more precise than the rest of Mr.
Brooke's speech, Mr. Casaubon silently hop that it refer to some
occupation at a great distance from Lowick. he have dislike will while
he help he, but he have begin to dislike he still more now that will
have decline his help. that be the way with we when we have any uneasy
jealousy in our disposition: if our talent be chiefly of the
burrowing kind, our honey-sip cousin (whom we have grave reason
for object to) be likely to have a secret contempt for we, and any
one who admire he pass an oblique criticism on ourselves. have
the scruple of rectitude in our soul, we be above the meanness of
injure he--rather we meet all his claim on we by active benefit;
and the drawing of cheque for he, be a superiority which he must
recognize, give our bitterness a milder infusion. now Mr. Casaubon
have be deprive of that superiority (as anything more than a
remembrance) in a sudden, capricious manner. his antipathy to Will do
not spring from the common jealousy of a winter-wear husband: it be
something deep, breed by his lifelong claim and discontent; but
Dorothea, now that she be present--Dorothea, as a young wife who
herself have show an offensive capability of criticism, necessarily
give concentration to the uneasiness which have before be vague.
will ladislaw on his side feel that his dislike be flourish at the
expense of his gratitude, and spend much inward discourse in justify
the dislike. Casaubon hat he--he know that very well; on his first
entrance he could discern a bitterness in the mouth and a venom in the
glance which would almost justify declare war in spite of past
benefit. he be much oblige to Casaubon in the past, but really the
act of marry this wife be a set-off against the obligation. it be
a question whether gratitude which refer to what be do for one's
self ought not to give way to indignation at what be do against
another. and Casaubon have do a wrong to Dorothea in marry she. a
man be bind to know himself well than that, and if he choose to grow
gray crunch bone in a cavern, he have no business to be lure a
girl into his companionship. "it be the most horrible of
virgin-sacrifice," say will; and he paint to himself what be
Dorothea's inward sorrow as if he have be write a choric wail. but
he would never lose sight of she: he would watch over she--if he give
up everything else in life he would watch over she, and she should know
that she have one slave in the world, will have--to use Sir Thomas
Browne's phrase--a "passionate prodigality" of statement both to
himself and other. the simple truth be that nothing then invite he
so strongly as the presence of Dorothea.
invitation of the formal kind have be want, however, for Will have
never be ask to go to Lowick. Mr. Brooke, indeed, confident of
do everything agreeable which Casaubon, poor fellow, be too much
absorb to think of, have arrange to bring Ladislaw to Lowick several
time (not neglect meanwhile to introduce he elsewhere on every
opportunity as "a young relative of Casaubon's"). and though will have
not see Dorothea alone, their interview have be enough to restore
her former sense of young companionship with one who be clever than
herself, yet seem ready to be sway by she. poor Dorothea before
her marriage have never find much room in other mind for what she
care most to say; and she have not, as we know, enjoy her husband's
superior instruction so much as she have expect. if she speak with
any keenness of interest to Mr. Casaubon, he hear she with an air of
patience as if she have give a quotation from the Delectus familiar to
he from his tender year, and sometimes mention curtly what ancient
sect or personage have hold similar idea, as if there be too much
of that sort in stock already; at other time he would inform she that
she be mistaken, and reassert what her remark have question.
but will Ladislaw always seem to see more in what she say than she
herself see. Dorothea have little vanity, but she have the ardent
woman's need to rule beneficently by make the joy of another soul.
hence the mere chance of see will occasionally be like a lunette
open in the wall of her prison, give she a glimpse of the sunny
air; and this pleasure begin to nullify her original alarm at what her
husband might think about the introduction of Will as her uncle's
guest. on this subject Mr. Casaubon have remain dumb.
but will want to talk with Dorothea alone, and be impatient of slow
circumstance. however slight the terrestrial intercourse between Dante
and Beatrice or Petrarch and Laura, time change the proportion of
thing, and in later day it be preferable to have few sonnet and
more conversation. necessity excuse stratagem, but stratagem be
limit by the dread of offend Dorothea. he find out at last that
he want to take a particular sketch at Lowick; and one morning when
Mr. Brooke have to drive along the Lowick road on his way to the county
town, will ask to be set down with his sketch-book and camp-stool at
Lowick, and without announce himself at the Manor settle himself to
sketch in a position where he must see Dorothea if she come out to
walk--and he know that she usually walk an hour in the morning.
but the stratagem be defeat by the weather. cloud gather with
treacherous quickness, the rain come down, and will be oblige to take
shelter in the house. he intend, on the strength of relationship, to
go into the drawing-room and wait there without be announce; and
see his old acquaintance the butler in the hall, he say, "donot
mention that I be here, Pratt; I will wait till luncheon; I know Mr.
Casaubon do not like to be disturb when he be in the library."
"Master be out, sir; therebe only Mrs. Casaubon in the library. Iwould
well tell she yoube here, sir," say Pratt, a red-cheeked man give
to lively converse with Tantripp, and often agree with she that it
must be dull for Madam.
"oh, very well; this confound rain have hinder I from sketch,"
say will, feel so happy that he affect indifference with
delightful ease.
in another minute he be in the library, and Dorothea be meet he
with her sweet unconstrained smile.
"Mr. Casaubon have go to the Archdeacon's," she say, at once. "I
donot know whether he will be at home again long before dinner. he be
uncertain how long he should be. do you want to say anything
particular to he?"
"no; I come to sketch, but the rain drive I in. else I would not have
disturb you yet. I suppose that Mr. Casaubon be here, and I know
he dislike interruption at this hour."
"I be indebted to the rain, then. I be so glad to see you." Dorothea
utter these common word with the simple sincerity of an unhappy
child, visit at school.
"I really come for the chance of see you alone," say will,
mysteriously force to be just as simple as she be. he could not stay
to ask himself, why not? "I want to talk about thing, as we do in
Rome. it always make a difference when other people be present."
"yes," say Dorothea, in her clear full tone of assent. "sit down."
she seat herself on a dark ottoman with the brown book behind she,
look in her plain dress of some thin woollen-white material, without
a single ornament on she besides her wedding-ring, as if she be under
a vow to be different from all other woman; and will sat down opposite
she at two yard' distance, the light fall on his bright curl and
delicate but rather petulant profile, with its defiant curve of lip
and chin. each look at the other as if they have be two flower
which have open then and there. Dorothea for the moment forget her
husband's mysterious irritation against will: it seem fresh water at
her thirsty lip to speak without fear to the one person whom she have
find receptive; for in look backward through sadness she
exaggerate a past solace.
"I have often think that I should like to talk to you again," she
say, immediately. "it seem strange to I how many thing I say to
you."
"I remember they all," say will, with the unspeakable content in his
soul of feeling that he be in the presence of a creature worthy to be
perfectly love. I think his own feeling at that moment be perfect,
for we mortal have our divine moment, when love be satisfied in the
completeness of the beloved object.
"I have try to learn a great deal since we be in Rome," say
Dorothea. "I can read Latin a little, and I be begin to understand
just a little greek. I can help Mr. Casaubon well now. I can find
out reference for he and save his eye in many way. but it be very
difficult to be learn; it seem as if people be wear out on the way
to great thought, and can never enjoy they because they be too tired."
"if a man have a capacity for great thought, he be likely to overtake
they before he be decrepit," say will, with irrepressible quickness.
but through certain sensibility Dorothea be as quick as he, and
see her face change, he add, immediately, "but it be quite true
that the good mind have be sometimes overstrain in work out
their idea."
"you correct I," say Dorothea. "I express myself ill. I should
have say that those who have great thought get too much worn in
work they out. I use to feel about that, even when I be a little
girl; and it always seem to I that the use I should like to make of
my life would be to help some one who do great work, so that his
burthen might be light."
Dorothea be lead on to this bit of autobiography without any sense of
make a revelation. but she have never before say anything to will
which throw so strong a light on her marriage. he do not shrug his
shoulder; and for want of that muscular outlet he think the more
irritably of beautiful lip kiss holy skull and other emptiness
ecclesiastically enshrine. also he have to take care that his speech
should not betray that think.
"but you may easily carry the help too far," he say, "and get
over-wrought yourself. be you not too much shut up? you already look
paler. it would be well for Mr. Casaubon to have a secretary; he
could easily get a man who would do half his work for he. it would
save he more effectually, and you need only help he in light way."
"how can you think of that?" say Dorothea, in a tone of earnest
remonstrance. "I should have no happiness if I do not help he in his
work. what could I do? there be no good to be do in Lowick. the
only thing I desire be to help he more. and he object to a
secretary: please not to mention that again."
"certainly not, now I know your feeling. but I have hear both Mr.
Brooke and Sir James Chettam express the same wish."
"yes?" say Dorothea, "but they donot understand--they want I to be a
great deal on horseback, and have the garden alter and new
conservatory, to fill up my day. I think you could understand
that one's mind have other want," she add, rather
impatiently--"besides, Mr. Casaubon cannot bear to hear of a secretary."
"my mistake be excusable," say will. "in old day I use to hear Mr.
Casaubon speak as if he look forward to have a secretary. indeed
he hold out the prospect of that office to I. but I turn out to
be--not good enough for it."
Dorothea be try to extract out of this an excuse for her husband's
evident repulsion, as she say, with a playful smile, "you be not a
steady worker enough."
"no," say will, shake his head backward somewhat after the manner of
a spirited horse. and then, the old irritable demon prompt he to
give another good pinch at the moth-wing of poor Mr. Casaubon's glory,
he go on, "and I have see since that Mr. Casaubon do not like any
one to overlook his work and know thoroughly what he be do. he be
too doubtful--too uncertain of himself. I may not be good for much,
but he dislike I because I disagree with he."
will be not without his intention to be always generous, but our
tongue be little trigger which have usually be pull before
general intention can be bring to bear. and it be too intolerable
that Casaubon's dislike of he should not be fairly account for to
Dorothea. yet when he have speak he be rather uneasy as to the effect
on she.
but Dorothea be strangely quiet--not immediately indignant, as she have
be on a like occasion in Rome. and the cause lie deep. she be no
long struggle against the perception of fact, but adjust
herself to their clear perception; and now when she look steadily
at her husband's failure, still more at his possible consciousness of
failure, she seem to be look along the one track where duty become
tenderness. willbe want of reticence might have be meet with more
severity, if he have not already be recommend to her mercy by her
husband's dislike, which must seem hard to she till she see well
reason for it.
she do not answer at once, but after look down ruminatingly she
say, with some earnestness, "Mr. Casaubon must have overcome his
dislike of you so far as his action be concern: and that be
admirable."
"yes; he have show a sense of justice in family matter. it be an
abominable thing that my grandmother should have be disinherit
because she make what they call a mesalliance, though there be
nothing to be say against her husband except that he be a polish
refugee who give lesson for his bread."
"I wish I know all about she!" say Dorothea. "I wonder how she bear
the change from wealth to poverty: I wonder whether she be happy with
her husband! do you know much about they?"
"no; only that my grandfather be a patriot--a bright fellow--could
speak many language--musical--get his bread by teach all sort of
thing. they both die rather early. and I never know much of my
father, beyond what my mother tell I; but he inherit the musical
talent. I remember his slow walk and his long thin hand; and one day
remain with I when he be lie ill, and I be very hungry, and have
only a little bit of bread."
"ah, what a different life from mine!" say Dorothea, with keen
interest, clasp her hand on her lap. "I have always have too much
of everything. but tell I how it be--Mr. Casaubon could not have
know about you then."
"no; but my father have make himself know to Mr. Casaubon, and that be
my last hungry day. my father die soon after, and my mother and I
be well take care of. Mr. Casaubon always expressly recognize it
as his duty to take care of we because of the harsh injustice which have
be show to his mother's sister. but now I be tell you what be
not new to you."
in his inmost soul will be conscious of wish to tell Dorothea what
be rather new even in his own construction of thing--namely, that
Mr. Casaubon have never do more than pay a debt towards he. will be
much too good a fellow to be easy under the sense of be ungrateful.
and when gratitude have become a matter of reasoning there be many way
of escape from its bond.
"no," answer Dorothea; "Mr. Casaubon have always avoid dwelling on
his own honorable action." she do not feel that her husband's
conduct be depreciate; but this notion of what justice have require
in his relation with Will Ladislaw take strong hold on her mind.
after a moment's pause, she add, "he have never tell I that he
support your mother. be she still live?"
"no; she die by an accident--a fall--four year ago. it be curious
that my mother, too, run away from her family, but not for the sake of
her husband. she never would tell I anything about her family, except
that she forsook they to get her own living--go on the stage, in
fact. she be a dark-eyed creature, with crisp ringlet, and never
seem to be get old. you see I come of rebellious blood on both
side," will end, smile brightly at Dorothea, while she be still
look with serious intentness before she, like a child see a drama
for the first time.
but her face, too, break into a smile as she say, "that be your
apology, I suppose, for have yourself be rather rebellious; I mean,
to Mr. Casaubon's wish. you must remember that you have not do
what he think well for you. and if he dislike you--you be
speak of dislike a little while ago--but I should rather say, if he
have show any painful feeling towards you, you must consider how
sensitive he have become from the wear effect of study. perhaps,"
she continue, get into a plead tone, "my uncle have not tell you
how serious Mr. Casaubon's illness be. it would be very petty of we
who be well and can bear thing, to think much of small offence from
those who carry a weight of trial."
"you teach I well," say will. "I will never grumble on that
subject again." there be a gentleness in his tone which come from the
unutterable contentment of perceive--what Dorothea be hardly
conscious of--that she be travel into the remoteness of pure pity
and loyalty towards her husband. will be ready to adore her pity and
loyalty, if she would associate himself with she in manifest they.
"I have really sometimes be a perverse fellow," he go on, "but I
will never again, if I can help it, do or say what you would
disapprove."
"that be very good of you," say Dorothea, with another open smile. "I
shall have a little kingdom then, where I shall give law. but you
will soon go away, out of my rule, I imagine. you will soon be tire
of stay at the Grange."
"that be a point I want to mention to you--one of the reason why I
wish to speak to you alone. Mr. Brooke propose that I should stay
in this neighborhood. he have buy one of the Middlemarch newspaper,
and he wish I to conduct that, and also to help he in other way."
"would not that be a sacrifice of high prospect for you?" say
Dorothea.
"perhaps; but I have always be blame for thinking of prospect, and
not settle to anything. and here be something offer to I. if you
would not like I to accept it, I will give it up. otherwise I would
rather stay in this part of the country than go away. I belong to
nobody anywhere else."
"I should like you to stay very much," say Dorothea, at once, as
simply and readily as she have speak at Rome. there be not the shadow
of a reason in her mind at the moment why she should not say so.
"then I _will_ stay," say Ladislaw, shake his head backward, rise
and go towards the window, as if to see whether the rain have cease.
but the next moment, Dorothea, accord to a habit which be get
continually strong, begin to reflect that her husband feel
differently from herself, and she color deeply under the double
embarrassment of have express what might be in opposition to her
husband's feeling, and of have to suggest this opposition to Will.
if be face be not turn towards she, and this make it easy to say--
"but my opinion be of little consequence on such a subject. I think
you should be guide by Mr. Casaubon. I speak without think of
anything else than my own feeling, which have nothing to do with the
real question. but it now occur to I--perhaps Mr. Casaubon might
see that the proposal be not wise. can you not wait now and mention
it to he?"
"I cannot wait to-day," say will, inwardly sear by the possibility
that Mr. Casaubon would enter. "the rain be quite over now. I tell
Mr. Brooke not to call for I: I would rather walk the five mile. I
shall strike across Halsell Common, and see the gleam on the wet
grass. I like that."
he approach she to shake hand quite hurriedly, longing but not
dare to say, "donot mention the subject to Mr. Casaubon." no, he
dare not, could not say it. to ask she to be less simple and direct
would be like breathe on the crystal that you want to see the light
through. and there be always the other great dread--of himself
become dim and forever ray-shorn in her eye.
"I wish you could have stay," say Dorothea, with a touch of
mournfulness, as she rise and put out her hand. she also have she
thought which she do not like to express:--will certainly ought to
lose no time in consult Mr. Casaubon's wish, but for she to urge
this might seem an undue dictation.
so they only say "good-by," and will quit the house, strike
across the field so as not to run any risk of encounter Mr.
Casaubon's carriage, which, however, do not appear at the gate until
four o'clock. that be an unpropitious hour for come home: it be too
early to gain the moral support under ennui of dress his person for
dinner, and too late to undress his mind of the day's frivolous
ceremony and affair, so as to be prepare for a good plunge into the
serious business of study. on such occasion he usually throw into an
easy-chair in the library, and allow Dorothea to read the London
paper to he, close his eye the while. to-day, however, he
decline that relief, observe that he have already have too many public
detail urge upon he; but he speak more cheerfully than usual, when
Dorothea ask about his fatigue, and add with that air of formal
effort which never forsook he even when he speak without his waistcoat
and cravat--
"I have have the gratification of meet my former acquaintance, Dr.
Spanning, to-day, and of be praise by one who be himself a worthy
recipient of praise. he speak very handsomely of my late tractate on
the egyptian mysteries,--use, in fact, term which it would not
become I to repeat." in utter the last clause, Mr. Casaubon lean
over the elbow of his chair, and sway his head up and down,
apparently as a muscular outlet instead of that recapitulation which
would not have be become.
"I be very glad you have have that pleasure," say Dorothea, delight
to see her husband less weary than usual at this hour. "before you
come I have be regret that you happen to be out to-day."
"why so, my dear?" say Mr. Casaubon, throw himself backward again.
"because Mr. Ladislaw have be here; and he have mention a proposal of
my uncle's which I should like to know your opinion of." her husband
she feel be really concerned in this question. even with her
ignorance of the world she have a vague impression that the position
offer to Will be out of keep with his family connection, and
certainly Mr. Casaubon have a claim to be consult. he do not speak,
but merely bow.
"dear uncle, you know, have many project. it appear that he have
buy one of the Middlemarch newspaper, and he have ask Mr. Ladislaw
to stay in this neighborhood and conduct the paper for he, besides
help he in other way."
Dorothea look at her husband while she speak, but he have at first
blink and finally close his eye, as if to save they; while his lip
become more tense. "what be your opinion?" she add, rather timidly,
after a slight pause.
"do Mr. Ladislaw come on purpose to ask my opinion?" say Mr.
Casaubon, open his eye narrowly with a knife-edge look at
Dorothea. she be really uncomfortable on the point he inquire about,
but she only become a little more serious, and her eye do not swerve.
"no," she answer immediately, "he do not say that he come to ask
your opinion. but when he mention the proposal, he of course
expect I to tell you of it."
Mr. Casaubon be silent.
"I fear that you might feel some objection. but certainly a young
man with so much talent might be very useful to my uncle--might help
he to do good in a well way. and Mr. Ladislaw wish to have some
fix occupation. he have be blame, he say, for not seek
something of that kind, and he would like to stay in this neighborhood
because no one care for he elsewhere."
Dorothea feel that this be a consideration to soften her husband.
however, he do not speak, and she presently recur to Dr. Spanning
and the Archdeacon's breakfast. but there be no long sunshine on
these subject.
the next morning, without Dorothea's knowledge, Mr. Casaubon despatch
the follow letter, begin "dear Mr. Ladislaw" (he have always
before address he as "Will"):--
"Mrs. Casaubon inform I that a proposal have be make to you, and
(accord to an inference by no mean stretch) have on your part be
in some degree entertain, which involve your residence in this
neighborhood in a capacity which I be justify in say touch my
own position in such a way as render it not only natural and
warrantable in I when that effect be view under the influence of
legitimate feeling, but incumbent on I when the same effect be
consider in the light of my responsibility, to state at once that
your acceptance of the proposal above indicate would be highly
offensive to I. that I have some claim to the exercise of a veto
here, would not, I believe, be deny by any reasonable person
cognizant of the relation between we: relation which, though throw
into the past by your recent procedure, be not thereby annul in
their character of determine antecedent. I will not here make
reflection on any person's judgment. it be enough for I to point out
to yourself that there be certain social fitness and propriety
which should hinder a somewhat near relative of mine from become any
wise conspicuous in this vicinity in a status not only much beneath my
own, but associate at well with the sciolism of literary or political
adventurer. at any rate, the contrary issue must exclude you from
further reception at my house.
your faithfully,
"EDWARD CASAUBON."
meanwhile Dorothea's mind be innocently at work towards the further
embitterment of her husband; dwelling, with a sympathy that grow to
agitation, on what will have tell she about his parent and
grandparent. any private hour in her day be usually spend in her
blue-green boudoir, and she have come to be very fond of its pallid
quaintness. nothing have be outwardly alter there; but while the
summer have gradually advance over the western field beyond the avenue
of elm, the bare room have gather within it those memory of an
inward life which fill the air as with a cloud of good or bad angel,
the invisible yet active form of our spiritual triumph or our
spiritual fall. she have be so use to struggle for and to find
resolve in look along the avenue towards the arch of western light
that the vision itself have gain a communicating power. even the pale
stag seem to have reminding glance and to mean mutely, "yes, we
know." and the group of delicately touch miniature have make an
audience as of being no long disturb about their own earthly lot,
but still humanly interested. especially the mysterious "Aunt Julia"
about whom Dorothea have never find it easy to question her husband.
and now, since her conversation with Will, many fresh image have
gather round that Aunt Julia who be Will's grandmother; the presence
of that delicate miniature, so like a live face that she know,
help to concentrate her feeling. what a wrong, to cut off the girl
from the family protection and inheritance only because she have choose
a man who be poor! Dorothea, early trouble her elder with
question about the fact around she, have work herself into some
independent clearness as to the historical, political reason why
eld son have superior right, and why land should be entail: those
reason, impress she with a certain awe, might be weighty than she
know, but here be a question of tie which leave they uninfringed.
here be a daughter whose child--even accord to the ordinary aping
of aristocratic institution by people who be no more aristocratic
than retired grocer, and who have no more land to "keep together" than
a lawn and a paddock--would have a prior claim. be inheritance a
question of like or of responsibility? all the energy of Dorothea's
nature go on the side of responsibility--the fulfilment of claim
found on our own deed, such as marriage and parentage.
it be true, she say to herself, that Mr. Casaubon have a debt to the
Ladislaws--that he have to pay back what the ladislaw have be wrong
of. and now she begin to think of her husband's will, which have be
make at the time of their marriage, leave the bulk of his property to
she, with proviso in case of she have child. that ought to be
alter; and no time ought to be lose. this very question which have
just arise about Will Ladislaw's occupation, be the occasion for
place thing on a new, right footing. her husband, she feel sure,
accord to all his previous conduct, would be ready to take the just
view, if she propose it--she, in whose interest an unfair
concentration of the property have be urge. his sense of right have
surmount and would continue to surmount anything that might be call
antipathy. she suspect that her uncle's scheme be disapprove by
Mr. Casaubon, and this make it seem all the more opportune that a fresh
understanding should be begin, so that instead of Willbe start
penniless and accept the first function that offer itself, he
should find himself in possession of a rightful income which should be
pay by her husband during his life, and, by an immediate alteration of
the will, should be secure at his death. the vision of all this as
what ought to be do seem to Dorothea like a sudden letting in of
daylight, wake she from her previous stupidity and incurious
self-absorb ignorance about her husband's relation to other. will
Ladislaw have refuse Mr. Casaubon's future aid on a ground that no
long appear right to she; and Mr. Casaubon have never himself see
fully what be the claim upon he. "but he will!" say Dorothea. "the
great strength of his character lie here. and what be we do with
our money? we make no use of half of our income. my own money buy I
nothing but an uneasy conscience."
there be a peculiar fascination for Dorothea in this division of
property intend for herself, and always regard by she as excessive.
she be blind, you see, to many thing obvious to other--likely to
tread in the wrong place, as Celia have warn she; yet her blindness
to whatever do not lie in her own pure purpose carry she safely by
the side of precipice where vision would have be perilous with fear.
the thought which have gather vividness in the solitude of she
boudoir occupy she incessantly through the day on which Mr. Casaubon
have send his letter to Will. everything seem hindrance to she till
she could find an opportunity of open her heart to her husband. to
his preoccupied mind all subject be to be approach gently, and she
have never since his illness lose from her consciousness the dread of
agitate he. Bat when young ardor be set brood over the
conception of a prompt deed, the deed itself seem to start forth with
independent life, master ideal obstacle. the day pass in a
sombre fashion, not unusual, though Mr. Casaubon be perhaps unusually
silent; but there be hour of the night which might be count on as
opportunity of conversation; for Dorothea, when aware of her
husband's sleeplessness, have establish a habit of rise, light a
candle, and read he to sleep again. and this night she be from
the begin sleepless, excited by resolve. he sleep as usual for a
few hour, but she have rise softly and have sit in the darkness for
nearly an hour before he said--
"Dorothea, since you be up, will you light a candle?"
"do you feel ill, dear?" be her first question, as she obey he.
"no, not at all; but I shall be oblige, since you be up, if you will
read I a few page of Lowth."
"may I talk to you a little instead?" say Dorothea.
"certainly."
"I have be think about money all day--that I have always have too
much, and especially the prospect of too much."
"these, my dear Dorothea, be providential arrangement."
"but if one have too much in consequence of other be wrong, it
seem to I that the divine voice which tell we to set that wrong
right must be obey."
"what, my love, be the bearing of your remark?"
"that you have be too liberal in arrangement for I--I mean, with
regard to property; and that make I unhappy."
"how so? I have none but comparatively distant connection."
"I have be lead to think about your aunt Julia, and how she be leave
in poverty only because she marry a poor man, an act which be not
disgraceful, since he be not unworthy. it be on that ground, I know,
that you educate Mr. Ladislaw and provide for his mother."
Dorothea wait a few moment for some answer that would help she
onward. none come, and her next word seem the more forcible to she,
fall clear upon the dark silence.
"but surely we should regard his claim as a much great one, even to
the half of that property which I know that you have destine for I.
and I think he ought at once to be provide for on that understanding.
it be not right that he should be in the dependence of poverty while we
be rich. and if there be any objection to the proposal he mention,
the give he his true place and his true share would set aside any
motive for his accept it."
"Mr. Ladislaw have probably be speak to you on this subject?" say
Mr. Casaubon, with a certain bite quickness not habitual to he.
"indeed, no!" say Dorothea, earnestly. "how can you imagine it, since
he have so lately decline everything from you? I fear you think too
hardly of he, dear. he only tell I a little about his parent and
grandparent, and almost all in answer to my question. you be so
good, so just--you have do everything you think to be right. but
it seem to I clear that more than that be right; and I must speak
about it, since I be the person who would get what be call benefit by
that 'more' not be do."
there be a perceptible pause before Mr. Casaubon reply, not quickly
as before, but with a still more biting emphasis.
"Dorothea, my love, this be not the first occasion, but it be well
that it should be the last, on which you have assume a judgment on
subject beyond your scope. into the question how far conduct,
especially in the matter of alliance, constitute a forfeiture of
family claim, I do not now enter. suffice it, that you be not here
qualified to discriminate. what I now wish you to understand be, that
I accept no revision, still less dictation within that range of affair
which I have deliberate upon as distinctly and properly mine. it be
not for you to interfere between I and Mr. Ladislaw, and still less to
encourage communication from he to you which constitute a criticism
on my procedure."
Poor Dorothea, shroud in the darkness, be in a tumult of conflicting
emotion. Alarm at the possible effect on himself of her husband's
strongly manifest anger, would have check any expression of her own
resentment, even if she have be quite free from doubt and compunction
under the consciousness that there might be some justice in his last
insinuation. hear he breathe quickly after he have speak, she sit
listening, frightened, wretched--with a dumb inward cry for help to
bear this nightmare of a life in which every energy be arrest by
dread. but nothing else happen, except that they both remain a
long while sleepless, without speak again.
the next day, Mr. Casaubon receive the following answer from will
ladislaw:--
"DEAR MR. CASAUBON,--I have give all due consideration to your letter
of yesterday, but I be unable to take precisely your view of our mutual
position. with the full acknowledgment of your generous conduct to
I in the past, I must still maintain that an obligation of this kind
cannot fairly fetter I as you appear to expect that it should.
grant that a benefactor's wish may constitute a claim; there must
always be a reservation as to the quality of those wish. they may
possibly clash with more imperative consideration. or a benefactor's
veto might impose such a negation on a man's life that the consequent
blank might be more cruel than the benefaction be generous. I be
merely use strong illustration. in the present case I be unable to
take your view of the bearing which my acceptance of occupation--not
enrich certainly, but not dishonorable--will have on your own
position which seem to I too substantial to be affect in that
shadowy manner. and though I do not believe that any change in our
relation will occur (certainly none have yet occur) which can
nullify the obligation impose on I by the past, pardon I for not
see that those obligation should restrain I from use the
ordinary freedom of live where I choose, and maintain myself by
any lawful occupation I may choose. regret that there exist this
difference between we as to a relation in which the conferring of
benefit have be entirely on your side--
I remain, your with persistent obligation,
WILL LADISLAW."
poor Mr. Casaubon feel (and must not we, be impartial, feel with he
a little?) that no man have juster cause for disgust and suspicion than
he. Young Ladislaw, he be sure, mean to defy and annoy he, mean to
win Dorothea's confidence and sow her mind with disrespect, and perhaps
aversion, towards her husband. some motive beneath the surface have
be need to account for Will's sudden change of in reject Mr.
Casaubon's aid and quit his travel; and this defiant determination
to fix himself in the neighborhood by take up something so much at
variance with his former choice as Mr. Brooke's Middlemarch project,
reveal clearly enough that the undeclared motive have relation to
Dorothea. not for one moment do Mr. Casaubon suspect Dorothea of any
doubleness: he have no suspicion of she, but he have (what be little
less uncomfortable) the positive knowledge that her tendency to form
opinion about her husband's conduct be accompany with a disposition
to regard Will Ladislaw favorably and be influence by what he say.
his own proud reticence have prevent he from ever be undeceive in
the supposition that Dorothea have originally ask her uncle to invite
will to his house.
and now, on receive Will's letter, Mr. Casaubon have to consider his
duty. he would never have be easy to call his action anything else
than duty; but in this case, contend motif thrust he back into
negation.
should he apply directly to Mr. Brooke, and demand of that troublesome
gentleman to revoke his proposal? or should he consult Sir James
Chettam, and get he to concur in remonstrance against a step which
touch the whole family? in either case Mr. Casaubon be aware that
failure be just as probable as success. it be impossible for he to
mention Dorothea's name in the matter, and without some alarming
urgency Mr. Brooke be as likely as not, after meet all
representation with apparent assent, to wind up by say, "never
fear, Casaubon! depend upon it, young Ladislaw will do you credit.
depend upon it, I have put my finger on the right thing." and Mr.
Casaubon shrink nervously from communicate on the subject with Sir
James Chettam, between whom and himself there have never be any
cordiality, and who would immediately think of Dorothea without any
mention of she.
poor Mr. Casaubon be distrustful of everybody's feeling towards he,
especially as a husband. to let any one suppose that he be jealous
would be to admit their (suspect) view of his disadvantage: to let
they know that he do not find marriage particularly blissful would
imply his conversion to their (probably) early disapproval. it would
be as bad as let carp, and Brasenose generally, know how backward
he be in organize the matter for his "key to all Mythologies." all
through his life Mr. Casaubon have be try not to admit even to
himself the inward sore of self-doubt and jealousy. and on the most
delicate of all personal subject, the habit of proud suspicious
reticence tell doubly.
thus Mr. Casaubon remain proudly, bitterly silent. but he have
forbid Will to come to Lowick Manor, and he be mentally prepare
other measure of frustration.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
"C'est beaucoup que le jugement des homme sur les action
humaine; tot ou tard il devient efficace."--guizot.
Sir James Chettam could not look with any satisfaction on Mr. Brooke's
new course; but it be easy to object than to hinder. Sir James
account for his have come in alone one day to lunch with the
Cadwalladers by saying--
"I cannot talk to you as I want, before Celia: it might hurt she.
indeed, it would not be right."
"I know what you mean--the 'Pioneer' at the Grange!" dart in Mrs.
Cadwallader, almost before the last word be off her friend's tongue.
"it be frightful--this taking to buy whistle and blow they in
everybody's hearing. lie in bed all day and play at domino,
like poor Lord Plessy, would be more private and bearable."
"I see they be begin to attack our friend Brooke in the
'Trumpet,'" say the Rector, lounge back and smile easily, as he
would have do if he have be attack himself. "there be tremendous
sarcasm against a landlord not a hundred mile from Middlemarch, who
receive his own rent, and make no return."
"I do wish Brooke would leave that off," say Sir James, with his
little frown of annoyance.
"be he really go to be put in nomination, though?" say Mr.
Cadwallader. "I see Farebrother yesterday--hebe Whiggish himself,
hoist Brougham and useful Knowledge; thatbe the bad I know of
him;--and he say that Brooke be get up a pretty strong party.
Bulstrode, the banker, be his foremost man. but he think Brooke would
come off badly at a nomination."
"exactly," say Sir James, with earnestness. "I have be inquire
into the thing, for Ihave never know anything about Middlemarch
politic before--the county be my business. what Brooke trust to,
be that they be go to turn out Oliver because he be a Peelite. but
Hawley tell I that if they send up a Whig at all it be sure to be
Bagster, one of those candidate who come from heaven know where, but
dead against Ministers, and an experienced parliamentary man. Hawley's
rather rough: he forget that he be speak to I. he say if Brooke
want a pelting, he could get it cheap than by go to the
husting."
"I warn you all of it," say Mrs. Cadwallader, wave her hand
outward. "I say to Humphrey long ago, Mr. Brooke be go to make a
splash in the mud. and now he have do it."
"well, he might have take it into his head to marry," say the Rector.
"that would have be a graver mess than a little flirtation with
politic."
"he may do that afterwards," say Mrs. Cadwallader--"when he have come
out on the other side of the mud with an ague."
"what I care for most be his own dignity," say Sir James. "of course
I care the more because of the family. but hebe get on in life
now, and I donot like to think of his expose himself. they will be
rake up everything against he."
"I suppose itbe no use try any persuasion," say the Rector.
"therebe such an odd mixture of obstinacy and changeableness in Brooke.
have you try he on the subject?"
"well, no," say Sir James; "I feel a delicacy in appear to dictate.
but I have be talk to this young Ladislaw that Brooke be make a
factotum of. Ladislaw seem clever enough for anything. I think it
as well to hear what he have to say; and he be against Brooke's standing
this time. I think hewill turn he round: I think the nomination may be
stave off."
"I know," say Mrs. Cadwallader, nodding. "the independent member
havenot get his speech well enough by heart."
"but this Ladislaw--there again be a vexatious business," say Sir
James. "we have have he two or three time to dine at the Hall (you
have meet he, by the bye) as Brooke's guest and a relation of
Casaubon's, think he be only on a fly visit. and now I find
hebe in everybody's mouth in Middlemarch as the editor of the
'Pioneer.' there be story go about he as a quill-drive alien,
a foreign emissary, and what not."
"Casaubon willnot like that," say the Rector.
"there _be_ some foreign blood in Ladislaw," return Sir James. "I
hope he willnot go into extreme opinion and carry Brooke on."
"oh, hebe a dangerous young sprig, that Mr. Ladislaw," say Mrs.
Cadwallader, "with his opera song and his ready tongue. a sort of
byronic hero--an amorous conspirator, it strike I. and Thomas
Aquinas be not fond of he. I could see that, the day the picture be
bring."
"I donot like to begin on the subject with Casaubon," say Sir James.
"he have more right to interfere than i. but itbe a disagreeable affair
all round. what a character for anybody with decent connection to
show himself in!--one of those newspaper fellow! you have only to
look at Keck, who manage the 'Trumpet.' I see he the other day with
Hawley. his writing be sound enough, I believe, but hebe such a low
fellow, that I wish he have be on the wrong side."
"what can you expect with these peddle Middlemarch paper?" say the
Rector. "I donot suppose you could get a high style of man anywhere to
be write up interest he donot really care about, and for pay that
hardly keep he in at elbow."
"exactly: that make it so annoying that Brooke should have put a man
who have a sort of connection with the family in a position of that
kind. for my part, I think Ladislaw be rather a fool for accept."
"it be Aquinas's fault," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "why donot he use his
interest to get Ladislaw make an attache or send to India? that be how
family get rid of troublesome sprig."
"there be no knowing to what length the mischief may go," say Sir
James, anxiously. "but if Casaubon say nothing, what can I do?"
"oh my dear Sir James," say the Rector, "donot let we make too much of
all this. it be likely enough to end in mere smoke. after a month or
two Brooke and this Master Ladislaw will get tired of each other;
Ladislaw will take wing; Brooke will sell the 'Pioneer,' and everything
will settle down again as usual."
"there be one good chance--that he will not like to feel his money
ooze away," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "if I know the item of election
expense I could scare he. itbe no use ply he with wide word
like expenditure: I wouldnot talk of phlebotomy, I would empty a pot of
leech upon he. what we good stingy people donot like, be have our
sixpence suck away from we."
"and he will not like have thing rake up against he," say Sir
James. "there be the management of his estate. they have begin upon
that already. and it really be painful for I to see. it be a
nuisance under one's very nose. I do think one be bind to do the good
for one's land and tenant, especially in these hard time."
"perhaps the 'Trumpet' may rouse he to make a change, and some good
may come of it all," say the Rector. "I know I should be glad. I
should hear less grumbling when my tithe be pay. I donot know what I
should do if there be not a modus in Tipton."
"I want he to have a proper man to look after thing--I want he to
take on Garth again," say Sir James. "he get rid of Garth twelve
year ago, and everything have be go wrong since. I think of
get Garth to manage for I--he have make such a capital plan for my
building; and Lovegood be hardly up to the mark. but Garth would not
undertake the Tipton estate again unless Brooke leave it entirely to
he."
"in the right of it too," say the Rector. "Garth be an independent
fellow: an original, simple-minded fellow. one day, when he be do
some valuation for I, he tell I point-blank that clergyman seldom
understand anything about business, and do mischief when they meddle;
but he say it as quietly and respectfully as if he have be talk to
I about sailor. he would make a different parish of Tipton, if
Brooke would let he manage. I wish, by the help of the 'Trumpet,' you
could bring that round."
"if Dorothea have keep near her uncle, there would have be some
chance," say Sir James. "she might have get some power over he in
time, and she be always uneasy about the estate. she have wonderfully
good notion about such thing. but now Casaubon take she up
entirely. Celia complain a good deal. we can hardly get she to dine
with we, since he have that fit." Sir James end with a look of pity
disgust, and Mrs. Cadwallader shrug her shoulder as much as to say
that _she_ be not likely to see anything new in that direction.
"Poor Casaubon!" the Rector say. "that be a nasty attack. I think
he look shatter the other day at the Archdeacon's."
"in point of fact," resume Sir James, not choose to dwell on "fit,"
"Brooke donot mean badly by his tenant or any one else, but he have
get that way of paring and clip at expense."
"come, thatbe a blessing," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "that help he to
find himself in a morning. he may not know his own opinion, but he
do know his own pocket."
"I donot believe a man be in pocket by stinginess on his land," say
Sir James.
"oh, stinginess may be abuse like other virtue: it will not do to
keep one's own pig lean," say Mrs. Cadwallader, who have rise to look
out of the window. "but talk of an independent politician and he will
appear."
"what! Brooke?" say her husband.
"yes. now, you ply he with the 'Trumpet,' Humphrey; and I will put
the leech on he. what will you do, Sir James?"
"the fact be, I donot like to begin about it with Brooke, in our mutual
position; the whole thing be so unpleasant. I do wish people would
behave like gentleman," say the good baronet, feel that this be a
simple and comprehensive programme for social well-being.
"here you all be, eh?" say Mr. Brooke, shuffle round and shake
hand. "I be go up to the Hall by-and-by, Chettam. but itbe
pleasant to find everybody, you know. well, what do you think of
things?--going on a little fast! it be true enough, what Lafitte
said--'since yesterday, a century have pass away:'--they're in the
next century, you know, on the other side of the water. go on
fast than we be."
"why, yes," say the Rector, take up the newspaper. "here be the
'trumpet' accuse you of lag behind--do you see?"
"eh? no," say Mr. Brooke, drop his glove into his hat and hastily
adjust his eye-glass. but Mr. Cadwallader keep the paper in his
hand, say, with a smile in his eyes--
"look here! all this be about a landlord not a hundred mile from
Middlemarch, who receive his own rent. they say he be the most
retrogressive man in the county. I think you must have teach they
that word in the 'Pioneer.'"
"oh, that be Keek--an illiterate fellow, you know. Retrogressive, now!
come, thatbe capital. he think it mean destructive: they want to
make I out a destructive, you know," say Mr. Brooke, with that
cheerfulness which be usually sustain by an adversary's ignorance.
"I think he know the meaning of the word. here be a sharp stroke or
two. if we have to describe a man who be retrogressive in the most evil
sense of the word--we should say, he be one who would dub himself a
reformer of our constitution, while every interest for which he be
immediately responsible be go to decay: a philanthropist who cannot
bear one rogue to be hang, but do not mind five honest tenant
be half-starve: a man who shriek at corruption, and keep his
farm at rack-rent: who roar himself red at rotten borough, and do
not mind if every field on his farm have a rotten gate: a man very
open-hearted to Leeds and Manchester, no doubt; he would give any
number of representative who will pay for their seat out of their own
pocket: what he object to give, be a little return on rent-day to
help a tenant to buy stock, or an outlay on repair to keep the weather
out at a tenant's barn-door or make his house look a little less like
an irish cottier's. but we all know the wag's definition of a
philanthropist: a man whose charity increase directly as the square of
the distance. and so on. all the rest be to show what sort of
legislator a philanthropist be likely to make," end the Rector,
throw down the paper, and clasp his hand at the back of his
head, while he look at Mr. Brooke with an air of amused neutrality.
"come, thatbe rather good, you know," say Mr. Brooke, take up the
paper and try to bear the attack as easily as his neighbor do, but
color and smile rather nervously; "that about roar himself red
at rotten borough--I never make a speech about rotten borough in my
life. and as to roar myself red and that kind of thing--these man
never understand what be good satire. Satire, you know, should be true
up to a certain point. I recollect they say that in 'the Edinburgh'
somewhere--it must be true up to a certain point."
"well, that be really a hit about the gate," say Sir James, anxious
to tread carefully. "Dagley complain to I the other day that he
havenot get a decent gate on his farm. Garth have invent a new pattern
of gate--I wish you would try it. one ought to use some of one's
timber in that way."
"you go in for fancy farming, you know, Chettam," say Mr. Brooke,
appear to glance over the column of the "Trumpet." "thatbe your
hobby, and you donot mind the expense."
"I think the most expensive hobby in the world be stand for
Parliament," say Mrs. Cadwallader. "they say the last unsuccessful
candidate at Middlemarch--Giles, benot his name?--spent ten thousand
pound and fail because he do not bribe enough. what a bitter
reflection for a man!"
"somebody be say," say the Rector, laughingly, "that East Retford
be nothing to Middlemarch, for bribery."
"nothing of the kind," say Mr. Brooke. "the Tories bribe, you know:
Hawley and his set bribe with treating, hot codling, and that sort of
thing; and they bring the voter drunk to the poll. but they be not
go to have it their own way in future--not in future, you know.
Middlemarch be a little backward, I admit--the freeman be a little
backward. but we shall educate they--we shall bring they on, you
know. the good people there be on our side."
"Hawley say you have man on your side who will do you harm," remark
Sir James. "he say Bulstrode the banker will do you harm."
"and that if you get pelt," interpose Mrs. Cadwallader, "half the
rotten egg would mean hatred of your committee-man. good heaven!
think what it must be to be pelt for wrong opinion. and I seem to
remember a story of a man they pretend to chair and let he fall into
a dust-heap on purpose!"
"pelt be nothing to their finding hole in one's coat," say the
Rector. "I confess thatbe what I should be afraid of, if we parson
have to stand at the husting for preferment. I should be afraid of
their reckon up all my fishing day. upon my word, I think the
truth be the hard missile one can be pelt with."
"the fact be," say Sir James, "if a man go into public life he must
be prepare for the consequence. he must make himself proof against
calumny."
"my dear Chettam, that be all very fine, you know," say Mr. Brooke.
"but how will you make yourself proof against calumny? you should read
history--look at ostracism, persecution, martyrdom, and that kind of
thing. they always happen to the good man, you know. but what be that
in Horace?--'fiat justitia, ruat . . . something or other."
"exactly," say Sir James, with a little more heat than usual. "what I
mean by be proof against calumny be be able to point to the fact
as a contradiction."
"and it be not martyrdom to pay bill that one have run into one's
self," say Mrs. Cadwallader.
but it be Sir James's evident annoyance that most stir Mr. Brooke.
"well, you know, Chettam," he say, rise, take up his hat and
lean on his stick, "you and I have a different system. you be all
for outlay with your farm. I donot want to make out that my system be
good under all circumstance--under all circumstance, you know."
"there ought to be a new valuation make from time to time," say Sir
James. "return be very well occasionally, but I like a fair
valuation. what do you say, Cadwallader?"
"I agree with you. if I be Brooke, I would choke the 'Trumpet' at
once by get Garth to make a new valuation of the farm, and give
he carte blanche about gate and repair: thatbe my view of the
political situation," say the Rector, broaden himself by stick
his thumb in his armhole, and laugh towards Mr. Brooke.
"thatbe a showy sort of thing to do, you know," say Mr. Brooke. "but
I should like you to tell I of another landlord who have distress his
tenant for arrear as little as I have. I let the old tenant stay
on. Ibe uncommonly easy, let I tell you, uncommonly easy. I have my
own idea, and I take my stand on they, you know. a man who do that
be always charge with eccentricity, inconsistency, and that kind of
thing. when I change my line of action, I shall follow my own idea."
after that, Mr. Brooke remember that there be a packet which he have
omit to send off from the Grange, and he bid everybody hurriedly
good-by.
"I donot want to take a liberty with Brooke," say Sir James; "I see
he be nettle. but as to what he say about old tenant, in point of
fact no new tenant would take the farm on the present term."
"I have a notion that he will be bring round in time," say the
Rector. "but you be pull one way, Elinor, and we be pull
another. you want to frighten he away from expense, and we want to
frighten he into it. well let he try to be popular and see that
his character as a landlord stand in his way. I donot think it
signify two straw about the 'Pioneer,' or Ladislaw, or Brooke's
speechifying to the Middlemarchers. but it do signify about the
parishioner in Tipton be comfortable."
"excuse I, it be you two who be on the wrong tack," say Mrs.
Cadwallader. "you should have prove to he that he lose money by bad
management, and then we should all have pull together. if you put
he a-horseback on politic, I warn you of the consequence. it be
all very well to ride on stick at home and call they idea."
CHAPTER XXXIX.
"if, as I have, you also doe,
Vertue attire in woman see,
and dare love that, and say so too,
and forget the He and she;
and if this love, though place so,
from prophane man you hide,
which will no faith on this bestow,
or, if they doe, deride:
then you have do a braver thing
than all the Worthies do,
and a braver thence will spring,
which be, to keep that hid."
--DR. DONNE.
Sir James Chettam's mind be not fruitful in device, but his grow
anxiety to "act on Brooke," once bring close to his constant belief
in Dorothea's capacity for influence, become formative, and issue in a
little plan; namely, to plead Celia's indisposition as a reason for
fetch Dorothea by herself to the Hall, and to leave she at the
Grange with the carriage on the way, after make she fully aware of
the situation concern the management of the estate.
in this way it happen that one day near four o'clock, when Mr. Brooke
and Ladislaw be seat in the library, the door open and Mrs.
Casaubon be announce.
will, the moment before, have be low in the depth of boredom, and,
oblige to help Mr. Brooke in arrange "document" about hang
sheep-stealer, be exemplify the power our mind have of rid
several horse at once by inwardly arrange measure towards get a
lodge for himself in Middlemarch and cut short his constant
residence at the Grange; while there flit through all these steady
image a tickling vision of a sheep-steal epic write with homeric
particularity. when Mrs. Casaubon be announce he start up as from
an electric shock, and feel a tingling at his finger-end. any one
observe he would have see a change in his complexion, in the
adjustment of his facial muscle, in the vividness of his glance, which
might have make they imagine that every molecule in his body have pass
the message of a magic touch. and so it have. for effective magic be
transcendent nature; and who shall measure the subtlety of those
touch which convey the quality of soul as well as body, and make a
man's passion for one woman differ from his passion for another as joy
in the morning light over valley and river and white mountain-top
differ from joy among chinese lantern and glass panel? will, too,
be make of very impressible stuff. the bow of a violin draw near he
cleverly, would at one stroke change the aspect of the world for he,
and his point of view shift--as easily as his mood. Dorothea's
entrance be the freshness of morning.
"well, my dear, this be pleasant, now," say Mr. Brooke, meeting and
kiss she. "you have leave Casaubon with his book, I suppose.
thatbe right. we must not have you get too learn for a woman,
you know."
"there be no fear of that, uncle," say Dorothea, turn to Will and
shake hand with open cheerfulness, while she make no other form of
greeting, but go on answer her uncle. "I be very slow. when I
want to be busy with book, I be often play truant among my
thought. I find it be not so easy to be learn as to plan cottage."
she seat herself beside her uncle opposite to Will, and be evidently
preoccupy with something that make she almost unmindful of he. he
be ridiculously disappointed, as if he have imagine that her come
have anything to do with he.
"why, yes, my dear, it be quite your hobby to draw plan. but it be
good to break that off a little. hobby be apt to run away with we,
you know; it donot do to be run away with. we must keep the rein.
I have never let myself be run away with; I always pull up. that be
what I tell Ladislaw. he and I be alike, you know: he like to go
into everything. we be work at capital punishment. we shall do a
great deal together, Ladislaw and I."
"yes," say Dorothea, with characteristic directness, "Sir James have
be tell I that he be in hope of see a great change make soon
in your management of the estate--that you be think of have the
farm value, and repair make, and the cottage improve, so that
Tipton may look quite another place. oh, how happy!"--she go on,
clasp her hand, with a return to that more childlike impetuous
manner, which have be subdue since her marriage. "if I be at home
still, I should take to rid again, that I might go about with you
and see all that! and you be go to engage Mr. Garth, who praise
my cottage, Sir James say."
"chettam be a little hasty, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, color
slightly; "a little hasty, you know. I never say I should do anything
of the kind. I never say I should _not_ do it, you know."
"he only feel confident that you will do it," say Dorothea, in a
voice as clear and unhesitate as that of a young chorister chant a
credo, "because you mean to enter Parliament as a member who care for
the improvement of the people, and one of the first thing to be make
well be the state of the land and the laborer. think of Kit Downes,
uncle, who live with his wife and seven child in a house with one
sitting room and one bedroom hardly large than this table!--and those
poor dagley, in their tumble-down farmhouse, where they live in the
back kitchen and leave the other room to the rat! that be one reason
why I do not like the picture here, dear uncle--which you think I
stupid about. I use to come from the village with all that dirt and
coarse ugliness like a pain within I, and the simper picture in
the drawing-room seem to I like a wicked attempt to find delight in
what be false, while we donot mind how hard the truth be for the
neighbor outside our wall. I think we have no right to come forward
and urge wide change for good, until we have try to alter the evil
which lie under our own hand."
Dorothea have gather emotion as she go on, and have forget
everything except the relief of pour forth her feeling, unchecked:
an experience once habitual with she, but hardly ever present since her
marriage, which have be a perpetual struggle of energy with fear. for
the moment, Will's admiration be accompany with a chilling sense of
remoteness. a man be seldom ashamed of feel that he cannot love a
woman so well when he see a certain greatness in she: nature have
intend greatness for man. but nature have sometimes make sad
oversight in carry out her intention; as in the case of good Mr.
Brooke, whose masculine consciousness be at this moment in rather a
stammering condition under the eloquence of his niece. he could not
immediately find any other mode of express himself than that of
rise, fix his eye-glass, and finger the paper before he. at
last he said--
"there be something in what you say, my dear, something in what you
say--but not everything--eh, Ladislaw? you and I donot like our
picture and statue be find fault with. young lady be a little
ardent, you know--a little one-side, my dear. fine art, poetry, that
kind of thing, elevate a nation--emollit more--you understand a
little Latin now. but--eh? what?"
these interrogative be address to the footman who have come in to
say that the keeper have find one of Dagley's boy with a leveret in
his hand just kill.
"Iwill come, Iwill come. I shall let he off easily, you know," say Mr.
Brooke aside to Dorothea, shuffle away very cheerfully.
"I hope you feel how right this change be that I--that Sir James wish
for," say Dorothea to will, as soon as her uncle be go.
"I do, now I have hear you speak about it. I shall not forget what
you have say. but can you think of something else at this moment? I
may not have another opportunity of speak to you about what have
occur," say Will, rise with a movement of impatience, and hold
the back of his chair with both hand.
"pray tell I what it be," say Dorothea, anxiously, also rise and
go to the open window, where Monk be look in, pant and
wag his tail. she lean she back against the window-frame, and
lay her hand on the dog's head; for though, as we know, she be not
fond of pet that must be hold in the hand or trodden on, she be
always attentive to the feeling of dog, and very polite if she have to
decline their advance.
will follow she only with his eye and say, "I presume you know that
Mr. Casaubon have forbid I to go to his house."
"no, I do not," say Dorothea, after a moment's pause. she be
evidently much move. "I be very, very sorry," she add, mournfully.
she be think of what will have no knowledge of--the conversation
between she and her husband in the darkness; and she be anew smite
with hopelessness that she could influence Mr. Casaubon's action. but
the marked expression of her sorrow convince will that it be not all
give to he personally, and that Dorothea have not be visit by the
idea that Mr. Casaubon's dislike and jealousy of he turn upon
herself. he feel an odd mixture of delight and vexation: of delight
that he could dwell and be cherish in her thought as in a pure home,
without suspicion and without stint--of vexation because he be of too
little account with she, be not formidable enough, be treat with an
unhesitate benevolence which do not flatter he. but his dread of
any change in Dorothea be strong than his discontent, and he begin
to speak again in a tone of mere explanation.
"Mr. Casaubon's reason be, his displeasure at my take a position here
which he consider unsuited to my rank as his cousin. I have tell he
that I cannot give way on this point. it be a little too hard on I to
expect that my course in life be to be hamper by prejudice which I
think ridiculous. obligation may be stretch till it be no well
than a brand of slavery stamp on we when we be too young to know
its meaning. I would not have accept the position if I have not mean
to make it useful and honorable. I be not bind to regard family
dignity in any other light."
Dorothea feel wretched. she think her husband altogether in the
wrong, on more ground than will have mention.
"it be well for we not to speak on the subject," she say, with a
tremulousness not common in her voice, "since you and Mr. Casaubon
disagree. you intend to remain?" she be look out on the lawn,
with melancholy meditation.
"yes; but I shall hardly ever see you now," say will, in a tone of
almost boyish complaint.
"no," say Dorothea, turn her eye full upon he, "hardly ever. but
I shall hear of you. I shall know what you be do for my uncle."
"I shall know hardly anything about you," say will. "no one will tell
I anything."
"oh, my life be very simple," say Dorothea, her lip curl with an
exquisite smile, which irradiate her melancholy. "I be always at
Lowick."
"that be a dreadful imprisonment," say will, impetuously.
"no, donot think that," say Dorothea. "I have no longing."
he do not speak, but she reply to some change in his expression. "I
mean, for myself. except that I should like not to have so much more
than my share without do anything for other. but I have a belief
of my own, and it comfort I."
"what be that?" say will, rather jealous of the belief.
"that by desire what be perfectly good, even when we donot quite know
what it be and cannot do what we would, we be part of the divine power
against evil--widen the skirt of light and make the struggle with
darkness narrower."
"that be a beautiful mysticism--it be a--"
"please not to call it by any name," say Dorothea, put out her
hand entreatingly. "you will say it be Persian, or something else
geographical. it be my life. I have find it out, and cannot part
with it. I have always be find out my religion since I be a
little girl. I use to pray so much--now I hardly ever pray. I try
not to have desire merely for myself, because they may not be good for
other, and I have too much already. I only tell you, that you might
know quite well how my day go at Lowick."
"God bless you for tell I!" say will, ardently, and rather
wonder at himself. they be look at each other like two fond
child who be talk confidentially of bird.
"what be _your_ religion?" say Dorothea. "I mean--not what you know
about religion, but the belief that help you most?"
"to love what be good and beautiful when I see it," say will. "but I
be a rebel: I donot feel bound, as you do, to submit to what I donot
like."
"but if you like what be good, that come to the same thing," say
Dorothea, smile.
"now you be subtle," say will.
"yes; Mr. Casaubon often say I be too subtle. I donot feel as if I
be subtle," say Dorothea, playfully. "but how long my uncle be! I
must go and look for he. I must really go on to the Hall. Celia be
expect I."
will offer to tell Mr. Brooke, who presently come and say that he
would step into the carriage and go with Dorothea as far as Dagley's,
to speak about the small delinquent who have be catch with the
leveret. Dorothea renew the subject of the estate as they drive
along, but Mr. Brooke, not be take unawares, get the talk under his
own control.
"Chettam, now," he reply; "he find fault with I, my dear; but I
should not preserve my game if it be not for Chettam, and he cannot
say that that expense be for the sake of the tenant, you know. itbe a
little against my feeling:--poaching, now, if you come to look into
it--I have often think of get up the subject. not long ago,
Flavell, the Methodist preacher, be bring up for knock down a
hare that come across his path when he and his wife be walk out
together. he be pretty quick, and knock it on the neck."
"that be very brutal, I think," say Dorothea
"well, now, it seem rather black to I, I confess, in a Methodist
preacher, you know. and Johnson say, 'you may judge what a
_hypocrite_ he be.' and upon my word, I think Flavell look very
little like 'the high style of man'--as somebody call the
Christian--Young, the poet Young, I think--you know Young? well, now,
Flavell in his shabby black gaiter, plead that he think the Lord
have send he and his wife a good dinner, and he have a right to knock it
down, though not a mighty hunter before the Lord, as Nimrod be--I
assure you it be rather comic: Fielding would have make something of
it--or Scott, now--Scott might have work it up. but really, when I
come to think of it, I couldnot help like that the fellow should have
a bit of hare to say grace over. itbe all a matter of
prejudice--prejudice with the law on its side, you know--about the
stick and the gaiter, and so on. however, it donot do to reason
about thing; and law be law. but I get Johnson to be quiet, and I
hush the matter up. I doubt whether Chettam would not have be more
severe, and yet he come down on I as if I be the hard man in the
county. but here we be at Dagley's."
Mr. Brooke get down at a farmyard-gate, and Dorothea drive on. it be
wonderful how much uglier thing will look when we only suspect that we
be blame for they. even our own person in the glass be apt to
change their aspect for we after we have hear some frank remark on
their less admirable point; and on the other hand it be astonishing
how pleasantly conscience take our encroachment on those who never
complain or have nobody to complain for they. Dagley's homestead never
before look so dismal to Mr. Brooke as it do today, with his mind
thus sore about the fault-finding of the "Trumpet," echo by Sir James.
it be true that an observer, under that soften influence of the fine
art which make other people's hardship picturesque, might have be
delighted with this homestead call Freeman's end: the old house have
dormer-window in the dark red roof, two of the chimney be choke
with ivy, the large porch be block up with bundle of stick, and
half the window be close with gray worm-eat shutter about which
the jasmine-bough grow in wild luxuriance; the mouldering garden wall
with hollyhock peep over it be a perfect study of highly mingle
subdue color, and there be an aged goat (keep doubtless on
interesting superstitious ground) lie against the open back-kitchen
door. the mossy thatch of the cow-shed, the broken gray barn-door,
the pauper laborer in ragged breech who have nearly finish
unload a wagon of corn into the barn ready for early thrashing; the
scanty dairy of cow be tethered for milk and leave one half of
the shed in brown emptiness; the very pig and white duck seem to
wander about the uneven neglect yard as if in low spirit from
feed on a too meagre quality of rinsings,--all these object under
the quiet light of a sky marble with high cloud would have make a
sort of picture which we have all pause over as a "charming bit,"
touch other sensibility than those which be stir by the
depression of the agricultural interest, with the sad lack of farming
capital, as see constantly in the newspaper of that time. but these
troublesome association be just now strongly present to Mr. Brooke,
and spoil the scene for he. Mr. Dagley himself make a figure in the
landscape, carry a pitchfork and wear his milking-hat--a very old
beaver flatten in front. his coat and breech be the good he have,
and he would not have be wear they on this weekday occasion if he
have not be to market and return later than usual, have give
himself the rare treat of dining at the public table of the Blue Bull.
how he come to fall into this extravagance would perhaps be matter of
wonderment to himself on the morrow; but before dinner something in the
state of the country, a slight pause in the harvest before the Far Dips
be cut, the story about the new King and the numerous handbill on
the wall, have seem to warrant a little recklessness. it be a maxim
about Middlemarch, and regard as self-evident, that good meat should
have good drink, which last Dagley interpret as plenty of table ale
well follow up by rum-and-water. these liquor have so far truth in
they that they be not false enough to make poor Dagley seem merry:
they only make his discontent less tongue-tie than usual. he have also
take too much in the shape of muddy political talk, a stimulant
dangerously disturbing to his farming conservatism, which consist in
hold that whatever be, be bad, and any change be likely to be bad.
he be flushed, and his eye have a decidedly quarrelsome stare as he
stand still grasp his pitchfork, while the landlord approach with
his easy shuffling walk, one hand in his trouser-pocket and the other
swing round a thin walking-stick.
"Dagley, my good fellow," begin Mr. Brooke, conscious that he be go
to be very friendly about the boy.
"oh, ay, Ibe a good feller, be I? thank ye, sir, thank ye," say
Dagley, with a loud snarling irony which make fag the sheep-dog stir
from his seat and prick his ear; but see Monk enter the yard after
some outside loitering, Fag seat himself again in an attitude of
observation. "Ibe glad to hear Ibe a good feller."
Mr. Brooke reflect that it be market-day, and that his worthy tenant
have probably be dining, but see no reason why he should not go on,
since he could take the precaution of repeat what he have to say to
Mrs. Dagley.
"your little lad Jacob have be catch kill a leveret, Dagley: I
have tell Johnson to lock he up in the empty stable an hour or two,
just to frighten he, you know. but he will be bring home by-and-by,
before night: and youwill just look after he, will you, and give he a
reprimand, you know?"
"no, I woon't: Iwill be dee'd if Iwill leather my boy to please you or
anybody else, not if you be twenty landlord istid o' one, and that a
bad un."
Dagley's word be loud enough to summon his wife to the back-kitchen
door--the only entrance ever use, and one always open except in bad
weather--and Mr. Brooke, say soothingly, "well, well, Iwill speak to
your wife--I donot mean beat, you know," turn to walk to the
house. but Dagley, only the more inclined to "have his say" with a
gentleman who walk away from he, follow at once, with fag
slouching at his heel and sullenly evade some small and probably
charitable advance on the part of Monk.
"how do you do, Mrs. Dagley?" say Mr. Brooke, make some haste. "I
come to tell you about your boy: I donot want you to give he the
stick, you know." he be careful to speak quite plainly this time.
Overworked Mrs. Dagley--a thin, worn woman, from whose life pleasure
have so entirely vanish that she have not even any Sunday clothe which
could give her satisfaction in prepare for church--have already have a
misunderstanding with her husband since he have come home, and be in
low spirit, expect the bad. but her husband be beforehand in
answer.
"no, nor he woon't hev the stick, whether you want it or no," pursue
Dagley, throw out his voice, as if he want it to hit hard.
"youhave get no call to come an' talk about stick o' these primise, as
you woon't give a stick tow'rt mend. go to Middlemarch to ax for
_your_ charrickter."
"youwould far well hold your tongue, Dagley," say the wife, "and not
kick your own trough over. when a man as be father of a family have
be an' spend money at market and make himself the bad for liquor,
hebe do enough mischief for one day. but I should like to know what
my boybe do, sir."
"Niver do you mind what hebe do," say Dagley, more fiercely, "itbe
my business to speak, an' not yourn. an' I wull speak, too. Iwill hev
my say--supper or no. an' what I say be, as Ihave live upo' your
ground from my father and grandfather afore I, an' hev drop our
money into't, an' I an' my child might lie an' rot on the ground
for top-dressin' as we cannot find the money to buy, if the King benot
to put a stop."
"my good fellow, yoube drunk, you know," say Mr. Brooke,
confidentially but not judiciously. "another day, another day," he
add, turn as if to go.
but Dagley immediately front he, and fag at his heel growl low,
as his master's voice grow loud and more insulting, while Monk also
draw close in silent dignified watch. the laborer on the wagon be
pause to listen, and it seem wise to be quite passive than to
attempt a ridiculous flight pursue by a bawl man.
"Ibe no more drunk nor you be, nor so much," say Dagley. "I can
carry my liquor, an' I know what I meean. an' I meean as the King 'ull
put a stop to 't, for they say it as know it, as therebe to be a
Rinform, and they landlord as never do the right thing by their
tenant 'ull be treat I' that way as theywill hev to scuttle off. an'
therebe they I' Middlemarch know what the rinform be--an' as know
whowill hev to scuttle. say they, 'I know who _your_ landlord be.'
an' say I, 'I hope yoube the well for knowin' he, I arn't.' say
they, 'hebe a close-fiste un.' 'ay ay,' say I. 'hebe a man for the
Rinform,' say they. thatbe what they say. an' I make out what the
Rinform be--an' it be to send you an' your like a-scuttlin' an'
wi' pretty strong-smellin' thing too. an' you may do as you like now,
for Ibe none afeard on you. an' youwould well let my boy aloan, an'
look to yoursen, afore the Rinform have get upo' your back. thatbe what
I'n get to say," conclude Mr. Dagley, strike his fork into the
ground with a firmness which prove inconvenient as he try to draw it
up again.
at this last action Monk begin to bark loudly, and it be a moment for
Mr. Brooke to escape. he walk out of the yard as quickly as he
could, in some amazement at the novelty of his situation. he have never
be insult on his own land before, and have be incline to regard
himself as a general favorite (we be all apt to do so, when we think
of our own amiability more than of what other people be likely to want
of we). when he have quarrel with Caleb Garth twelve year before he
have think that the tenant would be pleased at the landlord's taking
everything into his own hand.
some who follow the narrative of his experience may wonder at the
midnight darkness of Mr. Dagley; but nothing be easy in those time
than for an hereditary farmer of his grade to be ignorant, in spite
somehow of have a rector in the twin parish who be a gentleman to
the backbone, a curate nearer at hand who preach more learnedly than
the rector, a landlord who have go into everything, especially fine
art and social improvement, and all the light of Middlemarch only
three mile off. as to the facility with which mortal escape
knowledge, try an average acquaintance in the intellectual blaze of
London, and consider what that eligible person for a dinner-party would
have be if he have learn scant skill in "sum" from the
parish-clerk of Tipton, and read a chapter in the Bible with immense
difficulty, because such name as Isaiah or Apollos remain
unmanageable after twice spelling. poor Dagley read a few verse
sometimes on a Sunday evening, and the world be at least not dark to
he than it have be before. some thing he know thoroughly, namely,
the slovenly habit of farming, and the awkwardness of weather, stock
and crop, at Freeman's end--so call apparently by way of sarcasm,
to imply that a man be free to quit it if he choose, but that there be
no earthly "beyond" open to he.
CHAPTER XL.
wise in his daily work be he:
to fruit of diligence,
and not to faith or polity,
he ply his utmost sense.
these perfect in their little part,
whose work be all their prize--
without they how could law, or art,
or tower city rise?
in watch effect, if only of an electric battery, it be often
necessary to change our place and examine a particular mixture or group
at some distance from the point where the movement we be interested in
be set up. the group I be move towards be at Caleb Garth's
breakfast-table in the large parlor where the map and desk be:
father, mother, and five of the child. Mary be just now at home
wait for a situation, while Christy, the boy next to she, be
get cheap learning and cheap fare in Scotland, have to his
father's disappointment take to book instead of that sacred calling
"business."
the letter have come--nine costly letter, for which the postman have
be pay three and twopence, and Mr. Garth be forget his tea and
toast while he read his letter and lay they open one above the other,
sometimes sway his head slowly, sometimes screw up his mouth in
inward debate, but not forget to cut off a large red seal unbroken,
which Letty snatch up like an eager terrier.
the talk among the rest go on unrestrainedly, for nothing disturb
Caleb's absorption except shake the table when he be write.
two letter of the nine have be for Mary. after read they, she have
pass they to her mother, and sit play with her tea-spoon absently,
till with a sudden recollection she return to her sewing, which she
have keep on her lap during breakfast.
"oh, donot sew, Mary!" say Ben, pull her arm down. "make I a
peacock with this bread-crumb." he have be knead a small mass for
the purpose.
"no, no, Mischief!" say Mary, good-humoredly, while she prick his
hand lightly with her needle. "try and mould it yourself: you have
see I do it often enough. I must get this sewing do. it be for
Rosamond Vincy: she be to be marry next week, and she cannot be
married without this handkerchief." Mary end merrily, amuse with
the last notion.
"why cannot she, Mary?" say Letty, seriously interested in this
mystery, and push her head so close to her sister that Mary now
turn the threatening needle towards Letty's nose.
"because this be one of a dozen, and without it there would only be
eleven," say Mary, with a grave air of explanation, so that Letty sink
back with a sense of knowledge.
"have you make up your mind, my dear?" say Mrs. Garth, lay the
letter down.
"I shall go to the school at York," say Mary. "I be less unfit to
teach in a school than in a family. I like to teach class well.
and, you see, I must teach: there be nothing else to be do."
"teaching seem to I the most delightful work in the world," say Mrs.
Garth, with a touch of rebuke in her tone. "I could understand your
objection to it if you have not knowledge enough, Mary, or if you
dislike child."
"I suppose we never quite understand why another dislike what we like,
mother," say Mary, rather curtly. "I be not fond of a schoolroom: I
like the outside world well. it be a very inconvenient fault of
mine."
"it must be very stupid to be always in a girl' school," say Alfred.
"such a set of nincompoop, like Mrs. Ballard's pupil walk two and
two."
"and they have no game worth play at," say Jim. "they can neither
throw nor leap. I donot wonder at Mary's not like it."
"what be that Mary donot like, eh?" say the father, look over his
spectacle and pausing before he open his next letter.
"be among a lot of nincompoop girl," say Alfred.
"be it the situation you have hear of, Mary?" say Caleb, gently,
look at his daughter.
"yes, father: the school at York. I have determine to take it. it be
quite the good. thirty-five pound a-year, and extra pay for teach
the small strummer at the piano."
"poor child! I wish she could stay at home with we, Susan," say
Caleb, look plaintively at his wife.
"Mary would not be happy without do her duty," say Mrs. Garth,
magisterially, conscious of have do her own.
"it wouldnot make I happy to do such a nasty duty as that," say
Alfred--at which Mary and her father laugh silently, but Mrs. Garth
say, gravely--
"do find a fitter word than nasty, my dear Alfred, for everything that
you think disagreeable. and suppose that Mary could help you to go to
Mr. Hanmer's with the money she get?"
"that seem to I a great shame. but shebe an old brick," say Alfred,
rise from his chair, and pull Mary's head backward to kiss she.
Mary color and laugh, but could not conceal that the tear be
come. Caleb, look on over his spectacle, with the angle of his
eyebrow fall, have an expression of mingle delight and sorrow as he
return to the opening of his letter; and even Mrs. Garth, her lip
curl with a calm contentment, allow that inappropriate language to
pass without correction, although Ben immediately take it up, and sing,
"shebe an old brick, old brick, old brick!" to a cantering measure,
which he beat out with his fist on Mary's arm.
but Mrs. Garth's eye be now draw towards her husband, who be
already deep in the letter he be read. his face have an expression
of grave surprise, which alarm she a little, but he do not like to
be question while he be read, and she remain anxiously watch
till she see he suddenly shake by a little joyous laugh as he turn
back to the beginning of the letter, and look at she above his
spectacle, say, in a low tone, "what do you think, Susan?"
she go and stand behind he, put her hand on his shoulder, while
they read the letter together. it be from Sir James Chettam, offer
to Mr. Garth the management of the family estate at Freshitt and
elsewhere, and add that Sir James have be request by Mr. Brooke
of Tipton to ascertain whether Mr. Garth would be dispose at the same
time to resume the agency of the Tipton property. the Baronet add in
very obliging word that he himself be particularly desirous of see
the Freshitt and Tipton estate under the same management, and he hop
to be able to show that the double agency might be hold on term
agreeable to Mr. Garth, whom he would be glad to see at the Hall at
twelve o'clock on the following day.
"he write handsomely, donot he, Susan?" say Caleb, turn his eye
upward to his wife, who raise her hand from his shoulder to his ear,
while she rest her chin on his head. "Brooke donot like to ask I
himself, I can see," he continue, laugh silently.
"here be an honor to your father, child," say Mrs. Garth, look
round at the five pair of eye, all fix on the parent. "he be ask
to take a post again by those who dismiss he long ago. that show
that he do his work well, so that they feel the want of he."
"like Cincinnatus--hooray!" say Ben, rid on his chair, with a
pleasant confidence that discipline be relaxed.
"will they come to fetch he, mother?" say Letty, think of the
Mayor and Corporation in their robe.
Mrs. Garth pat Letty's head and smile, but see that her husband
be gather up his letter and likely soon to be out of reach in that
sanctuary "business," she press his shoulder and say emphatically--
"now, mind you ask fair pay, Caleb."
"oh yes," say Caleb, in a deep voice of assent, as if it would be
unreasonable to suppose anything else of he. "itwill come to between
four and five hundred, the two together." then with a little start of
remembrance he say, "Mary, write and give up that school. stay and
help your mother. Ibe as pleased as Punch, now Ihave think of that."
no manner could have be less like that of Punch triumphant than
Caleb's, but his talent do not lie in find phrase, though he be
very particular about his letter-writing, and regard his wife as a
treasury of correct language.
there be almost an uproar among the child now, and Mary hold up the
cambric embroidery towards her mother entreatingly, that it might be
put out of reach while the boy drag she into a dance. Mrs. Garth,
in placid joy, begin to put the cup and plate together, while Caleb
push his chair from the table, as if he be go to move to the
desk, still sit hold his letter in his hand and look on the
ground meditatively, stretch out the finger of his left hand,
accord to a mute language of his own. at last he said--
"itbe a thousand pity Christy donot take to business, Susan. I
shall want help by-and-by. and Alfred must go off to the
engineering--I've make up my mind to that." he fall into meditation and
finger-rhetoric again for a little while, and then continue: "I shall
make Brooke have new agreement with the tenant, and I shall draw up a
rotation of crop. and Iwill lay a wager we can get fine brick out of
the clay at Bott's corner. I must look into that: it would cheapen the
repair. itbe a fine bit of work, Susan! a man without a family would
be glad to do it for nothing."
"mind you donot, though," say his wife, lift up her finger.
"no, no; but itbe a fine thing to come to a man when hebe see into the
nature of business: to have the chance of get a bit of the country
into good fettle, as they say, and put man into the right way with
their farming, and get a bit of good contriving and solid building
do--that those who be live and those who come after will be the
well for. Iwould soon have it than a fortune. I hold it the most
honorable work that be." here Caleb lay down his letter, thrust his
finger between the button of his waistcoat, and sit upright, but
presently proceed with some awe in his voice and move his head
slowly aside--"It's a great gift of God, Susan."
"that it be, Caleb," say his wife, with answer fervor. "and it
will be a blessing to your child to have have a father who do such
work: a father whose good work remain though his name may be
forget." she could not say any more to he then about the pay.
in the evening, when Caleb, rather tired with his day's work, be
seat in silence with his pocket-book open on his knee, while Mrs.
Garth and Mary be at their sewing, and Letty in a corner be
whisper a dialogue with her doll, Mr. Farebrother come up the
orchard walk, divide the bright August light and shadow with the
tufte grass and the apple-tree bough. we know that he be fond of
his parishioner the Garths, and have think Mary worth mention to
Lydgate. he use to the full the clergyman's privilege of disregard
the Middlemarch discrimination of rank, and always tell his mother
that Mrs. Garth be more of a lady than any matron in the town. still,
you see, he spend his evening at the Vincys', where the matron, though
less of a lady, preside over a well-light drawing-room and whist. in
those day human intercourse be not determine solely by respect. but
the Vicar do heartily respect the Garths, and a visit from he be no
surprise to that family. nevertheless he account for it even while
he be shake hand, by say, "I come as an envoy, Mrs. Garth: I
have something to say to you and Garth on behalf of Fred Vincy. the
fact be, poor fellow," he continue, as he seat himself and look
round with his bright glance at the three who be listen to he,
"he have take I into his confidence."
Mary's heart beat rather quickly: she wonder how far Fred's
confidence have go.
"we havenot see the lad for month," say Caleb. "I couldnot think
what be become of he."
"he have be away on a visit," say the Vicar, "because home be a
little too hot for he, and Lydgate tell his mother that the poor
fellow must not begin to study yet. but yesterday he come and pour
himself out to I. I be very glad he do, because I have see he grow
up from a youngster of fourteen, and I be so much at home in the house
that the child be like nephew and niece to I. but it be a
difficult case to advise upon. however, he have ask I to come and
tell you that he be go away, and that he be so miserable about his
debt to you, and his inability to pay, that he cannot bear to come
himself even to bid you good by."
"tell he it donot signify a farthing," say Caleb, wave his hand.
"wehave have the pinch and have get over it. and now Ibe go to be as
rich as a Jew."
"which mean," say Mrs. Garth, smile at the Vicar, "that we be
go to have enough to bring up the boy well and to keep Mary at
home."
"what be the treasure-trove?" say Mr. Farebrother.
"Ibe go to be agent for two estate, Freshitt and Tipton; and
perhaps for a pretty little bit of land in Lowick besides: itbe all the
same family connection, and employment spread like water if itbe once
set go. it make I very happy, Mr. Farebrother"--here Caleb throw
back his head a little, and spread his arm on the elbow of his
chair--"that Ihave get an opportunity again with the letting of the
land, and carry out a notion or two with improvement. itbe a most
uncommonly cramp thing, as Ihave often tell Susan, to sit on
horseback and look over the hedge at the wrong thing, and not be able
to put your hand to it to make it right. what people do who go into
politic I cannot think: it drive I almost mad to see mismanagement
over only a few hundred acre."
it be seldom that Caleb volunteer so long a speech, but his
happiness have the effect of mountain air: his eye be bright, and the
word come without effort.
"I congratulate you heartily, Garth," say the Vicar. "this be the
good sort of news I could have have to carry to Fred Vincy, for he dwelt
a good deal on the injury he have do you in cause you to part with
money--rob you of it, he say--which you want for other purpose.
I wish Fred be not such an idle dog; he have some very good point,
and his father be a little hard upon he."
"where be he go?" say Mrs. Garth, rather coldly.
"he mean to try again for his degree, and he be go up to study
before term. I have advise he to do that. I donot urge he to enter
the Church--on the contrary. but if he will go and work so as to pass,
that will be some guarantee that he have energy and a will; and he be
quite at sea; he donot know what else to do. so far he will please
his father, and I have promise in the mean time to try and reconcile
Vincy to his son's adopt some other line of life. Fred say frankly
he be not fit for a clergyman, and I would do anything I could to
hinder a man from the fatal step of choose the wrong profession. he
quote to I what you say, Miss Garth--do you remember it?" (Mr.
Farebrother use to say "Mary" instead of "Miss Garth," but it be part
of his delicacy to treat she with the more deference because, accord
to Mrs. Vincy's phrase, she work for her bread.)
Mary feel uncomfortable, but, determine to take the matter lightly,
answer at once, "I have say so many impertinent thing to Fred--we
be such old playfellow."
"you say, accord to he, that he would be one of those ridiculous
clergyman who help to make the whole clergy ridiculous. really, that
be so cut that I feel a little cut myself."
Caleb laugh. "she get her tongue from you, Susan," he say, with
some enjoyment.
"not its flippancy, father," say Mary, quickly, fear that her
mother would be displease. "it be rather too bad of Fred to repeat my
flippant speech to Mr. Farebrother."
"it be certainly a hasty speech, my dear," say Mrs. Garth, with whom
speak evil of dignity be a high misdemeanor. "we should not
value our vicar the less because there be a ridiculous curate in the
next parish."
"therebe something in what she say, though," say Caleb, not dispose
to have Mary's sharpness undervalue. "a bad workman of any sort make
his fellow mistrust. thing hang together," he add, look on
the floor and move his foot uneasily with a sense that word be
scanty than thought.
"clearly," say the Vicar, amuse. "by be contemptible we set man's
mind, to the tune of contempt. I certainly agree with Miss Garth's
view of the matter, whether I be condemn by it or not. but as to
Fred Vincy, it be only fair he should be excuse a little: old
Featherstone's delusive behavior do help to spoil he. there be
something quite diabolical in not leave he a farthing after all.
but Fred have the good taste not to dwell on that. and what he care
most about be have offend you, Mrs. Garth; he suppose you will
never think well of he again."
"I have be disappoint in Fred," say Mrs. Garth, with decision.
"but I shall be ready to think well of he again when he give I good
reason to do so."
at this point Mary go out of the room, take Letty with she.
"oh, we must forgive young people when theybe sorry," say Caleb,
watch Mary close the door. "and as you say, Mr. Farebrother, there
be the very devil in that old man."
now Mary's go out, I must tell you a thing--itbe only know to Susan
and I, and youwill not tell it again. the old scoundrel want Mary to
burn one of the will the very night he die, when she be sit up
with he by herself, and he offer she a sum of money that he have in
the box by he if she would do it. but Mary, you understand, could do
no such thing--would not be handle his iron chest, and so on. now,
you see, the will he want burn be this last, so that if Mary have
do what he want, Fred Vincy would have have ten thousand pound.
the old man do turn to he at the last. that touch poor Mary close;
she couldnot help it--she be in the right to do what she do, but she
feel, as she say, much as if she have knock down somebody's property
and break it against her will, when she be rightfully defend
herself. I feel with she, somehow, and if I could make any amend to
the poor lad, instead of bear he a grudge for the harm he do we, I
should be glad to do it. now, what be your opinion, sir? Susan
donot agree with I. she say--tell what you say, Susan."
"Mary could not have act otherwise, even if she have know what would
be the effect on Fred," say Mrs. Garth, pause from her work, and
look at Mr. Farebrother.
"and she be quite ignorant of it. it seem to I, a loss which fall
on another because we have do right be not to lie upon our
conscience."
the Vicar do not answer immediately, and Caleb say, "itbe the
feeling. the child feel in that way, and I feel with she. you donot
mean your horse to tread on a dog when yoube back out of the way;
but it go through you, when itbe do."
"I be sure Mrs. Garth would agree with you there," say Mr.
Farebrother, who for some reason seem more inclined to ruminate than
to speak. "one could hardly say that the feeling you mention about
Fred be wrong--or rather, mistaken--though no man ought to make a claim
on such feeling."
"well, well," say Caleb, "itbe a secret. you will not tell Fred."
"certainly not. but I shall carry the other good news--that you can
afford the loss he cause you."
Mr. Farebrother leave the house soon after, and see Mary in the
orchard with Letty, go to say good-by to she. they make a pretty
picture in the western light which bring out the brightness of the
apple on the old scant-leave bough--Mary in her lavender gingham and
black ribbon hold a basket, while Letty in her well-wear nankin
pick up the fall apple. if you want to know more particularly how
Mary look, ten to one you will see a face like hers in the crowd
street to-morrow, if you be there on the watch: she will not be among
those daughter of Zion who be haughty, and walk with stretch-out
neck and wanton eye, mince as they go: let all those pass, and fix
your eye on some small plump brownish person of firm but quiet
carriage, who look about she, but do not suppose that anybody be
look at she. if she have a broad face and square brow, well-mark
eyebrow and curly dark hair, a certain expression of amusement in her
glance which her mouth keep the secret of, and for the rest feature
entirely insignificant--take that ordinary but not disagreeable person
for a portrait of Mary Garth. if you make her smile, she would show
you perfect little tooth; if you make she angry, she would not raise
her voice, but would probably say one of the bitter thing you have
ever taste the flavor of; if you do she a kindness, she would never
forget it. Mary admire the keen-faced handsome little Vicar in his
well-brush threadbare clothe more than any man she have have the
opportunity of know. she have never hear he say a foolish thing,
though she know that he do unwise one; and perhaps foolish saying
be more objectionable to she than any of Mr. Farebrother's unwise
doing. at least, it be remarkable that the actual imperfection of
the Vicar's clerical character never seem to call forth the same
scorn and dislike which she show beforehand for the predict
imperfection of the clerical character sustain by Fred Vincy. these
irregularity of judgment, I imagine, be find even in riper mind
than Mary Garth's: our impartiality be keep for abstract merit and
demerit, which none of we ever see. will any one guess towards which
of those widely different man Mary have the peculiar woman's
tenderness?--the one she be most inclined to be severe on, or the
contrary?
"have you any message for your old playfellow, Miss Garth?" say the
Vicar, as he take a fragrant apple from the basket which she hold
towards he, and put it in his pocket. "something to soften down that
harsh judgment? I be go straight to see he."
"no," say Mary, shake her head, and smile. "if I be to say that
he would not be ridiculous as a clergyman, I must say that he would be
something bad than ridiculous. but I be very glad to hear that he be
go away to work."
"on the other hand, I be very glad to hear that _you_ be not go
away to work. my mother, I be sure, will be all the happy if you
will come to see she at the vicarage: you know she be fond of have
young people to talk to, and she have a great deal to tell about old
time. you will really be do a kindness."
"I should like it very much, if I may," say Mary. "everything seem
too happy for I all at once. I think it would always be part of my
life to long for home, and lose that grievance make I feel rather
empty: I suppose it serve instead of sense to fill up my mind?"
"may I go with you, Mary?" whisper Letty--a most inconvenient child,
who listen to everything. but she be make exultant by have she
chin pinch and her cheek kiss by Mr. Farebrother--an incident
which she narrate to her mother and father.
as the Vicar walk to Lowick, any one watch he closely might have
see he twice shrug his shoulder. I think that the rare Englishmen
who have this gesture be never of the heavy type--for fear of any
lumber instance to the contrary, I will say, hardly ever; they have
usually a fine temperament and much tolerance towards the small
error of man (themselves inclusive). the Vicar be hold an inward
dialogue in which he tell himself that there be probably something
more between Fred and Mary Garth than the regard of old playfellow,
and reply with a question whether that bit of womanhood be not a
great deal too choice for that crude young gentleman. the rejoinder to
this be the first shrug. then he laugh at himself for be likely
to have feel jealous, as if he have be a man able to marry, which,
add he, it be as clear as any balance-sheet that I be not. Whereupon
follow the second shrug.
what could two man, so different from each other, see in this "brown
patch," as Mary call herself? it be certainly not her plainness
that attract they (and let all plain young lady be warn against
the dangerous encouragement give they by Society to confide in their
want of beauty). a human being in this aged nation of ours be a very
wonderful whole, the slow creation of long interchange influence:
and charm be a result of two such whole, the one love and the one
love.
when Mr. and Mrs. Garth be sit alone, Caleb say, "Susan, guess
what Ibe think of."
"the rotation of crop," say Mrs. Garth, smile at he, above she
knitting, "or else the back-door of the Tipton cottage."
"no," say Caleb, gravely; "I be think that I could do a great turn
for Fred Vincy. Christy's gone, Alfred will be go soon, and it will
be five year before Jim be ready to take to business. I shall want
help, and Fred might come in and learn the nature of thing and act
under I, and it might be the making of he into a useful man, if he
give up be a parson. what do you think?"
"I think, there be hardly anything honest that his family would object
to more," say Mrs. Garth, decidedly.
"what care I about their objecting?" say Caleb, with a sturdiness
which he be apt to show when he have an opinion. "the lad be of age
and must get his bread. he have sense enough and quickness enough; he
like be on the land, and itbe my belief that he could learn
business well if he give his mind to it."
"but would he? his father and mother want he to be a fine
gentleman, and I think he have the same sort of feel himself. they
all think we beneath they. and if the proposal come from you, I be
sure Mrs. Vincy would say that we want Fred for Mary."
"life be a poor tale, if it be to be settle by nonsense of that sort,"
say Caleb, with disgust.
"yes, but there be a certain pride which be proper, Caleb."
"I call it improper pride to let fool' notion hinder you from do a
good action. therebe no sort of work," say Caleb, with fervor,
put out his hand and move it up and down to mark his emphasis,
"that could ever be do well, if you minded what fool say. you must
have it inside you that your plan be right, and that plan you must
follow."
"I will not oppose any plan you have set your mind on, Caleb," say
Mrs. Garth, who be a firm woman, but know that there be some point
on which her mild husband be yet firm. "still, it seem to be fix
that Fred be to go back to college: will it not be well to wait and
see what he will choose to do after that? it be not easy to keep
people against their will. and you be not yet quite sure enough of
your own position, or what you will want."
"well, it may be well to wait a bit. but as to my get plenty of
work for two, Ibe pretty sure of that. Ihave always have my hand full
with scattered thing, and therebe always something fresh turn up.
why, only yesterday--bless I, I donot think I tell you!--it be rather
odd that two man should have be at I on different side to do the
same bit of valuing. and who do you think they be?" say Caleb,
take a pinch of snuff and hold it up between his finger, as if it
be a part of his exposition. he be fond of a pinch when it occur
to he, but he usually forget that this indulgence be at his command.
his wife hold down her knitting and look attentive.
"why, that Rigg, or Rigg Featherstone, be one. but Bulstrode be
before he, so Ibe go to do it for Bulstrode. whether itbe mortgage
or purchase theybe go for, I cannot tell yet."
"can that man be go to sell the land just leave he--which he have
take the name for?" say Mrs. Garth.
"deuce know," say Caleb, who never refer the knowledge of
discreditable doing to any high power than the deuce. "but
Bulstrode have long be want to get a handsome bit of land under his
finger--that I know. and itbe a difficult matter to get, in this part
of the country."
Caleb scatter his snuff carefully instead of take it, and then
add, "the in and out of thing be curious. here be the land
theyhave be all along expect for Fred, which it seem the old man
never mean to leave he a foot of, but leave it to this side-slip of a
son that he keep in the dark, and thought of his sticking there and
vex everybody as well as he could have vex them himself if he could
have keep alive. I say, it would be curious if it get into Bulstrode's
hand after all. the old man hat he, and never would bank with he."
"what reason could the miserable creature have for hat a man whom he
have nothing to do with?" say Mrs. Garth.
"Pooh! wherebe the use of ask for such fellow' reason? the soul
of man," say Caleb, with the deep tone and grave shake of the head
which always come when he use this phrase--"the soul of man, when it
get fairly rotten, will bear you all sort of poisonous toad-stool,
and no eye can see whence come the seed thereof."
it be one of Caleb's quaintness, that in his difficulty of find
speech for his thought, he catch, as it be, snatch of diction
which he associate with various point of view or state of mind; and
whenever he have a feeling of awe, he be haunt by a sense of biblical
phraseology, though he could hardly have give a strict quotation.
CHAPTER XLI.
"by swagger could I never thrive,
for the rain it raineth every day.
--Twelfth Night
the transaction refer to by Caleb Garth as have go forward
between Mr. Bulstrode and Mr. Joshua Rigg Featherstone concern the
land attach to Stone Court, have occasion the interchange of a
letter or two between these personage.
who shall tell what may be the effect of writing? if it happen to
have be cut in stone, though it lie face down-most for age on a
forsake beach, or "rest quietly under the drum and trampling of many
conquest," it may end by let we into the secret of usurpation and
other scandal gossip about long empire ago:--this world be
apparently a huge whispering-gallery. such condition be often
minutely represent in our petty lifetime. as the stone which have
be kick by generation of clown may come by curious little link
of effect under the eye of a scholar, through whose labor it may at
last fix the date of invasion and unlock religion, so a bit of ink
and paper which have long be an innocent wrapping or stop-gap may at
last be lay open under the one pair of eye which have knowledge
enough to turn it into the opening of a catastrophe. to Uriel watch
the progress of planetary history from the sun, the one result would be
just as much of a coincidence as the other.
have make this rather lofty comparison I be less uneasy in call
attention to the existence of low people by whose interference, however
little we may like it, the course of the world be very much determined.
it would be well, certainly, if we could help to reduce their number,
and something might perhaps be do by not lightly give occasion to
their existence. socially speak, Joshua Rigg would have be
generally pronounce a superfluity. but those who like Peter
Featherstone never have a copy of themselves demand, be the very last
to wait for such a request either in prose or verse. the copy in this
case bear more of outside resemblance to the mother, in whose sex
frog-feature, accompany with fresh-colored cheek and a well-rounded
figure, be compatible with much charm for a certain order of admirer.
the result be sometimes a frog-face male, desirable, surely, to no
order of intelligent being. especially when he be suddenly bring
into evidence to frustrate other people's expectation--the very
low aspect in which a social superfluity can present himself.
but Mr. Rigg Featherstone's low characteristic be all of the sober,
water-drinking kind. from the early to the late hour of the day
he be always as sleek, neat, and cool as the frog he resemble, and
old Peter have secretly chuckle over an offshoot almost more
calculating, and far more imperturbable, than himself. I will add that
his finger-nail be scrupulously attend to, and that he mean to
marry a well-educate young lady (as yet unspecified) whose person be
good, and whose connection, in a solid middle-class way, be
undeniable. thus his nail and modesty be comparable to those of
most gentleman; though his ambition have be educate only by the
opportunity of a clerk and accountant in the small commercial
house of a seaport. he think the rural Featherstones very simple
absurd people, and they in their turn regard his "bring up" in a
seaport town as an exaggeration of the monstrosity that their brother
Peter, and still more Peter's property, should have have such belonging.
the garden and gravel approach, as see from the two window of the
wainscote parlor at Stone Court, be never in well trim than now,
when Mr. Rigg Featherstone stand, with his hand behind he, look
out on these ground as their master. but it seem doubtful whether
he look out for the sake of contemplation or of turn his back to a
person who stand in the middle of the room, with his leg considerably
apart and his hand in his trouser-pocket: a person in all respect a
contrast to the sleek and cool Rigg. he be a man obviously on the way
towards sixty, very florid and hairy, with much gray in his bushy
whisker and thick curly hair, a stoutish body which show to
disadvantage the somewhat worn joining of his clothe, and the air of
a swaggerer, who would aim at be noticeable even at a show of
firework, regard his own remark on any other person's performance
as likely to be more interesting than the performance itself.
his name be John Raffles, and he sometimes write jocosely W.A.G.
after his signature, observe when he do so, that he be once teach
by Leonard Lamb of Finsbury who write B.A. after his name, and that he,
Raffles, originate the witticism of call that celebrate principal
Ba-Lamb. such be the appearance and mental flavor of Mr. Raffles,
both of which seem to have a stale odor of traveller' room in the
commercial hotel of that period.
"come, now, Josh," he be say, in a full rumble tone, "look at it
in this light: here be your poor mother go into the vale of year,
and you could afford something handsome now to make her comfortable."
"not while you live. nothing would make her comfortable while you
live," return Rigg, in his cool high voice. "what I give she, youwill
take."
"you bear I a grudge, Josh, that I know. but come, now--as between
man and man--without humbug--a little capital might enable I to make a
first-rate thing of the shop. the tobacco trade be grow. I should
cut my own nose off in not do the good I could at it. I should
stick to it like a flea to a fleece for my own sake. I should always
be on the spot. and nothing would make your poor mother so happy.
Ihave pretty well do with my wild oat--turn fifty-five. I want to
settle down in my chimney-corner. and if I once buckle to the tobacco
trade, I could bring an amount of brain and experience to bear on it
that would not be find elsewhere in a hurry. I donot want to be
bother you one time after another, but to get thing once for all
into the right channel. consider that, Josh--as between man and
man--and with your poor mother to be make easy for her life. I be
always fond of the old woman, by Jove!"
"have you do?" say Mr. Rigg, quietly, without look away from the
window.
"yes, Ihave do," say Raffles, take hold of his hat which stand
before he on the table, and give it a sort of oratorical push.
"then just listen to I. the more you say anything, the less I shall
believe it. the more you want I to do a thing, the more reason I
shall have for never do it. do you think I mean to forget your
kick I when I be a lad, and eat all the good victual away from
I and my mother? do you think I forget your always come home to
sell and pocket everything, and go off again leave we in the
lurch? I should be glad to see you whip at the cart-tail. my
mother be a fool to you: shehave no right to give I a father-in-law,
and shebe be punish for it. she shall have her weekly allowance
pay and no more: and that shall be stop if you dare to come on to
these premise again, or to come into this country after I again. the
next time you show yourself inside the gate here, you shall be drive
off with the dog and the wagoner's whip."
as Rigg pronounce the last word he turn round and look at Raffles
with his prominent frozen eye. the contrast be as striking as it
could have be eighteen year before, when Rigg be a most unengaging
kickable boy, and Raffles be the rather thick-set Adonis of bar-room
and back-parlor. but the advantage now be on the side of Rigg, and
auditor of this conversation might probably have expect that Raffles
would retire with the air of a defeat dog. not at all. he make a
grimace which be habitual with he whenever he be "out" in a game;
then subside into a laugh, and draw a brandy-flask from his pocket.
"Come, Josh," he say, in a cajole tone, "give we a spoonful of
brandy, and a sovereign to pay the way back, and Iwill go. honor
bright! Iwill go like a bullet, _by_ Jove!"
"mind," say Rigg, draw out a bunch of key, "if I ever see you
again, I shallnot speak to you. I donot own you any more than if I see a
crow; and if you want to own I youwill get nothing by it but a
character for be what you be--a spiteful, brassy, bully rogue."
"thatbe a pity, now, Josh," say Raffles, affect to scratch his head
and wrinkle his brow upward as if he be nonplus. "Ibe very fond
of you; _by_ Jove, I be! therebe nothing I like well than plague
you--you're so like your mother, and I must do without it. but the
brandy and the sovereignbe a bargain."
he jerk forward the flask and Rigg go to a fine old oaken bureau
with his key. but Raffles have remind himself by his movement with
the flask that it have become dangerously loose from its leather
covering, and catch sight of a fold paper which have fall within
the fender, he take it up and shove it under the leather so as to make
the glass firm.
by that time Rigg come forward with a brandy-bottle, fill the flask,
and hand Raffles a sovereign, neither look at he nor speak to
he. after lock up the bureau again, he walk to the window and
gaze out as impassibly as he have do at the beginning of the
interview, while Raffles take a small allowance from the flask, screw
it up, and deposit it in his side-pocket, with provoke slowness,
make a grimace at his stepson's back.
"Farewell, Josh--and if forever!" say Raffles, turn back his head
as he open the door.
Rigg see he leave the ground and enter the lane. the gray day have
turn to a light drizzling rain, which freshen the hedgerow and the
grassy border of the by-road, and hasten the laborer who be
load the last shock of corn. raffle, walk with the uneasy gait
of a town loiterer oblige to do a bit of country journey on foot,
look as incongruous amid this moist rural quiet and industry as if he
have be a baboon escape from a menagerie. but there be none to
stare at he except the long-wean calf, and none to show dislike of
his appearance except the little water-rat which rustle away at his
approach.
he be fortunate enough when he get on to the highroad to be overtake
by the stage-coach, which carry he to Brassing; and there he take
the new-make railway, observe to his fellow-passenger that he
consider it pretty well seasoned now it have do for Huskisson. Mr.
Raffles on most occasion keep up the sense of have be educate at
an academy, and be able, if he choose, to pass well everywhere;
indeed, there be not one of his fellow-man whom he do not feel
himself in a position to ridicule and torment, confident of the
entertainment which he thus give to all the rest of the company.
he play this part now with as much spirit as if his journey have be
entirely successful, resort at frequent interval to his flask. the
paper with which he have wedge it be a letter sign Nicholas
Bulstrode, but Raffles be not likely to disturb it from its present
useful position.
CHAPTER XLII.
"how much, methink, I could despise this man
be I not bind in charity against it!
--SHAKESPEARE: Henry VIII.
one of the professional call make by Lydgate soon after his return
from his wedding-journey be to Lowick Manor, in consequence of a
letter which have request he to fix a time for his visit.
Mr. Casaubon have never put any question concern the nature of his
illness to Lydgate, nor have he even to Dorothea betray any anxiety as
to how far it might be likely to cut short his labor or his life. on
this point, as on all other, he shrink from pity; and if the suspicion
of be pity for anything in his lot surmise or know in spite of
himself be embitter, the idea of call forth a show of compassion
by frankly admit an alarm or a sorrow be necessarily intolerable
to he. every proud mind know something of this experience, and
perhaps it be only to be overcome by a sense of fellowship deep enough
to make all effort at isolation seem mean and petty instead of
exalt.
but Mr. Casaubon be now brood over something through which the
question of his health and life haunt his silence with a more
harass importunity even than through the autumnal unripeness of his
authorship. it be true that this last might be call his central
ambition; but there be some kind of authorship in which by far the
large result be the uneasy susceptibility accumulate in the
consciousness of the author--one know of the river by a few streak
amid a long-gather deposit of uncomfortable mud. that be the way
with Mr. Casaubon's hard intellectual labor. their most
characteristic result be not the "key to all Mythologies," but a
morbid consciousness that other do not give he the place which he
have not demonstrably merit--a perpetual suspicious conjecture that
the view entertain of he be not to his advantage--a melancholy
absence of passion in his effort at achievement, and a passionate
resistance to the confession that he have achieve nothing.
thus his intellectual ambition which seem to other to have absorb
and dry he, be really no security against wound, least of all
against those which come from Dorothea. and he have begin now to frame
possibility for the future which be somehow more embitter to he
than anything his mind have dwell on before.
against certain fact he be helpless: against Will Ladislaw's
existence, his defiant stay in the neighborhood of Lowick, and his
flippant state of mind with regard to the possessor of authentic,
well-stamp erudition: against Dorothea's nature, always take on
some new shape of ardent activity, and even in submission and silence
cover fervid reason which it be an irritation to think of: against
certain notion and liking which have take possession of her mind in
relation to subject that he could not possibly discuss with she.
there be no deny that Dorothea be as virtuous and lovely a young
lady as he could have obtain for a wife; but a young lady turn out
to be something more troublesome than he have conceive. she nurse
he, she read to he, she anticipate his want, and be solicitous
about his feeling; but there have enter into the husband's mind the
certainty that she judge he, and that her wifely devotedness be like
a penitential expiation of unbelieve thought--be accompany with a
power of comparison by which himself and his doing be see too
luminously as a part of thing in general. his discontent pass
vapor-like through all her gentle love manifestation, and clung to
that inappreciative world which she have only bring near to he.
poor Mr. Casaubon! this suffering be the hard to bear because it
seem like a betrayal: the young creature who have worship he with
perfect trust have quickly turn into the critical wife; and early
instance of criticism and resentment have make an impression which no
tenderness and submission afterwards could remove. to his suspicious
interpretation Dorothea's silence now be a suppress rebellion; a
remark from she which he have not in any way anticipate be an
assertion of conscious superiority; her gentle answer have an
irritate cautiousness in they; and when she acquiesce it be a
self-approve effort of forbearance. the tenacity with which he strove
to hide this inward drama make it the more vivid for he; as we hear
with the more keenness what we wish other not to hear.
instead of wonder at this result of misery in Mr. Casaubon, I think
it quite ordinary. will not a tiny speck very close to our vision blot
out the glory of the world, and leave only a margin by which we see the
blot? I know no speck so troublesome as self. and who, if Mr.
Casaubon have choose to expound his discontent--his suspicion that he
be not any long adore without criticism--could have deny that
they be found on good reason? on the contrary, there be a strong
reason to be add, which he have not himself take explicitly into
account--namely, that he be not unmixedly adorable. he suspect
this, however, as he suspect other thing, without confess it, and
like the rest of we, feel how soothing it would have be to have a
companion who would never find it out.
this sore susceptibility in relation to Dorothea be thoroughly
prepare before Will Ladislaw have return to Lowick, and what have
occur since then have bring Mr. Casaubon's power of suspicious
construction into exasperate activity. to all the fact which he
know, he add imaginary fact both present and future which become
more real to he than those because they call up a strong dislike,
a more predominating bitterness. suspicion and jealousy of Will
Ladislaw's intention, suspicion and jealousy of Dorothea's
impression, be constantly at their weaving work. it would be quite
unjust to he to suppose that he could have enter into any coarse
misinterpretation of Dorothea: his own habit of mind and conduct,
quite as much as the open elevation of her nature, save he from any
such mistake. what he be jealous of be her opinion, the sway that
might be give to her ardent mind in its judgment, and the future
possibility to which these might lead she. as to will, though until
his last defiant letter he have nothing definite which he would choose
formally to allege against he, he feel himself warrant in believe
that he be capable of any design which could fascinate a rebellious
temper and an undisciplined impulsiveness. he be quite sure that
Dorothea be the cause of Will's return from Rome, and his
determination to settle in the neighborhood; and he be penetrate
enough to imagine that Dorothea have innocently encourage this course.
it be as clear as possible that she be ready to be attach to Will
and to be pliant to his suggestion: they have never have a tete-a-tete
without her bring away from it some new troublesome impression, and
the last interview that Mr. Casaubon be aware of (Dorothea, on
return from Freshitt Hall, have for the first time be silent about
have see Will) have lead to a scene which rouse an angrier feel
against they both than he have ever know before. Dorothea's outpouring
of her notion about money, in the darkness of the night, have do
nothing but bring a mixture of more odious foreboding into her
husband's mind.
and there be the shock lately give to his health always sadly present
with he. he be certainly much revive; he have recover all his
usual power of work: the illness might have be mere fatigue, and
there might still be twenty year of achievement before he, which
would justify the thirty year of preparation. that prospect be make
the sweet by a flavor of vengeance against the hasty sneer of Carp &
Company; for even when Mr. Casaubon be carry his taper among the
tomb of the past, those modern figure come athwart the dim light, and
interrupt his diligent exploration. to convince carp of his mistake,
so that he would have to eat his own word with a good deal of
indigestion, would be an agreeable accident of triumphant authorship,
which the prospect of live to future age on earth and to all
eternity in heaven could not exclude from contemplation. since, thus,
the prevision of his own unending bliss could not nullify the bitter
savor of irritated jealousy and vindictiveness, it be the less
surprising that the probability of a transient earthly bliss for other
person, when he himself should have enter into glory, have not a
potently sweeten effect. if the truth should be that some
undermine disease be at work within he, there might be large
opportunity for some people to be the happy when he be go; and if
one of those people should be Will Ladislaw, Mr. Casaubon object so
strongly that it seem as if the annoyance would make part of his
disembody existence.
this be a very bare and therefore a very incomplete way of put the
case. the human soul move in many channel, and Mr. Casaubon, we
know, have a sense of rectitude and an honorable pride in satisfy the
requirement of honor, which compel he to find other reason for
his conduct than those of jealousy and vindictiveness. the way in
which Mr. Casaubon put the case be this:--"In marry Dorothea Brooke
I have to care for her well-being in case of my death. but well-being
be not to be secure by ample, independent possession of property; on
the contrary, occasion might arise in which such possession might
expose she to the more danger. she be ready prey to any man who know
how to play adroitly either on her affectionate ardor or her quixotic
enthusiasm; and a man stand by with that very intention in his mind--a
man with no other principle than transient caprice, and who have a
personal animosity towards I--I be sure of it--an animosity which be
feed by the consciousness of his ingratitude, and which he have
constantly vent in ridicule of which I be as well assure as if I have
hear it. even if I live I shall not be without uneasiness as to what
he may attempt through indirect influence. this man have gain
Dorothea's ear: he have fascinate her attention; he have evidently try
to impress her mind with the notion that he have claim beyond anything
I have do for he. if I die--and he be wait here on the watch for
that--he will persuade she to marry he. that would be calamity for
she and success for he. _she_ would not think it calamity: he would
make she believe anything; she have a tendency to immoderate attachment
which she inwardly reproach I for not respond to, and already her
mind be occupy with his fortune. he think of an easy conquest and
of enter into my nest. that I will hinder! such a marriage would be
fatal to Dorothea. have he ever persist in anything except from
contradiction? in knowledge he have always try to be showy at small
cost. in religion he could be, as long as it suit he, the facile
echo of Dorothea's vagary. when be sciolism ever dissociate from
laxity? I utterly distrust his moral, and it be my duty to hinder to
the utmost the fulfilment of his design."
the arrangement make by Mr. Casaubon on his marriage leave strong
measure open to he, but in ruminate on they his mind inevitably
dwelt so much on the probability of his own life that the longing to
get the near possible calculation have at last overcome his proud
reticence, and have determine he to ask Lydgate's opinion as to the
nature of his illness.
he have mention to Dorothea that Lydgate be come by appointment at
half-past three, and in answer to her anxious question, whether he have
feel ill, replied,--"no, I merely wish to have his opinion concern
some habitual symptom. you need not see he, my dear. I shall give
order that he may be send to I in the Yew-tree Walk, where I shall be
take my usual exercise."
when Lydgate enter the Yew-tree Walk he see Mr. Casaubon slowly
recede with his hand behind he accord to his habit, and his head
bend forward. it be a lovely afternoon; the leaf from the lofty
lime be fall silently across the sombre evergreen, while the
light and shadow sleep side by side: there be no sound but the
cawing of the rook, which to the accustomed ear be a lullaby, or that
last solemn lullaby, a dirge. lydgate, conscious of an energetic frame
in its prime, feel some compassion when the figure which he be likely
soon to overtake turn round, and in advance towards he show more
markedly than ever the sign of premature age--the student's bent
shoulder, the emaciated limb, and the melancholy line of the mouth.
"poor fellow," he think, "some man with his year be like lion; one
can tell nothing of their age except that they be full grown."
"Mr. Lydgate," say Mr. Casaubon, with his invariably polite air, "I be
exceedingly oblige to you for your punctuality. we will, if you
please, carry on our conversation in walk to and fro."
"I hope your wish to see I be not due to the return of unpleasant
symptom," say Lydgate, fill up a pause.
"not immediately--no. in order to account for that wish I must
mention--what it be otherwise needless to refer to--that my life, on
all collateral account insignificant, derive a possible importance
from the incompleteness of labor which have extend through all its
good year. in short, I have long have on hand a work which I would
fain leave behind I in such a state, at least, that it might be
commit to the press by--other. be I assure that this be the
utmost I can reasonably expect, that assurance would be a useful
circumscription of my attempt, and a guide in both the positive and
negative determination of my course."
here Mr. Casaubon pause, remove one hand from his back and thrust it
between the button of his single-breasted coat. to a mind largely
instruct in the human destiny hardly anything could be more
interesting than the inward conflict imply in his formal measured
address, deliver with the usual sing-song and motion of the head.
Nay, be there many situation more sublimely tragic than the struggle
of the soul with the demand to renounce a work which have be all the
significance of its life--a significance which be to vanish as the
water which come and go where no man have need of they? but there be
nothing to strike other as sublime about Mr. Casaubon, and Lydgate,
who have some contempt at hand for futile scholarship, feel a little
amusement mingle with his pity. he be at present too ill acquaint
with disaster to enter into the pathos of a lot where everything be
below the level of tragedy except the passionate egoism of the sufferer.
"you refer to the possible hindrance from want of health?" he say,
wish to help forward Mr. Casaubon's purpose, which seem to be
clog by some hesitation.
"I do. you have not imply to I that the symptom which--I be bind
to testify--you watch with scrupulous care, be those of a fatal
disease. but be it so, Mr. Lydgate, I should desire to know the
truth without reservation, and I appeal to you for an exact statement
of your conclusion: I request it as a friendly service. if you can
tell I that my life be not threaten by anything else than ordinary
casualty, I shall rejoice, on ground which I have already indicate.
if not, knowledge of the truth be even more important to I."
"then I can no long hesitate as to my course," say Lydgate; "but the
first thing I must impress on you be that my conclusion be doubly
uncertain--uncertain not only because of my fallibility, but because
disease of the heart be eminently difficult to find prediction on.
in any ease, one can hardly increase appreciably the tremendous
uncertainty of life."
Mr. Casaubon wince perceptibly, but bow.
"I believe that you be suffer from what be call fatty
degeneration of the heart, a disease which be first divine and
explore by Laennec, the man who give we the stethoscope, not so very
many year ago. a good deal of experience--a more lengthened
observation--be want on the subject. but after what you have say,
it be my duty to tell you that death from this disease be often sudden.
at the same time, no such result can be predict. your condition may
be consistent with a tolerably comfortable life for another fifteen
year, or even more. I could add no information to this beyond
anatomical or medical detail, which would leave expectation at
precisely the same point." lydgate's instinct be fine enough to tell
he that plain speech, quite free from ostentatious caution, would be
feel by Mr. Casaubon as a tribute of respect.
"I thank you, Mr. Lydgate," say Mr. Casaubon, after a moment's pause.
"one thing more I have still to ask: do you communicate what you have
now tell I to Mrs. Casaubon?"
"partly--I mean, as to the possible issue." Lydgate be go to
explain why he have tell Dorothea, but Mr. Casaubon, with an
unmistakable desire to end the conversation, wave his hand slightly,
and say again, "I thank you," proceed to remark on the rare beauty
of the day.
Lydgate, certain that his patient wish to be alone, soon leave he;
and the black figure with hand behind and head bent forward continue
to pace the walk where the dark yew-tree give he a mute companionship
in melancholy, and the little shadow of bird or leaf that fleet
across the isle of sunlight, steal along in silence as in the presence
of a sorrow. here be a man who now for the first time find himself
look into the eye of death--who be pass through one of those
rare moment of experience when we feel the truth of a commonplace,
which be as different from what we call know it, as the vision of
water upon the earth be different from the delirious vision of the
water which cannot be have to cool the burn tongue. when the
commonplace "we must all die" transform itself suddenly into the acute
consciousness "I must die--and soon," then death grapple we, and his
finger be cruel; afterwards, he may come to fold we in his arm as
our mother do, and our last moment of dim earthly discerning may be
like the first. to Mr. Casaubon now, it be as if he suddenly find
himself on the dark river-brink and hear the plash of the oncoming
oar, not discern the form, but expect the summon. in such an
hour the mind do not change its lifelong bias, but carry it onward
in imagination to the other side of death, gaze backward--perhaps
with the divine calm of beneficence, perhaps with the petty anxiety
of self-assertion. what be Mr. Casaubon's bias his act will give we a
clew to. he hold himself to be, with some private scholarly
reservation, a believe Christian, as to estimate of the present and
hope of the future. but what we strive to gratify, though we may call
it a distant hope, be an immediate desire: the future estate for which
man drudge up city alley exist already in their imagination and love.
and Mr. Casaubon's immediate desire be not for divine communion and
light divested of earthly condition; his passionate longing, poor
man, clung low and mist-like in very shady place.
Dorothea have be aware when Lydgate have ride away, and she have
step into the garden, with the impulse to go at once to her husband.
but she hesitate, fear to offend he by obtrude herself; for she
ardor, continually repulse, serve, with her intense memory, to
heighten her dread, as thwart energy subside into a shudder; and she
wander slowly round the near clump of tree until she see he
advance. then she go towards he, and might have represent a
heaven-send angel come with a promise that the short hour remain
should yet be fill with that faithful love which cling the close to
a comprehend grief. his glance in reply to hers be so chill that
she feel her timidity increase; yet she turn and pass her hand
through his arm.
Mr. Casaubon keep his hand behind he and allow her pliant arm to
cling with difficulty against his rigid arm.
there be something horrible to Dorothea in the sensation which this
unresponsive hardness inflict on she. that be a strong word, but not
too strong: it be in these act call triviality that the seed of
joy be forever waste, until man and woman look round with haggard
face at the devastation their own waste have make, and say, the earth
bear no harvest of sweetness--call their denial knowledge. you may
ask why, in the name of manliness, Mr. Casaubon should have behave in
that way. consider that his be a mind which shrink from pity: have
you ever watch in such a mind the effect of a suspicion that what be
press it as a grief may be really a source of contentment, either
actual or future, to the being who already offend by pity?
besides, he know little of Dorothea's sensation, and have not reflect
that on such an occasion as the present they be comparable in
strength to his own sensibility about Carp's criticism.
Dorothea do not withdraw her arm, but she could not venture to speak.
Mr. Casaubon do not say, "I wish to be alone," but he direct his
step in silence towards the house, and as they enter by the glass
door on this eastern side, Dorothea withdraw her arm and linger on
the matting, that she might leave her husband quite free. he enter
the library and shut himself in, alone with his sorrow.
she go up to her boudoir. the open bow-window let in the serene
glory of the afternoon lie in the avenue, where the lime-tree cast
long shadow. but Dorothea know nothing of the scene. she throw
herself on a chair, not heed that she be in the dazzle sun-ray:
if there be discomfort in that, how could she tell that it be not
part of her inward misery?
she be in the reaction of a rebellious anger strong than any she have
feel since her marriage. instead of tear there come words:--
"what have I do--what be I--that he should treat I so? he never
know what be in my mind--he never care. what be the use of anything
I do? he wish he have never marry I."
she begin to hear herself, and be check into stillness. like one
who have lose his way and be weary, she sit and see as in one glance all
the path of her young hope which she should never find again. and
just as clearly in the miserable light she see her own and her
husband's solitude--how they walk apart so that she be oblige to
survey he. if he have draw she towards he, she would never have
survey he--never have say, "be he worth live for?" but would have
feel he simply a part of her own life. now she say bitterly, "it be
his fault, not mine." in the jar of her whole being, Pity be
overthrow. be it her fault that she have believe in he--have
believe in his worthiness?--and what, exactly, be he?-- she be able
enough to estimate he--she who wait on his glance with trembling,
and shut her good soul in prison, pay it only hide visit, that
she might be petty enough to please he. in such a crisis as this,
some woman begin to hate.
the sun be low when Dorothea be think that she would not go down
again, but would send a message to her husband say that she be not
well and prefer remain up-stair. she have never deliberately
allow her resentment to govern she in this way before, but she
believe now that she could not see he again without tell he the
truth about her feeling, and she must wait till she could do it without
interruption. he might wonder and be hurt at her message. it be good
that he should wonder and be hurt. her anger say, as anger be apt to
say, that God be with she--that all heaven, though it be crowd
with spirit watch they, must be on her side. she have determine to
ring her bell, when there come a rap at the door.
Mr. Casaubon have send to say that he would have his dinner in the
library. he wish to be quite alone this evening, be much occupy.
"I shall not dine, then, Tantripp."
"oh, madam, let I bring you a little something?"
"no; I be not well. get everything ready in my dressing room, but pray
do not disturb I again."
Dorothea sit almost motionless in her meditative struggle, while the
evening slowly deepen into night. but the struggle change
continually, as that of a man who begin with a movement towards
strike and end with conquer his desire to strike. the energy
that would animate a crime be not more than be want to inspire a
resolve submission, when the noble habit of the soul reassert itself.
that think with which Dorothea have go out to meet her husband--her
conviction that he have be ask about the possible arrest of all his
work, and that the answer must have wring his heart, could not be long
without rise beside the image of he, like a shadowy monitor look
at her anger with sad remonstrance. it cost she a litany of picture
sorrow and of silent cry that she might be the mercy for those
sorrow--but the resolve submission do come; and when the house be
still, and she know that it be near the time when Mr. Casaubon
habitually go to rest, she open her door gently and stand outside
in the darkness wait for his come up-stair with a light in his
hand. if he do not come soon she think that she would go down and
even risk incur another pang. she would never again expect
anything else. but she do hear the library door open, and slowly the
light advance up the staircase without noise from the footstep on the
carpet. when her husband stand opposite to she, she see that his face
be more haggard. he start slightly on see she, and she look up
at he beseechingly, without speak.
"Dorothea!" he say, with a gentle surprise in his tone. "be you
wait for I?"
"yes, I do not like to disturb you."
"come, my dear, come. you be young, and need not to extend your life
by watch."
when the kind quiet melancholy of that speech fall on Dorothea's ear,
she feel something like the thankfulness that might well up in we if we
have narrowly escape hurt a lamed creature. she put her hand into
her husband's, and they go along the broad corridor together.
BOOK V.
the dead hand.
CHAPTER XLIII.
this figure hath high price: 't be work with love
age ago in fine ivory;
Nought modish in it, pure and noble line
of generous womanhood that fit all time
that too be costly ware; majolica
of deft design, to please a lordly eye:
the smile, you see, be perfect--wonderful
as mere Faience! a table ornament
to suit the rich mounting."
Dorothea seldom leave home without her husband, but she do occasionally
drive into Middlemarch alone, on little errand of shopping or charity
such as occur to every lady of any wealth when she live within three
mile of a town. two day after that scene in the Yew-tree Walk, she
determine to use such an opportunity in order if possible to see
Lydgate, and learn from he whether her husband have really feel any
depressing change of symptom which he be conceal from she, and
whether he have insist on know the utmost about himself. she feel
almost guilty in ask for knowledge about he from another, but the
dread of be without it--the dread of that ignorance which would make
she unjust or hard--overcome every scruple. that there have be some
crisis in her husband's mind she be certain: he have the very next day
begin a new method of arrange his note, and have associate her quite
newly in carry out his plan. poor Dorothea need to lay up store
of patience.
it be about four o'clock when she drive to Lydgate's house in Lowick
Gate, wish, in her immediate doubt of find he at home, that she
have write beforehand. and he be not at home.
"be Mrs. Lydgate at home?" say Dorothea, who have never, that she know
of, see Rosamond, but now remember the fact of the marriage. yes,
Mrs. Lydgate be at home.
"I will go in and speak to she, if she will allow I. will you ask she
if she can see I--see Mrs. Casaubon, for a few minute?"
when the servant have go to deliver that message, Dorothea could hear
sound of music through an open window--a few note from a man's voice
and then a piano burst into roulade. but the roulade break off
suddenly, and then the servant come back say that Mrs. Lydgate would
be happy to see Mrs. Casaubon.
when the drawing-room door open and Dorothea enter, there be a
sort of contrast not infrequent in country life when the habit of the
different rank be less blent than now. let those who know, tell we
exactly what stuff it be that Dorothea wear in those day of mild
autumn--that thin white woollen stuff soft to the touch and soft to the
eye. it always seem to have be lately wash, and to smell of the
sweet hedge--be always in the shape of a pelisse with sleeve hang
all out of the fashion. yet if she have enter before a still audience
as Imogene or Cato's daughter, the dress might have seem right
enough: the grace and dignity be in her limb and neck; and about she
simply part hair and candid eye the large round poke which be then
in the fate of woman, seem no more odd as a head-dress than the gold
trencher we call a halo. by the present audience of two person, no
dramatic heroine could have be expect with more interest than Mrs.
Casaubon. to Rosamond she be one of those county divinity not
mix with middlemarch mortality, whose slight mark of manner or
appearance be worthy of her study; moreover, Rosamond be not without
satisfaction that Mrs. Casaubon should have an opportunity of study
_she_. what be the use of be exquisite if you be not see by the
good judge? and since Rosamond have receive the high compliment at
Sir Godwin Lydgate's, she feel quite confident of the impression she
must make on people of good birth. Dorothea put out her hand with her
usual simple kindness, and look admiringly at Lydgate's lovely
bride--aware that there be a gentleman stand at a distance, but
see he merely as a coated figure at a wide angle. the gentleman
be too much occupy with the presence of the one woman to reflect on
the contrast between the two--a contrast that would certainly have be
strike to a calm observer. they be both tall, and their eye be
on a level; but imagine Rosamond's infantine blondness and wondrous
crown of hair-plait, with her pale-blue dress of a fit and fashion so
perfect that no dressmaker could look at it without emotion, a large
embroider collar which it be to be hop all beholder would know
the price of, her small hand duly set off with ring, and that
control self-consciousness of manner which be the expensive
substitute for simplicity.
"thank you very much for allow I to interrupt you," say Dorothea,
immediately. "I be anxious to see Mr. Lydgate, if possible, before I
go home, and I hop that you might possibly tell I where I could find
he, or even allow I to wait for he, if you expect he soon."
"he be at the New Hospital," say Rosamond; "I be not sure how soon he
will come home. but I can send for he."
"will you let I go and fetch he?" say will Ladislaw, come forward.
he have already take up his hat before Dorothea enter. she color
with surprise, but put out her hand with a smile of unmistakable
pleasure, saying--
"I do not know it be you: I have no thought of see you here."
"may I go to the Hospital and tell Mr. Lydgate that you wish to see
he?" say will.
"it would be quick to send the carriage for he," say Dorothea, "if
you will be kind enough to give the message to the coachman."
will be move to the door when Dorothea, whose mind have flash in an
instant over many connected memory, turn quickly and say, "I will
go myself, thank you. I wish to lose no time before get home
again. I will drive to the Hospital and see Mr. Lydgate there. pray
excuse I, Mrs. Lydgate. I be very much oblige to you."
her mind be evidently arrest by some sudden thought, and she leave
the room hardly conscious of what be immediately around she--hardly
conscious that will open the door for she and offer she his arm to
lead she to the carriage. she take the arm but say nothing. will be
feel rather vexed and miserable, and find nothing to say on his
side. he hand she into the carriage in silence, they say good-by,
and Dorothea drive away.
in the five minute' drive to the Hospital she have time for some
reflection that be quite new to she. her decision to go, and her
preoccupation in leave the room, have come from the sudden sense that
there would be a sort of deception in she voluntarily allow any
further intercourse between herself and will which she be unable to
mention to her husband, and already her errand in seek Lydgate be a
matter of concealment. that be all that have be explicitly in her
mind; but she have be urge also by a vague discomfort. now that she
be alone in her drive, she hear the note of the man's voice and the
accompany piano, which she have not note much at the time, return
on her inward sense; and she find herself think with some wonder
that will Ladislaw be pass his time with Mrs. Lydgate in her
husband's absence. and then she could not help remember that he have
pass some time with she under like circumstance, so why should there
be any unfitness in the fact? but Will be Mr. Casaubon's relative,
and one towards whom she be bind to show kindness. still there have
be sign which perhaps she ought to have understand as imply that
Mr. Casaubon do not like his cousin's visit during his own absence.
"perhaps I have be mistake in many thing," say poor Dorothea to
herself, while the tear come roll and she have to dry they quickly.
she feel confusedly unhappy, and the image of will which have be so
clear to she before be mysteriously spoil. but the carriage stop
at the gate of the Hospital. she be soon walk round the grass
plot with Lydgate, and her feeling recover the strong bent which
have make she seek for this interview.
will Ladislaw, meanwhile, be mortify, and know the reason of it
clearly enough. his chance of meet Dorothea be rare; and here
for the first time there have come a chance which have set he at a
disadvantage. it be not only, as it have be hitherto, that she be
not supremely occupy with he, but that she have see he under
circumstance in which he might appear not to be supremely occupy
with she. he feel thrust to a new distance from she, amongst the
circle of Middlemarchers who make no part of her life. but that be
not his fault: of course, since he have take his lodging in the town,
he have be make as many acquaintance as he could, his position
require that he should know everybody and everything. Lydgate be
really well worth know than any one else in the neighborhood, and
he happen to have a wife who be musical and altogether worth call
upon. here be the whole history of the situation in which Diana have
descend too unexpectedly on her worshipper. it be mortifying. will
be conscious that he should not have be at Middlemarch but for
Dorothea; and yet his position there be threaten to divide he from
she with those barrier of habitual sentiment which be more fatal to
the persistence of mutual interest than all the distance between Rome
and Britain. prejudice about rank and status be easy enough to defy
in the form of a tyrannical letter from Mr. Casaubon; but prejudice,
like odorous body, have a double existence both solid and subtle--solid
as the pyramid, subtle as the twentieth echo of an echo, or as
the memory of hyacinth which once scent the darkness. and Will be
of a temperament to feel keenly the presence of subtlety: a man of
clumsier perception would not have feel, as he do, that for the first
time some sense of unfitness in perfect freedom with he have spring up
in Dorothea's mind, and that their silence, as he conduct she to the
carriage, have have a chill in it. perhaps Casaubon, in his hatred and
jealousy, have be insist to Dorothea that will have slide below she
socially. Confound Casaubon!
will re-enter the drawing-room, take up his hat, and look
irritated as he advance towards Mrs. Lydgate, who have seat herself
at her work-table, said--
"it be always fatal to have music or poetry interrupt. may I come
another day and just finish about the rendering of 'Lungi dal caro
bene'?"
"I shall be happy to be teach," say Rosamond. "but I be sure you
admit that the interruption be a very beautiful one. I quite envy
your acquaintance with Mrs. Casaubon. be she very clever? she look
as if she be."
"really, I never think about it," say will, sulkily.
"that be just the answer Tertius give I, when I first ask he if she
be handsome. what be it that you gentleman be think of when you
be with Mrs. Casaubon?"
"herself," say will, not indispose to provoke the charming Mrs.
Lydgate. "when one see a perfect woman, one never think of her
attribute--one be conscious of her presence."
"I shall be jealous when Tertius go to Lowick," say Rosamond,
dimpling, and speak with aery lightness. "he will come back and
think nothing of I."
"that do not seem to have be the effect on Lydgate hitherto. Mrs.
Casaubon be too unlike other woman for they to be compare with she."
"you be a devout worshipper, I perceive. you often see she, I
suppose."
"no," say will, almost pettishly. "worship be usually a matter of
theory rather than of practice. but I be practise it to excess just
at this moment--I must really tear myself away.
"pray come again some evening: Mr. Lydgate will like to hear the music,
and I cannot enjoy it so well without he."
when her husband be at home again, Rosamond say, stand in front of
he and hold his coat-collar with both her hand, "Mr. Ladislaw be
here sing with I when Mrs. Casaubon come in. he seem vex. do
you think he dislike she see he at our house? surely your
position be more than equal to his--whatever may be his relation to the
casaubon."
"no, no; it must be something else if he be really vex, Ladislaw be
a sort of gypsy; he think nothing of leather and prunella."
"music apart, he be not always very agreeable. do you like he?"
"yes: I think he be a good fellow: rather miscellaneous and
bric-a-brac, but likable."
"do you know, I think he adore Mrs. Casaubon."
"poor devil!" say Lydgate, smile and pinch his wife's ear.
Rosamond feel herself begin to know a great deal of the world,
especially in discover what when she be in her unmarried girlhood
have be inconceivable to she except as a dim tragedy in by-go
costume--that woman, even after marriage, might make conquest and
enslave man. at that time young lady in the country, even when
educate at Mrs. Lemon's, read little french literature later than
Racine, and public print have not cast their present magnificent
illumination over the scandal of life. still, vanity, with a woman's
whole mind and day to work in, can construct abundantly on slight
hint, especially on such a hint as the possibility of indefinite
conquest. how delightful to make captive from the throne of marriage
with a husband as crown-prince by your side--himself in fact a
subject--while the captive look up forever hopeless, lose their
rest probably, and if their appetite too, so much the well! but
Rosamond's romance turn at present chiefly on her crown-prince, and
it be enough to enjoy his assured subjection. when he say, "poor
devil!" she ask, with playful curiosity--
"why so?"
"why, what can a man do when he take to adore one of you mermaid?
he only neglect his work and run up bill."
"I be sure you do not neglect your work. you be always at the
Hospital, or see poor patient, or think about some doctor's
quarrel; and then at home you always want to pore over your microscope
and phial. confess you like those thing well than I."
"havenot you ambition enough to wish that your husband should be
something well than a Middlemarch doctor?" say Lydgate, let his
hand fall on to his wife's shoulder, and look at she with
affectionate gravity. "I shall make you learn my favorite bit from an
old poet--
'why should our pride make such a stir to be
and be forget? what good be like to this,
to do worthy the writing, and to write
Worthy the reading and the world delight?'
what I want, rosy, be to do worthy the writing,--and to write out
myself what I have do. a man must work, to do that, my pet."
"of course, I wish you to make discovery: no one could more wish you
to attain a high position in some well place than Middlemarch. you
cannot say that I have ever try to hinder you from work. but we
cannot live like hermit. you be not discontent with I, Tertius?"
"no, dear, no. I be too entirely content."
"but what do Mrs. Casaubon want to say to you?"
"merely to ask about her husband's health. but I think she be go to
be splendid to our New Hospital: I think she will give we two hundred
a-year."
CHAPTER XLIV.
I would not creep along the coast but steer
out in mid-sea, by guidance of the star.
when Dorothea, walk round the laurel-plant plot of the New
Hospital with Lydgate, have learn from he that there be no sign of
change in Mr. Casaubon's bodily condition beyond the mental sign of
anxiety to know the truth about his illness, she be silent for a few
moment, wonder whether she have say or do anything to rouse this
new anxiety. lydgate, not willing to let slip an opportunity of
further a favorite purpose, venture to say--
"I donot know whether your or Mr.--Casaubon's attention have be draw
to the need of our New Hospital. circumstance have make it seem
rather egotistic in I to urge the subject; but that be not my fault:
it be because there be a fight be make against it by the other
medical man. I think you be generally interested in such thing, for
I remember that when I first have the pleasure of see you at Tipton
Grange before your marriage, you be ask I some question about
the way in which the health of the poor be affect by their miserable
housing."
"yes, indeed," say Dorothea, brighten. "I shall be quite grateful
to you if you will tell I how I can help to make thing a little
well. everything of that sort have slip away from I since I have
be marry. I mean," she say, after a moment's hesitation, "that
the people in our village be tolerably comfortable, and my mind have
be too much take up for I to inquire far. but here--in such a
place as Middlemarch--there must be a great deal to be do."
"there be everything to be do," say Lydgate, with abrupt energy.
"and this Hospital be a capital piece of work, due entirely to Mr.
Bulstrode's exertion, and in a great degree to his money. but one man
cannot do everything in a scheme of this sort. of course he look
forward to help. and now therebe a mean, petty feud set up against the
thing in the town, by certain person who want to make it a failure."
"what can be their reason?" say Dorothea, with naive surprise.
"chiefly Mr. Bulstrode's unpopularity, to begin with. half the town
would almost take trouble for the sake of thwart he. in this
stupid world most people never consider that a thing be good to be do
unless it be do by their own set. I have no connection with Bulstrode
before I come here. I look at he quite impartially, and I see that he
have some notion--that he have set thing on foot--which I can turn to
good public purpose. if a fair number of the well educate man go
to work with the belief that their observation might contribute to the
reform of medical doctrine and practice, we should soon see a change
for the well. thatbe my point of view. I hold that by refuse to
work with Mr. Bulstrode I should be turn my back on an opportunity
of make my profession more generally serviceable."
"I quite agree with you," say Dorothea, at once fascinate by the
situation sketch in Lydgate's word. "but what be there against Mr.
Bulstrode? I know that my uncle be friendly with he."
"People donot like his religious tone," say Lydgate, break off
there.
"that be all the strong reason for despise such an opposition,"
say Dorothea, look at the affair of Middlemarch by the light of
the great persecution.
"to put the matter quite fairly, they have other objection to him:--he
be masterful and rather unsociable, and he be concern with trade,
which have complaint of its own that I know nothing about. but what
have that to do with the question whether it would not be a fine thing
to establish here a more valuable hospital than any they have in the
county? the immediate motive to the opposition, however, be the fact
that Bulstrode have put the medical direction into my hand. of course
I be glad of that. it give I an opportunity of do some good
work,--and I be aware that I have to justify his choice of I. but the
consequence be, that the whole profession in Middlemarch have set
themselves tooth and nail against the Hospital, and not only refuse to
cooperate themselves, but try to blacken the whole affair and hinder
subscription."
"how very petty!" exclaim Dorothea, indignantly.
"I suppose one must expect to fight one's way: there be hardly anything
to be do without it. and the ignorance of people about here be
stupendous. I donot lay claim to anything else than have use some
opportunity which have not come within everybody's reach; but there
be no stifle the offence of be young, and a new-comer, and
happen to know something more than the old inhabitant. still, if I
believe that I can set go a well method of treatment--if I
believe that I can pursue certain observation and inquiry which may
be a lasting benefit to medical practice, I should be a base truckler
if I allow any consideration of personal comfort to hinder I. and
the course be all the clear from there be no salary in question to
put my persistence in an equivocal light."
"I be glad you have tell I this, Mr. Lydgate," say Dorothea,
cordially. "I feel sure I can help a little. I have some money, and
donot know what to do with it--that be often an uncomfortable thought
to I. I be sure I can spare two hundred a-year for a grand purpose
like this. how happy you must be, to know thing that you feel sure
will do great good! I wish I could awake with that knowledge every
morning. there seem to be so much trouble take that one can hardly
see the good of!"
there be a melancholy cadence in Dorothea's voice as she speak these
last word. but she presently add, more cheerfully, "pray come to
Lowick and tell we more of this. I will mention the subject to Mr.
Casaubon. I must hasten home now."
she do mention it that evening, and say that she should like to
subscribe two hundred a-year--she have seven hundred a-year as the
equivalent of her own fortune, settle on she at her marriage. Mr.
Casaubon make no objection beyond a passing remark that the sum might
be disproportionate in relation to other good object, but when
Dorothea in her ignorance resist that suggestion, he acquiesce. he
do not care himself about spend money, and be not reluctant to
give it. if he ever feel keenly any question of money it be through
the medium of another passion than the love of material property.
Dorothea tell he that she have see Lydgate, and recite the gist of
her conversation with he about the Hospital. Mr. Casaubon do not
question she far, but he feel sure that she have wish to know what
have pass between Lydgate and himself "she know that I know," say
the ever-restless voice within; but that increase of tacit knowledge
only thrust far off any confidence between they. he distrust she
affection; and what loneliness be more lonely than distrust?
CHAPTER XLV.
it be the humor of many head to extol the day of their
forefather, and declaim against the wickedness of time
present. which notwithstanding they cannot handsomely do,
without the borrow help and satire of time past;
condemn the vice of their own time, by the expression
of vice in time which they commend, which cannot but argue
the community of vice in both. Horace, therefore, Juvenal,
and Persius, be no prophet, although their line do seem
to indigitate and point at our times.--SIR THOMAS BROWNE:
Pseudodoxia Epidemica.
that opposition to the New Fever Hospital which Lydgate have sketch to
Dorothea be, like other opposition, to be view in many different
light. he regard it as a mixture of jealousy and dunderheade
prejudice. Mr. Bulstrode see in it not only medical jealousy but a
determination to thwart himself, prompt mainly by a hatred of that
vital religion of which he have strive to be an effectual lay
representative--a hatred which certainly find pretext apart from
religion such as be only too easy to find in the entanglement of
human action. these might be call the ministerial view. but
opposition have the illimitable range of objection at command, which
need never stop short at the boundary of knowledge, but can draw
forever on the vast of ignorance. what the opposition in Middlemarch
say about the New Hospital and its administration have certainly a
great deal of echo in it, for heaven have take care that everybody
shall not be an originator; but there be difference which
represent every social shade between the polished moderation of Dr.
Minchin and the trenchant assertion of Mrs. Dollop, the landlady of the
Tankard in Slaughter Lane.
Mrs. Dollop become more and more convinced by her own asseveration,
that Dr. Lydgate mean to let the people die in the Hospital, if not to
poison they, for the sake of cut they up without say by your
leave or with your leave; for it be a known "fac" that he have want
to cut up Mrs. Goby, as respectable a woman as any in Parley Street,
who have money in trust before her marriage--a poor tale for a doctor,
who if he be good for anything should know what be the matter with
you before you die, and not want to pry into your inside after you
be go. if that be not reason, Mrs. Dollop wish to know what
be; but there be a prevalent feeling in her audience that her opinion
be a bulwark, and that if it be overthrow there would be no limit
to the cutting-up of body, as have be well see in Burke and Hare
with their pitch-plaister--such a hang business as that be not
want in Middlemarch!
and let it not be suppose that opinion at the Tankard in Slaughter
Lane be unimportant to the medical profession: that old authentic
public-house--the original Tankard, know by the name of Dollop's--be
the resort of a great Benefit Club, which have some month before put to
the vote whether its long-stand medical man, "Doctor Gambit," should
not be cashier in favor of "this Doctor Lydgate," who be capable of
perform the most astonishing cure, and rescue people altogether
give up by other practitioner. but the balance have be turn
against Lydgate by two member, who for some private reason hold that
this power of resuscitate person as good as dead be an equivocal
recommendation, and might interfere with providential favor. in the
course of the year, however, there have be a change in the public
sentiment, of which the unanimity at Dollop's be an index.
a good deal more than a year ago, before anything be know of
Lydgate's skill, the judgment on it have naturally be divide,
depend on a sense of likelihood, situate perhaps in the pit of the
stomach or in the pineal gland, and differ in its verdict, but not
the less valuable as a guide in the total deficit of evidence.
patient who have chronic disease or whose life have long be wear
threadbare, like old Featherstone's, have be at once incline to try
he; also, many who do not like pay their doctor's bill, think
agreeably of open an account with a new doctor and send for he
without stint if the child's temper want a dose, occasion when
the old practitioner be often crusty; and all person thus incline
to employ Lydgate hold it likely that he be clever. some consider
that he might do more than other "where there be liver;"--at least
there would be no harm in get a few bottle of "stuff" from he,
since if these prove useless it would still be possible to return to
the Purifying Pills, which keep you alive if they do not remove the
yellowness. but these be people of minor importance. good
Middlemarch family be of course not go to change their doctor
without reason show; and everybody who have employ Mr. Peacock do
not feel obliged to accept a new man merely in the character of his
successor, object that he be "not likely to be equal to Peacock."
but Lydgate have not be long in the town before there be particular
enough report of he to breed much more specific expectation and to
intensify difference into partisanship; some of the particular be
of that impressive order of which the significance be entirely hide,
like a statistical amount without a standard of comparison, but with a
note of exclamation at the end. the cubic foot of oxygen yearly
swallow by a full-grow man--what a shudder they might have create
in some middlemarch circle! "Oxygen! nobody know what that may
be--be it any wonder the cholera have get to Dantzic? and yet there be
people who say quarantine be no good!"
one of the fact quickly rumor be that Lydgate do not dispense
drug. this be offensive both to the physician whose exclusive
distinction seem infringe on, and to the surgeon-apothecary with
whom he range himself; and only a little while before, they might have
count on have the law on their side against a man who without
call himself a London-make M.D. dare to ask for pay except as a
charge on drug. but Lydgate have not be experience enough to
foresee that his new course would be even more offensive to the laity;
and to Mr. Mawmsey, an important grocer in the Top Market, who, though
not one of his patient, question he in an affable manner on the
subject, he be injudicious enough to give a hasty popular explanation
of his reason, point out to Mr. Mawmsey that it must lower the
character of practitioner, and be a constant injury to the public, if
their only mode of get pay for their work be by their make out
long bill for draught, bolus, and mixture.
"it be in that way that hard-work medical man may come to be almost
as mischievous as quack," say Lydgate, rather thoughtlessly. "to get
their own bread they must overdose the king's liege; and thatbe a bad
sort of treason, Mr. Mawmsey--undermine the constitution in a fatal
way."
Mr. Mawmsey be not only an overseer (it be about a question of
outdoor pay that he be have an interview with Lydgate), he be also
asthmatic and have an increase family: thus, from a medical point of
view, as well as from his own, he be an important man; indeed, an
exceptional grocer, whose hair be arrange in a flame-like pyramid,
and whose retail deference be of the cordial, encourage
kind--jocosely complimentary, and with a certain considerate abstinence
from let out the full force of his mind. it be Mr. Mawmsey's
friendly jocoseness in question he which have set the tone of
Lydgate's reply. but let the wise be warn against too great
readiness at explanation: it multiply the source of mistake,
lengthen the sum for reckoner sure to go wrong.
Lydgate smile as he end his speech, put his foot into the
stirrup, and Mr. Mawmsey laugh more than he would have do if he have
know who the king's liege be, give his "good morning, sir,
good-morning, sir," with the air of one who see everything clearly
enough. but in truth his view be perturb. for year he have be
pay bill with strictly make item, so that for every half-crown and
eighteen-pence he be certain something measurable have be deliver.
he have do this with satisfaction, include it among his
responsibility as a husband and father, and regard a long bill
than usual as a dignity worth mention. moreover, in addition to the
massive benefit of the drug to "self and family," he have enjoy the
pleasure of form an acute judgment as to their immediate effect, so
as to give an intelligent statement for the guidance of Mr. Gambit--a
practitioner just a little low in status than Wrench or Toller, and
especially esteem as an accoucheur, of whose ability Mr. Mawmsey have
the poor opinion on all other point, but in doctoring, he be willnot
to say in an undertone, he place Gambit above any of they.
here be deep reason than the superficial talk of a new man, which
appear still flimsy in the drawing-room over the shop, when they
be recite to Mrs. Mawmsey, a woman accustom to be make much of as
a fertile mother,--generally under attendance more or less frequent
from Mr. Gambit, and occasionally have attack which require Dr.
Minchin.
"do this Mr. Lydgate mean to say there be no use in take medicine?"
say Mrs. Mawmsey, who be slightly give to drawling. "I should like
he to tell I how I could bear up at Fair time, if I donot take
strengthen medicine for a month beforehand. think of what I have to
provide for call customer, my dear!"--here Mrs. Mawmsey turn to
an intimate female friend who sit by--"a large veal pie--a stuff
fillet--a round of beef--ham, tongue, et cetera, et cetera! but what
keep I up well be the pink mixture, not the brown. I wonder, Mr.
Mawmsey, with _your_ experience, you could have patience to listen. I
should have tell he at once that I know a little well than that."
"no, no, no," say Mr. Mawmsey; "I be not go to tell he my
opinion. hear everything and judge for yourself be my motto. but he
donot know who he be talk to. I be not to be turn on _his_
finger. People often pretend to tell I thing, when they might as
well say, 'Mawmsey, yoube a fool.' but I smile at it: I humor
everybody's weak place. if physic have do harm to self and family, I
should have find it out by this time."
the next day Mr. Gambit be tell that Lydgate go about say physic
be of no use.
"indeed!" say he, lift his eyebrow with cautious surprise. (he
be a stout husky man with a large ring on his fourth finger.) "how
will he cure his patient, then?"
"that be what I say," return Mrs. Mawmsey, who habitually give weight
to her speech by load her pronoun. "do _he_ suppose that people
will pay he only to come and sit with they and go away again?"
Mrs. Mawmsey have have a great deal of sit from Mr. Gambit, include
very full account of his own habit of body and other affair; but of
course he know there be no innuendo in her remark, since his spare
time and personal narrative have never be charge for. so he reply,
humorously--
"well, Lydgate be a good-looking young fellow, you know."
"not one that I would employ," say Mrs. Mawmsey. "_other_ may do as
they please."
hence Mr. Gambit could go away from the chief grocer's without fear of
rivalry, but not without a sense that Lydgate be one of those
hypocrite who try to discredit other by advertise their own
honesty, and that it might be worth some people's while to show he up.
Mr. Gambit, however, have a satisfactory practice, much pervade by the
smell of retail trading which suggest the reduction of cash payment
to a balance. and he do not think it worth his while to show Lydgate
up until he know how. he have not indeed great resource of education,
and have have to work his own way against a good deal of professional
contempt; but he make none the bad accoucheur for call the
breathing apparatus "long."
other medical man feel themselves more capable. Mr. Toller share the
high practice in the town and belong to an old Middlemarch family:
there be toller in the law and everything else above the line of
retail trade. unlike our irascible friend Wrench, he have the easy
way in the world of take thing which might be suppose to annoy he,
be a well-breed, quietly facetious man, who keep a good house, be
very fond of a little sporting when he could get it, very friendly with
Mr. Hawley, and hostile to Mr. Bulstrode. it may seem odd that with
such pleasant habit he should have be give to the heroic treatment,
bleed and blister and starve his patient, with a dispassionate
disregard to his personal example; but the incongruity favor the
opinion of his ability among his patient, who commonly observe that
Mr. Toller have lazy manner, but his treatment be as active as you
could desire: no man, say they, carry more seriousness into his
profession: he be a little slow in come, but when he come, he _do_
something. he be a great favorite in his own circle, and whatever he
imply to any one's disadvantage tell doubly from his careless
ironical tone.
he naturally get tired of smile and say, "ah!" when he be tell
that Mr. Peacock's successor do not mean to dispense medicine; and
Mr. Hackbutt one day mention it over the wine at a dinner-party, Mr.
Toller say, laughingly, "Dibbitts will get rid of his stale drug,
then. Ibe fond of little Dibbitts--I'm glad hebe in luck."
"I see your meaning, Toller," say Mr. Hackbutt, "and I be entirely of
your opinion. I shall take an opportunity of express myself to that
effect. a medical man should be responsible for the quality of the
drug consume by his patient. that be the rationale of the system of
charge which have hitherto obtain; and nothing be more offensive
than this ostentation of reform, where there be no real amelioration."
"Ostentation, Hackbutt?" say Mr. Toller, ironically. "I donot see
that. a man cannot very well be ostentatious of what nobody believe
in. therebe no reform in the matter: the question be, whether the
profit on the drug be pay to the medical man by the druggist or by
the patient, and whether there shall be extra pay under the name of
attendance."
"ah, to be sure; one of your damned new version of old humbug," say
Mr. Hawley, pass the decanter to Mr. Wrench.
Mr. Wrench, generally abstemious, often drink wine rather freely at a
party, get the more irritable in consequence.
"as to humbug, Hawley," he say, "thatbe a word easy to fle about.
but what I contend against be the way medical man be foul their own
nest, and set up a cry about the country as if a general
practitioner who dispense drug couldnot be a gentleman. I throw back
the imputation with scorn. I say, the most ungentlemanly trick a man
can be guilty of be to come among the member of his profession with
innovation which be a libel on their time-honor procedure. that be
my opinion, and I be ready to maintain it against any one who
contradict I." Mr. Wrench's voice have become exceedingly sharp.
"I cannot oblige you there, Wrench," say Mr. Hawley, thrust his
hand into his trouser-pocket.
"my dear fellow," say Mr. Toller, strike in pacifically! and look
at Mr. Wrench, "the physician have their toe trodden on more than we
have. if you come to dignity it be a question for Minchin and Sprague."
"do medical jurisprudence provide nothing against these
infringement?" say Mr. Hackbutt, with a disinterested desire to offer
his light. "how do the law stand, eh, Hawley?"
"nothing to be do there," say Mr. Hawley. "I look into it for
Sprague. youwould only break your nose against a damned judge's decision."
"Pooh! no need of law," say Mr. Toller. "so far as practice be
concern the attempt be an absurdity. no patient will like
it--certainly not Peacock's, who have be use to depletion. pass the
wine."
Mr. Toller's prediction be partly verify. if Mr. and Mrs. Mawmsey,
who have no idea of employ Lydgate, be make uneasy by his suppose
declaration against drug, it be inevitable that those who call he
in should watch a little anxiously to see whether he do "use all the
mean he might use" in the case. even good Mr. Powderell, who in his
constant charity of interpretation be inclined to esteem Lydgate the
more for what seem a conscientious pursuit of a well plan, have his
mind disturb with doubt during his wife's attack of erysipela, and
could not abstain from mention to lydgate that Mr. Peacock on a
similar occasion have administer a series of bolus which be not
otherwise definable than by their remarkable effect in bring Mrs.
Powderell round before Michaelmas from an illness which have begin in a
remarkably hot August. at last, indeed, in the conflict between his
desire not to hurt Lydgate and his anxiety that no "mean" should be
lacking, he induce his wife privately to take Widgeon's Purifying
Pills, an esteemed Middlemarch medicine, which arrest every disease
at the fountain by set to work at once upon the blood. this
co-operative measure be not to be mention to Lydgate, and Mr.
Powderell himself have no certain reliance on it, only hop that it
might be attend with a blessing.
but in this doubtful stage of Lydgate's introduction he be help by
what we mortal rashly call good fortune. I suppose no doctor ever
come newly to a place without make cure that surprise somebody--cure
which may be call fortune's testimonial, and deserve as much
credit as the written or print kind. various patient get well while
Lydgate be attend they, some even of dangerous illness; and it
be remark that the new doctor with his new way have at least the
merit of bring people back from the brink of death. the trash
talk on such occasion be the more vexatious to Lydgate, because it
give precisely the sort of prestige which an incompetent and
unscrupulous man would desire, and be sure to be impute to he by the
simmer dislike of the other medical man as an encouragement on his
own part of ignorant puffing. but even his proud outspokenness be
check by the discernment that it be as useless to fight against the
interpretation of ignorance as to whip the fog; and "good fortune"
insist on use those interpretation.
Mrs. Larcher have just become charitably concerned about alarm
symptom in her charwoman, when Dr. Minchin call, ask he to see
she then and there, and to give she a certificate for the Infirmary;
whereupon after examination he write a statement of the case as one of
tumor, and recommend the bearer Nancy Nash as an out-patient. Nancy,
call at home on her way to the Infirmary, allow the stay maker and
his wife, in whose attic she lodge, to read Dr. Minchin's paper, and
by this mean become a subject of compassionate conversation in the
neighboring shop of Churchyard Lane as be afflict with a tumor at
first declare to be as large and hard as a duck's egg, but later in
the day to be about the size of "your fist." Most hearer agree that
it would have to be cut out, but one have know of oil and another of
"squitchineal" as adequate to soften and reduce any lump in the body
when take enough of into the inside--the oil by gradually "soopling,"
the squitchineal by eat away.
meanwhile when Nancy present herself at the Infirmary, it happen to
be one of Lydgate's day there. after question and examine she,
Lydgate say to the house-surgeon in an undertone, "itbe not tumor:
itbe cramp." he order she a blister and some steel mixture, and tell
she to go home and rest, give she at the same time a note to Mrs.
Larcher, who, she say, be her good employer, to testify that she be
in need of good food.
but by-and-by Nancy, in her attic, become portentously bad, the
suppose tumor have indeed give way to the blister, but only
wander to another region with angrier pain. the staymaker's wife
go to fetch Lydgate, and he continue for a fortnight to attend Nancy
in her own home, until under his treatment she get quite well and go
to work again. but the case continue to be describe as one of tumor
in Churchyard Lane and other street--nay, by Mrs. Larcher also; for
when Lydgate's remarkable cure be mention to Dr. Minchin, he
naturally do not like to say, "the case be not one of tumor, and I
be mistake in describe it as such," but answer, "indeed! ah! I
see it be a surgical case, not of a fatal kind." he have be inwardly
annoyed, however, when he have ask at the Infirmary about the woman he
have recommend two day before, to hear from the house-surgeon, a
youngster who be not sorry to vex Minchin with impunity, exactly what
have occur: he privately pronounce that it be indecent in a general
practitioner to contradict a physician's diagnosis in that open manner,
and afterwards agree with Wrench that Lydgate be disagreeably
inattentive to etiquette. Lydgate do not make the affair a ground for
value himself or (very particularly) despise Minchin, such
rectification of misjudgment often happen among man of equal
qualification. but report take up this amazing case of tumor, not
clearly distinguish from cancer, and consider the more awful for
be of the wandering sort; till much prejudice against Lydgate's
method as to drug be overcome by the proof of his marvellous skill in
the speedy restoration of Nancy Nash after she have be roll and
roll in agony from the presence of a tumor both hard and
obstinate, but nevertheless compel to yield.
how could lydgate help himself? it be offensive to tell a lady when
she be express her amazement at your skill, that she be altogether
mistaken and rather foolish in her amazement. and to have enter into
the nature of disease would only have add to his breach of medical
propriety. thus he have to wince under a promise of success give by
that ignorant praise which miss every valid quality.
in the case of a more conspicuous patient, Mr. Borthrop Trumbull,
Lydgate be conscious of have show himself something well than an
every-day doctor, though here too it be an equivocal advantage that he
win. the eloquent auctioneer be seize with pneumonia, and have
be a patient of Mr. Peacock's, send for Lydgate, whom he have
express his intention to patronize. Mr Trumbull be a robust man, a
good subject for try the expectant theory upon--watch the course
of an interesting disease when leave as much as possible to itself, so
that the stage might be note for future guidance; and from the air
with which he describe his sensation Lydgate surmise that he would
like to be take into his medical man's confidence, and be represent
as a partner in his own cure. the auctioneer hear, without much
surprise, that his be a constitution which (always with due watch)
might be leave to itself, so as to offer a beautiful example of a
disease with all its phase see in clear delineation, and that he
probably have the rare strength of mind voluntarily to become the test
of a rational procedure, and thus make the disorder of his pulmonary
function a general benefit to society.
Mr. Trumbull acquiesce at once, and enter strongly into the view
that an illness of his be no ordinary occasion for medical science.
"never fear, sir; you be not speak to one who be altogether
ignorant of the vis medicatrix," say he, with his usual superiority of
expression, make rather pathetic by difficulty of breathing. and he
go without shrink through his abstinence from drug, much
sustain by application of the thermometer which imply the
importance of his temperature, by the sense that he furnish object
for the microscope, and by learn many new word which seem suit
to the dignity of his secretion. for Lydgate be acute enough to
indulge he with a little technical talk.
it may be imagine that Mr. Trumbull rise from his couch with a
disposition to speak of an illness in which he have manifest the
strength of his mind as well as constitution; and he be not backward
in award credit to the medical man who have discern the quality of
patient he have to deal with. the auctioneer be not an ungenerous man,
and like to give other their due, feel that he could afford it.
he have catch the word "expectant method," and rang chime on this and
other learn phrase to accompany the assurance that Lydgate "know a
thing or two more than the rest of the doctor--be far well verse
in the secret of his profession than the majority of his compeer."
this have happen before the affair of Fred Vincy's illness have give
to Mr. Wrench's enmity towards Lydgate more definite personal ground.
the new-comer already threaten to be a nuisance in the shape of
rivalry, and be certainly a nuisance in the shape of practical
criticism or reflection on his hard-drive elder, who have have
something else to do than to busy themselves with untried notion. his
practice have spread in one or two quarter, and from the first the
report of his high family have lead to his be pretty generally
invite, so that the other medical man have to meet he at dinner in the
good house; and have to meet a man whom you dislike be not observe
always to end in a mutual attachment. there be hardly ever so much
unanimity among they as in the opinion that Lydgate be an arrogant
young fellow, and yet ready for the sake of ultimately predominate to
show a crawl subservience to Bulstrode. that Mr. Farebrother, whose
name be a chief flag of the anti-bulstrode party, always defend
Lydgate and make a friend of he, be refer to Farebrother's
unaccountable way of fight on both side.
here be plenty of preparation for the outburst of professional disgust
at the announcement of the law Mr. Bulstrode be lay down for the
direction of the New Hospital, which be the more exasperating because
there be no present possibility of interfere with his will and
pleasure, everybody except Lord Medlicote have refuse help towards
the building, on the ground that they prefer give to the Old
Infirmary. Mr. Bulstrode meet all the expense, and have cease to be
sorry that he be purchase the right to carry out his notion of
improvement without hindrance from prejudiced coadjutor; but he have
have to spend large sum, and the building have linger. Caleb Garth
have undertake it, have fail during its progress, and before the
interior fitting be begin have retire from the management of the
business; and when refer to the Hospital he often say that however
Bulstrode might ring if you try he, he like good solid carpentry
and masonry, and have a notion both of drain and chimney. in fact,
the Hospital have become an object of intense interest to Bulstrode, and
he would willingly have continue to spare a large yearly sum that he
might rule it dictatorially without any Board; but he have another
favorite object which also require money for its accomplishment: he
wish to buy some land in the neighborhood of Middlemarch, and
therefore he wish to get considerable contribution towards
maintain the hospital. meanwhile he frame his plan of management.
the Hospital be to be reserve for fever in all its form; Lydgate be
to be chief medical superintendent, that he might have free authority
to pursue all comparative investigation which his study,
particularly in Paris, have show he the importance of, the other
medical visitor have a consultative influence, but no power to
contravene lydgate's ultimate decision; and the general management be
to be lodge exclusively in the hand of five director associate with
Mr. Bulstrode, who be to have vote in the ratio of their
contribution, the Board itself fill up any vacancy in its number,
and no mob of small contributor be admit to a share of
government.
there be an immediate refusal on the part of every medical man in the
town to become a visitor at the Fever Hospital.
"very well," say Lydgate to Mr. Bulstrode, "we have a capital
house-surgeon and dispenser, a clear-head, neat-handed fellow; wewill
get Webbe from Crabsley, as good a country practitioner as any of they,
to come over twice a-week, and in case of any exceptional operation,
Protheroe will come from Brassing. I must work the hard, thatbe all,
and I have give up my post at the Infirmary. the plan will flourish
in spite of they, and then theywill be glad to come in. thing cannot
last as they be: there must be all sort of reform soon, and then
young fellow may be glad to come and study here." Lydgate be in high
spirit.
"I shall not flinch, you may depend upon it, Mr. Lydgate," say Mr.
Bulstrode. "while I see you carry out high intention with vigor,
you shall have my unfailing support. and I have humble confidence that
the blessing which have hitherto attend my effort against the spirit
of evil in this town will not be withdraw. suitable director to
assist I I have no doubt of securing. Mr. Brooke of Tipton have
already give I his concurrence, and a pledge to contribute yearly: he
have not specify the sum--probably not a great one. but he will be a
useful member of the board."
a useful member be perhaps to be define as one who would originate
nothing, and always vote with Mr. Bulstrode.
the medical aversion to Lydgate be hardly disguise now. neither Dr.
Sprague nor Dr. Minchin say that he dislike Lydgate's knowledge, or
his disposition to improve treatment: what they dislike be his
arrogance, which nobody feel to be altogether deniable. they imply
that he be insolent, pretentious, and give to that reckless
innovation for the sake of noise and show which be the essence of the
charlatan.
the word charlatan once throw on the air could not be let drop. in
those day the world be agitate about the wondrous doing of Mr. St.
John Long, "nobleman and gentleman" attest his extraction of a fluid
like mercury from the temple of a patient.
Mr. Toller remark one day, smilingly, to Mrs. Taft, that "Bulstrode
have find a man to suit he in Lydgate; a charlatan in religion be sure
to like other sort of charlatan."
"yes, indeed, I can imagine," say Mrs. Taft, keep the number of
thirty stitch carefully in her mind all the while; "there be so many
of that sort. I remember Mr. Cheshire, with his iron, try to make
people straight when the Almighty have make they crooked."
"no, no," say Mr. Toller, "cheshire be all right--all fair and above
board. but therebe St. John Long--thatbe the kind of fellow we call a
charlatan, advertising cure in way nobody know anything about: a
fellow who want to make a noise by pretend to go deep than other
people. the other day he be pretend to tap a man's brain and get
quicksilver out of it."
"good gracious! what dreadful trifling with people's constitution!"
say Mrs. Taft.
after this, it come to be hold in various quarter that Lydgate play
even with respectable constitution for his own purpose, and how much
more likely that in his flighty experiment he should make six and
seven of hospital patient. especially it be to be expect, as the
landlady of the Tankard have say, that he would recklessly cut up their
dead body. for Lydgate have attend Mrs. Goby, who die
apparently of a heart-disease not very clearly express in the
symptom, too daringly ask leave of her relative to open the body,
and thus give an offence quickly spread beyond Parley Street, where
that lady have long reside on an income such as make this association
of her body with the victim of Burke and Hare a flagrant insult to her
memory.
affair be in this stage when Lydgate open the subject of the
Hospital to Dorothea. we see that he be bear enmity and silly
misconception with much spirit, aware that they be partly create by
his good share of success.
"they will not drive I away," he say, talk confidentially in Mr.
Farebrother's study. "I have get a good opportunity here, for the end
I care most about; and I be pretty sure to get income enough for our
want. by-and-by I shall go on as quietly as possible: I have no
seduction now away from home and work. and I be more and more
convince that it will be possible to demonstrate the homogeneous
origin of all the tissue. Raspail and other be on the same track,
and I have be lose time."
"I have no power of prophecy there," say Mr. Farebrother, who have be
puff at his pipe thoughtfully while Lydgate talk; "but as to the
hostility in the town, youwill weather it if you be prudent."
"how be I to be prudent?" say Lydgate, "I just do what come before I
to do. I cannot help people's ignorance and spite, any more than
Vesalius could. it benot possible to square one's conduct to silly
conclusion which nobody can foresee."
"quite true; I donot mean that. I mean only two thing. one be,
keep yourself as separable from Bulstrode as you can: of course, you
can go on do good work of your own by his help; but donot get tie.
perhaps it seem like personal feeling in I to say so--and therebe a
good deal of that, I own--but personal feeling be not always in the
wrong if you boil it down to the impression which make it simply an
opinion."
"Bulstrode be nothing to I," say Lydgate, carelessly, "except on
public ground. as to get very closely united to he, I be not
fond enough of he for that. but what be the other thing you mean?"
say Lydgate, who be nurse his leg as comfortably as possible, and
feel in no great need of advice.
"why, this. take care--experto crede--take care not to get hamper
about money matter. I know, by a word you let fall one day, that you
donot like my playing at card so much for money. you be right enough
there. but try and keep clear of want small sum that you havenot
get. I be perhaps talk rather superfluously; but a man like to
assume superiority over himself, by hold up his bad example and
sermonize on it."
Lydgate take Mr. Farebrother's hint very cordially, though he would
hardly have bear they from another man. he could not help remember
that he have lately make some debt, but these have seem inevitable,
and he have no intention now to do more than keep house in a simple way.
the furniture for which he owe would not want renewing; nor even the
stock of wine for a long while.
many thought cheer he at that time--and justly. a man conscious of
enthusiasm for worthy aim be sustain under petty hostility by the
memory of great worker who have to fight their way not without wound,
and who hover in his mind as patron saint, invisibly help. at
home, that same evening when he have be chat with Mr. Farebrother,
he have his long leg stretch on the sofa, his head throw back, and
his hand clasp behind it accord to his favorite ruminating
attitude, while Rosamond sit at the piano, and play one tune after
another, of which her husband only know (like the emotional elephant he
be!) that they fall in with his mood as if they have be melodious
sea-breeze.
there be something very fine in Lydgate's look just then, and any one
might have be encourage to bet on his achievement. in his dark eye
and on his mouth and brow there be that placidity which come from the
fulness of contemplative thought--the mind not search, but
beholding, and the glance seem to be fill with what be behind it.
presently Rosamond leave the piano and seat herself on a chair close
to the sofa and opposite her husband's face.
"be that enough music for you, my lord?" she say, fold her hand
before she and put on a little air of meekness.
"yes, dear, if you be tired," say Lydgate, gently, turn his eye
and rest they on she, but not otherwise move. Rosamond's presence
at that moment be perhaps no more than a spoonful bring to the lake,
and her woman's instinct in this matter be not dull.
"what be absorb you?" she say, lean forward and bring she
face near to his.
he move his hand and place they gently behind her shoulder.
"I be think of a great fellow, who be about as old as I be three
hundred year ago, and have already begin a new era in anatomy."
"I cannot guess," say Rosamond, shake her head. "we use to play at
guess historical character at Mrs. Lemon's, but not anatomist."
"Iwill tell you. his name be Vesalius. and the only way he could get
to know anatomy as he do, be by go to snatch body at night, from
graveyard and place of execution."
"oh!" say Rosamond, with a look of disgust on her pretty face, "I be
very glad you be not Vesalius. I should have think he might find
some less horrible way than that."
"no, he couldnot," say Lydgate, go on too earnestly to take much
notice of her answer. "he could only get a complete skeleton by
snatch the whitened bone of a criminal from the gallow, and
bury they, and fetch they away by bit secretly, in the dead of
night."
"I hope he be not one of your great hero," say Rosamond, half
playfully, half anxiously, "else I shall have you get up in the
night to go to St. Peter's churchyard. you know how angry you tell I
the people be about Mrs. Goby. you have enemy enough already."
"so have Vesalius, Rosy. no wonder the medical fogy in Middlemarch
be jealous, when some of the great doctor live be fierce upon
Vesalius because they have believe in Galen, and he show that Galen
be wrong. they call he a liar and a poisonous monster. but the
fact of the human frame be on his side; and so he get the well of
they."
"and what happen to he afterwards?" say Rosamond, with some
interest.
"oh, he have a good deal of fight to the last. and they do
exasperate he enough at one time to make he burn a good deal of his
work. then he get shipwreck just as he be come from Jerusalem to
take a great chair at Padua. he die rather miserably."
there be a moment's pause before Rosamond say, "do you know, Tertius,
I often wish you have not be a medical man."
"Nay, Rosy, donot say that," say Lydgate, draw she close to he.
"that be like say you wish you have marry another man."
"not at all; you be clever enough for anything: you might easily have
be something else. and your cousin at Quallingham all think that
you have sink below they in your choice of a profession."
"the cousin at Quallingham may go to the devil!" say Lydgate, with
scorn. "it be like their impudence if they say anything of the sort
to you."
"still," say Rosamond, "I do _not_ think it be a nice profession,
dear." we know that she have much quiet perseverance in her opinion.
"it be the grand profession in the world, Rosamond," say Lydgate,
gravely. "and to say that you love I without love the medical man
in I, be the same sort of thing as to say that you like eat a peach
but donot like its flavor. donot say that again, dear, it pain I."
"very well, Doctor Grave-face," say Rosy, dimple, "I will declare in
future that I dote on skeleton, and body-snatcher, and bit of thing
in phial, and quarrel with everybody, that end in your dying
miserably."
"no, no, not so bad as that," say Lydgate, give up remonstrance and
pet she resignedly.
CHAPTER XLVI.
Pues no podemos haber aquello que queremos, queramos
aquello que podremos.
since we cannot get what we like, let we like
what we can get.
--Spanish Proverb.
while lydgate, safely married and with the Hospital under his command,
feel himself struggle for Medical Reform against Middlemarch,
Middlemarch be become more and more conscious of the national
struggle for another kind of reform.
by the time that Lord John Russell's measure be be debate in the
House of Commons, there be a new political animation in Middlemarch,
and a new definition of party which might show a decide change of
balance if a new election come. and there be some who already
predict this event, declare that a Reform Bill would never be
carry by the actual Parliament. this be what will Ladislaw dwelt on
to Mr. Brooke as a reason for congratulation that he have not yet try
his strength at the husting.
"thing will grow and ripen as if it be a comet year," say will.
"the public temper will soon get to a cometary heat, now the question
of Reform have set in. there be likely to be another election before
long, and by that time Middlemarch will have get more idea into its
head. what we have to work at now be the 'Pioneer' and political
meeting."
"quite right, Ladislaw; we shall make a new thing of opinion here,"
say Mr. Brooke. "only I want to keep myself independent about Reform,
you know; I donot want to go too far. I want to take up.
Wilberforce's and Romilly's line, you know, and work at Negro
Emancipation, Criminal Law--that kind of thing. but of course I should
support Grey."
"if you go in for the principle of Reform, you must be prepare to take
what the situation offer," say will. "if everybody pull for his
own bit against everybody else, the whole question would go to tatter."
"yes, yes, I agree with you--I quite take that point of view. I should
put it in that light. I should support Grey, you know. but I donot
want to change the balance of the constitution, and I donot think Grey
would."
"but that be what the country wants,"-said will. "else there would be
no meaning in political union or any other movement that know what
itbe about. it want to have a House of Commons which be not weight
with nominee of the land class, but with representative of the
other interest. and as to contend for a reform short of that, it
be like ask for a bit of an avalanche which have already begin to
thunder."
"that be fine, Ladislaw: that be the way to put it. write that down,
now. we must begin to get document about the feeling of the country,
as well as the machine-break and general distress."
"as to document," say will, "a two-inch card will hold plenty. a few
row of figure be enough to deduce misery from, and a few more will
show the rate at which the political determination of the people be
grow."
"good: draw that out a little more at length, Ladislaw. that be an
idea, now: write it out in the 'Pioneer.' put the figure and deduce
the misery, you know; and put the other figure and deduce--and so on.
you have a way of put thing. Burke, now:--when I think of Burke,
I cannot help wish somebody have a pocket-borough to give you,
Ladislaw. youwould never get elect, you know. and we shall always want
talent in the House: reform as we will, we shall always want talent.
that avalanche and the thunder, now, be really a little like Burke. I
want that sort of thing--not idea, you know, but a way of put
they."
"pocket-borough would be a fine thing," say Ladislaw, "if they be
always in the right pocket, and there be always a Burke at hand."
will be not displeased with that complimentary comparison, even from
Mr. Brooke; for it be a little too try to human flesh to be
conscious of express one's self well than other and never to have
it notice, and in the general dearth of admiration for the right
thing, even a chance bray of applause fall exactly in time be rather
fortifying. will feel that his literary refinement be usually
beyond the limit of middlemarch perception; nevertheless, he be
begin thoroughly to like the work of which when he begin he have
say to himself rather languidly, "why not?"--and he study the
political situation with as ardent an interest as he have ever give to
poetic metre or mediaevalism. it be undeniable that but for the
desire to be where Dorothea be, and perhaps the want of know what
else to do, will would not at this time have be meditate on the
need of the english people or criticise English statesmanship: he
would probably have be ramble in Italy sketch plan for several
drama, try prose and find it too jejune, try verse and
find it too artificial, begin to copy "bit" from old picture,
leave off because they be "no good," and observe that, after all,
self-culture be the principal point; while in politic he would have
be sympathize warmly with liberty and progress in general. our
sense of duty must often wait for some work which shall take the place
of dilettanteism and make we feel that the quality of our action be not
a matter of indifference.
Ladislaw have now accept his bit of work, though it be not that
indeterminate lofty thing which he have once dream of as alone
worthy of continuous effort. his nature warm easily in the presence
of subject which be visibly mixed with life and action, and the
easily stir rebellion in he help the glow of public spirit. in
spite of Mr. Casaubon and the banishment from Lowick, he be rather
happy; get a great deal of fresh knowledge in a vivid way and for
practical purpose, and make the "Pioneer" celebrate as far as
Brassing (never mind the smallness of the area; the writing be not
bad than much that reach the four corner of the earth).
Mr. Brooke be occasionally irritate; but will's impatience be
relieve by the division of his time between visit to the Grange and
retreat to his middlemarch lodging, which give variety to his life.
"shift the peg a little," he say to himself, "and Mr. Brooke might be
in the Cabinet, while I be under-Secretary. that be the common order
of thing: the little wave make the large one and be of the same
pattern. I be well here than in the sort of life Mr. Casaubon would
have train I for, where the doing would be all lay down by a
precedent too rigid for I to react upon. I donot care for prestige or
high pay."
as Lydgate have say of he, he be a sort of gypsy, rather enjoy the
sense of belong to no class; he have a feeling of romance in his
position, and a pleasant consciousness of create a little surprise
wherever he go. that sort of enjoyment have be disturb when he
have feel some new distance between himself and Dorothea in their
accidental meeting at Lydgate's, and his irritation have go out
towards Mr. Casaubon, who have declare beforehand that will would lose
caste. "I never have any caste," he would have say, if that prophecy
have be utter to he, and the quick blood would have come and go
like breath in his transparent skin. but it be one thing to like
defiance, and another thing to like its consequence.
meanwhile, the town opinion about the new editor of the "Pioneer" be
tend to confirm Mr. Casaubon's view. will's relationship in that
distinguished quarter do not, like Lydgate's high connection, serve
as an advantageous introduction: if it be rumor that young Ladislaw
be Mr. Casaubon's nephew or cousin, it be also rumor that "Mr.
Casaubon would have nothing to do with he."
"Brooke have take he up," say Mr. Hawley, "because that be what no
man in his sens could have expect. Casaubon have devilish good
reason, you may be sure, for turn the cold shoulder on a young
fellow whose bringing-up he pay for. just like Brooke--one of those
fellow who would praise a cat to sell a horse."
and some oddity of Will's, more or less poetical, appear to support
Mr. Keck, the editor of the "Trumpet," in assert that Ladislaw, if
the truth be know, be not only a polish emissary but crack-brain,
which account for the preternatural quickness and glibness of his
speech when he get on to a platform--as he do whenever he have an
opportunity, speak with a facility which cast reflection on solid
Englishmen generally. it be disgusting to Keck to see a strip of a
fellow, with light curl round his head, get up and speechify by the
hour against institution "which have exist when he be in his
cradle." and in a lead article of the "Trumpet," Keck characterize
Ladislaw's speech at a reform meeting as "the violence of an
energuman--a miserable effort to shroud in the brilliancy of firework
the daring of irresponsible statement and the poverty of a knowledge
which be of the cheap and most recent description."
"that be a rattle article yesterday, Keck," say Dr. Sprague, with
sarcastic intention. "but what be an energuman?"
"oh, a term that come up in the French Revolution," say Keck.
this dangerous aspect of Ladislaw be strangely contrast with other
habit which become matter of remark. he have a fondness, half
artistic, half affectionate, for little child--the small they be
on tolerably active leg, and the funny their clothing, the well
will like to surprise and please they. we know that in Rome he be
give to ramble about among the poor people, and the taste do not quit
he in Middlemarch.
he have somehow pick up a troop of droll child, little hatless boy
with their galligaskin much worn and scant shirting to hang out,
little girl who toss their hair out of their eye to look at he,
and guardian brother at the mature age of seven. this troop he have
lead out on gypsy excursion to Halsell Wood at nutting-time, and since
the cold weather have set in he have take they on a clear day to gather
stick for a bonfire in the hollow of a hillside, where he draw out a
small feast of gingerbread for they, and improvise a Punch-and-judy
drama with some private home-make puppet. here be one oddity.
another be, that in house where he get friendly, he be give to
stretch himself at full length on the rug while he talk, and be apt
to be discover in this attitude by occasional caller for whom such
an irregularity be likely to confirm the notion of his dangerously
mixed blood and general laxity.
but Will's article and speech naturally recommend he in family
which the new strictness of party division have mark off on the side
of Reform. he be invite to Mr. Bulstrode's; but here he could not
lie down on the rug, and Mrs. Bulstrode feel that his mode of talk
about catholic country, as if there be any truce with Antichrist,
illustrate the usual tendency to unsoundness in intellectual man.
at Mr. Farebrother's, however, whom the irony of event have bring on
the same side with Bulstrode in the national movement, will become a
favorite with the lady; especially with little Miss Noble, whom it
be one of his oddity to escort when he meet she in the street with
her little basket, give she his arm in the eye of the town, and
insist on go with she to pay some call where she distribute she
small filching from her own share of sweet thing.
but the house where he visit oftenest and lie most on the rug be
Lydgate's. the two man be not at all alike, but they agree none the
bad. Lydgate be abrupt but not irritable, take little notice of
megrim in healthy people; and Ladislaw do not usually throw away his
susceptibility on those who take no notice of they. with Rosamond,
on the other hand, he pout and be wayward--nay, often
uncomplimentary, much to her inward surprise; nevertheless he be
gradually become necessary to her entertainment by his companionship
in her music, his varied talk, and his freedom from the grave
preoccupation which, with all her husband's tenderness and indulgence,
often make his manner unsatisfactory to she, and confirm her dislike
of the medical profession.
Lydgate, incline to be sarcastic on the superstitious faith of the
people in the efficacy of "the bill," while nobody care about the low
state of pathology, sometimes assail Will with troublesome question.
one evening in March, Rosamond in her cherry-color dress with
swansdown trim about the throat sit at the tea-table; lydgate,
lately come in tired from his outdoor work, be seat sideways on an
easy-chair by the fire with one leg over the elbow, his brow look a
little troubled as his eye ramble over the column of the "Pioneer,"
while Rosamond, have notice that he be perturb, avoid look
at he, and inwardly thank heaven that she herself have not a moody
disposition. will Ladislaw be stretch on the rug contemplate the
curtain-pole abstractedly, and hum very low the note of "when
first I see thy face;" while the house spaniel, also stretch out with
small choice of room, look from between his paw at the usurper of
the rug with silent but strong objection.
Rosamond bring Lydgate his cup of tea, he throw down the paper, and
say to Will, who have start up and go to the table--
"itbe no use your puff Brooke as a reform landlord, Ladislaw:
they only pick the more hole in his coat in the 'Trumpet.'"
"no matter; those who read the 'Pioneer' donot read the 'Trumpet,'"
say will, swallow his tea and walk about. "do you suppose the
public read with a view to its own conversion? we should have a
witch' brewing with a vengeance then--'mingle, mingle, mingle,
mingle, you that mingle may'--and nobody would know which side he be
go to take."
"Farebrother say, he donot believe Brooke would get elect if the
opportunity come: the very man who profess to be for he would bring
another member out of the bag at the right moment."
"therebe no harm in try. itbe good to have resident member."
"why?" say Lydgate, who be much give to use that inconvenient word
in a curt tone.
"they represent the local stupidity well," say will, laughing, and
shake his curl; "and they be keep on their good behavior in the
neighborhood. Brooke be not a bad fellow, but he have do some good
thing on his estate that he never would have do but for this
parliamentary bite."
"hebe not fit to be a public man," say Lydgate, with contemptuous
decision. "he would disappoint everybody who count on he: I can see
that at the Hospital. only, there Bulstrode hold the rein and drive
he."
"that depend on how you fix your standard of public man," say will.
"hebe good enough for the occasion: when the people have make up their
mind as they be make it up now, they donot want a man--they only
want a vote."
"that be the way with you political writer, Ladislaw--cry up a
measure as if it be a universal cure, and cry up man who be a
part of the very disease that want cure."
"why not? man may help to cure themselves off the face of the land
without know it," say will, who could find reason impromptu, when
he have not think of a question beforehand.
"that be no excuse for encourage the superstitious exaggeration of
hope about this particular measure, help the cry to swallow it
whole and to send up voting popinjay who be good for nothing but to
carry it. you go against rottenness, and there be nothing more
thoroughly rotten than make people believe that society can be cure
by a political hocus-pocus."
"thatbe very fine, my dear fellow. but your cure must begin somewhere,
and put it that a thousand thing which debase a population can never
be reform without this particular reform to begin with. look what
Stanley say the other day--that the House have be tinker long
enough at small question of bribery, inquire whether this or that
voter have have a guinea when everybody know that the seat have be
sell wholesale. wait for wisdom and conscience in public
agent--fiddlestick! the only conscience we can trust to be the
massive sense of wrong in a class, and the good wisdom that will work
be the wisdom of balance claim. thatbe my text--which side be
injure? I support the man who support their claim; not the virtuous
upholder of the wrong."
"that general talk about a particular case be mere question beg,
Ladislaw. when I say, I go in for the dose that cure, it donot
follow that I go in for opium in a give case of gout."
"I be not beg the question we be upon--whether we be to try for
nothing till we find immaculate man to work with. should you go on
that plan? if there be one man who would carry you a medical reform
and another who would oppose it, should you inquire which have the
well motif or even the well brain?"
"oh, of course," say Lydgate, see himself checkmate by a move
which he have often use himself, "if one do not work with such man as
be at hand, thing must come to a dead-lock. suppose the bad opinion
in the town about Bulstrode be a true one, that would not make it
less true that he have the sense and the resolution to do what I think
ought to be do in the matter I know and care most about; but that be
the only ground on which I go with he," Lydgate add rather proudly,
bear in mind Mr. Farebrother's remark. "he be nothing to I
otherwise; I would not cry he up on any personal ground--I would keep
clear of that."
"do you mean that I cry up Brooke on any personal ground?" say will
Ladislaw, nettled, and turn sharp round. for the first time he feel
offend with Lydgate; not the less so, perhaps, because he would have
decline any close inquiry into the growth of his relation to Mr.
Brooke.
"not at all," say Lydgate, "I be simply explain my own action. I
mean that a man may work for a special end with other whose motif
and general course be equivocal, if he be quite sure of his personal
independence, and that he be not work for his private
interest--either place or money."
"then, why donot you extend your liberality to other?" say will,
still nettle. "my personal independence be as important to I as
yours be to you. you have no more reason to imagine that I have
personal expectation from Brooke, than I have to imagine that you have
personal expectation from Bulstrode. motif be point of honor, I
suppose--nobody can prove they. but as to money and place in the
world." will end, toss back his head, "I think it be pretty clear
that I be not determine by consideration of that sort."
"you quite mistake I, Ladislaw," say Lydgate, surprised. he have be
preoccupy with his own vindication, and have be blind to what
Ladislaw might infer on his own account. "I beg your pardon for
unintentionally annoying you. in fact, I should rather attribute to
you a romantic disregard of your own worldly interest. on the
political question, I refer simply to intellectual bias."
"how very unpleasant you both be this evening!" say Rosamond. "I
cannot conceive why money should have be refer to. polity and
Medicine be sufficiently disagreeable to quarrel upon. you can both
of you go on quarrel with all the world and with each other on
those two topic."
Rosamond look mildly neutral as she say this, rise to ring the
bell, and then cross to her work-table.
"Poor Rosy!" say Lydgate, put out his hand to she as she be
pass he. "disputation be not amusing to cherub. have some music.
ask Ladislaw to sing with you."
when will be go Rosamond say to her husband, "what put you out of
temper this evening, Tertius?"
"I? it be Ladislaw who be out of temper. he be like a bit of
tinder."
"but I mean, before that. something have vex you before you come in,
you look cross. and that make you begin to dispute with Mr.
Ladislaw. you hurt I very much when you look so, Tertius."
"do I? then I be a brute," say Lydgate, caress she penitently.
"what vex you?"
"oh, outdoor thing--business." it be really a letter insist on
the payment of a bill for furniture. but Rosamond be expect to
have a baby, and Lydgate wish to save she from any perturbation.
CHAPTER XLVII.
be never true love love in vain,
for true love be high gain.
no art can make it: it must spring
where element be foster.
so in heaven's spot and hour
Springs the little native flower,
downward root and upward eye,
shapen by the earth and sky.
it happen to be on a Saturday evening that will Ladislaw have that
little discussion with Lydgate. its effect when he go to his own
room be to make he sit up half the night, think over again, under
a new irritation, all that he have before thought of his have settle
in Middlemarch and harness himself with Mr. Brooke. hesitation
before he have take the step have since turn into susceptibility to
every hint that he would have be wise not to take it; and hence come
his heat towards Lydgate--a heat which still keep he restless. be he
not make a fool of himself?--and at a time when he be more than
ever conscious of be something well than a fool? and for what end?
well, for no definite end. true, he have dreamy vision of
possibility: there be no human being who have both passion and
thought do not think in consequence of his passion--do not find
image rise in his mind which soothe the passion with hope or sting
it with dread. but this, which happen to we all, happen to some with
a wide difference; and will be not one of those whose wit "keep the
roadway:" he have his bypath where there be little joy of his own
choosing, such as gentleman canter on the highroad might have
think rather idiotic. the way in which he make a sort of happiness
for himself out of his feeling for Dorothea be an example of this. it
may seem strange, but it be the fact, that the ordinary vulgar vision
of which Mr. Casaubon suspect he--namely, that Dorothea might become
a widow, and that the interest he have establish in her mind might
turn into acceptance of he as a husband--have no tempting, arresting
power over he; he do not live in the scenery of such an event, and
follow it out, as we all do with that imagine "otherwise" which be our
practical heaven. it be not only that he be unwilling to entertain
thought which could be accuse of baseness, and be already uneasy in
the sense that he have to justify himself from the charge of
ingratitude--the latent consciousness of many other barrier between
himself and Dorothea besides the existence of her husband, have help
to turn away his imagination from speculate on what might befall Mr.
Casaubon. and there be yet other reason. will, we know, could not
bear the thought of any flaw appear in his crystal: he be at once
exasperate and delight by the calm freedom with which Dorothea
look at he and speak to he, and there be something so exquisite in
thinking of she just as she be, that he could not long for a change
which must somehow change she. do we not shun the street version of a
fine melody?--or shrink from the news that the rarity--some bit of
chiselling or engrave perhaps--which we have dwell on even with
exultation in the trouble it have cost we to snatch glimpse of it, be
really not an uncommon thing, and may be obtain as an every-day
possession? our good depend on the quality and breadth of our
emotion; and to Will, a creature who care little for what be call
the solid thing of life and greatly for its subtler influence, to
have within he such a feeling as he have towards Dorothea, be like the
inheritance of a fortune. what other might have call the futility
of his passion, make an additional delight for his imagination: he be
conscious of a generous movement, and of verify in his own
experience that high love-poetry which have charm his fancy.
Dorothea, he say to himself, be forever enthrone in his soul: no
other woman could sit high than her footstool; and if he could have
write out in immortal syllable the effect she work within he, he
might have boast after the example of old Drayton, that,--
"Queens hereafter might be glad to live
upon the alm of her superfluous praise."
but this result be questionable. and what else could he do for
Dorothea? what be his devotion worth to she? it be impossible to
tell. he would not go out of her reach. he see no creature among her
friend to whom he could believe that she speak with the same simple
confidence as to he. she have once say that she would like he to
stay; and stay he would, whatever fire-breathing dragon might hiss
around she.
this have always be the conclusion of Will's hesitation. but he be
not without contradictoriness and rebellion even towards his own
resolve. he have often get irritated, as he be on this particular
night, by some outside demonstration that his public exertion with Mr.
Brooke as a chief could not seem as heroic as he would like they to be,
and this be always associate with the other ground of
irritation--that notwithstanding his sacrifice of dignity for
Dorothea's sake, he could hardly ever see she. Whereupon, not be
able to contradict these unpleasant fact, he contradict his own
strong bias and say, "I be a fool."
nevertheless, since the inward debate necessarily turn on Dorothea,
he end, as he have do before, only by get a lively sense of
what her presence would be to he; and suddenly reflect that the
morrow would be Sunday, he determine to go to Lowick Church and see
she. he sleep upon that idea, but when he be dress in the rational
morning light, Objection said--
"that will be a virtual defiance of Mr. Casaubon's prohibition to visit
Lowick, and Dorothea will be displease."
"nonsense!" argue Inclination, "it would be too monstrous for he to
hinder I from go out to a pretty country church on a spring
morning. and Dorothea will be glad."
"it will be clear to Mr. Casaubon that you have come either to annoy
he or to see Dorothea."
"it be not true that I go to annoy he, and why should I not go to see
Dorothea? be he to have everything to himself and be always
comfortable? let he smart a little, as other people be oblige to
do. I have always like the quaintness of the church and congregation;
besides, I know the Tuckers: I shall go into their pew."
have silence Objection by force of unreason, will walk to Lowick
as if he have be on the way to Paradise, cross Halsell Common and
skirt the wood, where the sunlight fall broadly under the bud
bough, bring out the beauty of moss and lichen, and fresh green
growth pierce the brown. everything seem to know that it be
Sunday, and to approve of his go to Lowick Church. will easily feel
happy when nothing cross his humor, and by this time the thought of
vex Mr. Casaubon have become rather amusing to he, make his face
break into its merry smile, pleasant to see as the breaking of sunshine
on the water--though the occasion be not exemplary. but most of we
be apt to settle within ourselves that the man who block our way be
odious, and not to mind cause he a little of the disgust which his
personality excite in ourselves. will go along with a small book
under his arm and a hand in each side-pocket, never read, but
chant a little, as he make scene of what would happen in church and
come out. he be experiment in tune to suit some word of his
own, sometimes try a ready-make melody, sometimes improvise. the
word be not exactly a hymn, but they certainly fit his Sunday
experience:--
"o I, o I, what frugal cheer
my love doth feed upon!
a touch, a ray, that be not here,
a shadow that be go:
"a dream of breath that might be near,
an inly-echo tone,
the thought that one may think I dear,
the place where one be know,
"the tremor of a banish fear,
an ill that be not done--
o I, o I, what frugal cheer
my love doth feed upon!"
sometimes, when he take off his hat, shake his head backward, and
show his delicate throat as he sing, he look like an incarnation
of the spring whose spirit fill the air--a bright creature, abundant
in uncertain promise.
the bell be still ring when he get to Lowick, and he go into
the curate's pew before any one else arrive there. but he be still
leave alone in it when the congregation have assemble. the curate's pew
be opposite the rectorbe at the entrance of the small chancel, and
will have time to fear that Dorothea might not come while he look
round at the group of rural face which make the congregation from year
to year within the white-wash wall and dark old pew, hardly with
more change than we see in the bough of a tree which break here and
there with age, but yet have young shoot. Mr. Rigg's frog-face be
something alien and unaccountable, but notwithstanding this shock to
the order of thing, there be still the Waules and the rural stock of
the Powderells in their pew side by side; brother Samuel's cheek have
the same purple round as ever, and the three generation of decent
cottager come as of old with a sense of duty to their better
generally--the small child regard Mr. Casaubon, who wear the
black gown and mount to the high box, as probably the chief of all
better, and the one most awful if offend. even in 1831 Lowick be
at peace, not more agitated by Reform than by the solemn tenor of the
Sunday sermon. the congregation have be use to see Will at church
in former day, and no one take much note of he except the choir, who
expect he to make a figure in the singing.
Dorothea do at last appear on this quaint background, walk up the
short aisle in her white beaver bonnet and gray cloak--the same she have
wear in the Vatican. her face be, from her entrance, towards the
chancel, even her shortsighted eye soon discern Will, but there be
no outward show of her feeling except a slight paleness and a grave bow
as she pass he. to his own surprise will feel suddenly
uncomfortable, and dare not look at she after they have bow to each
other. two minute later, when Mr. Casaubon come out of the vestry,
and, enter the pew, seat himself in face of Dorothea, will feel
his paralysis more complete. he could look nowhere except at the choir
in the little gallery over the vestry-door: Dorothea be perhaps
pain, and he have make a wretched blunder. it be no long amusing
to vex Mr. Casaubon, who have the advantage probably of watch he and
see that he dare not turn his head. why have he not imagine this
beforehand?--but he could not expect that he should sit in that square
pew alone, unrelieve by any Tuckers, who have apparently depart from
Lowick altogether, for a new clergyman be in the desk. still he
call himself stupid now for not foresee that it would be
impossible for he to look towards Dorothea--nay, that she might feel
his come an impertinence. there be no deliver himself from his
cage, however; and will find his place and look at his book as if
he have be a school-mistress, feel that the morning service have
never be so immeasurably long before, that he be utterly ridiculous,
out of temper, and miserable. this be what a man get by worship
the sight of a woman! the clerk observe with surprise that Mr.
Ladislaw do not join in the tune of Hanover, and reflect that he
might have a cold.
Mr. Casaubon do not preach that morning, and there be no change in
Will's situation until the blessing have be pronounce and every one
rise. it be the fashion at Lowick for "the better" to go out first.
with a sudden determination to break the spell that be upon he, will
look straight at Mr. Casaubon. but that gentleman's eye be on the
button of the pew-door, which he open, allow Dorothea to pass, and
follow she immediately without raise his eyelid. will's glance
have catch Dorothea's as she turn out of the pew, and again she
bow, but this time with a look of agitation, as if she be
repress tear. will walk out after they, but they go on towards
the little gate lead out of the churchyard into the shrubbery, never
look round.
it be impossible for he to follow they, and he could only walk back
sadly at mid-day along the same road which he have tread hopefully in
the morning. the light be all change for he both without and
within.
CHAPTER XLVIII
surely the golden hour be turn gray
and dance no more, and vainly strive to run:
I see their white lock stream in the wind--
each face be haggard as it look at I,
slow turning in the constant clasping round
storm-drive.
Dorothea's distress when she be leave the church come chiefly from
the perception that Mr. Casaubon be determine not to speak to his
cousin, and that will's presence at church have serve to mark more
strongly the alienation between they. willbe come seem to she
quite excusable, nay, she think it an amiable movement in he towards
a reconciliation which she herself have be constantly wish for. he
have probably imagine, as she have, that if Mr. Casaubon and he could
meet easily, they would shake hand and friendly intercourse might
return. but now Dorothea feel quite rob of that hope. will be
banish far than ever, for Mr. Casaubon must have be newly
embitter by this thrusting upon he of a presence which he refuse to
recognize.
he have not be very well that morning, suffer from some difficulty
in breathing, and have not preach in consequence; she be not
surprised, therefore, that he be nearly silent at luncheon, still less
that he make no allusion to Will Ladislaw. for her own part she feel
that she could never again introduce that subject. they usually spend
apart the hour between luncheon and dinner on a Sunday; Mr. Casaubon
in the library doze chiefly, and Dorothea in her boudoir, where she
be willnot to occupy herself with some of her favorite book. there be
a little heap of they on the table in the bow-window--of various sort,
from Herodotus, which she be learn to read with Mr. Casaubon, to
her old companion Pascal, and Keble's "Christian Year." but to-day
open one after another, and could read none of they. everything
seem dreary: the portent before the birth of Cyrus--jewish
antiquity--oh dear!--devout epigram--the sacred chime of favorite
hymn--all alike be as flat as tune beat on wood: even the spring
flower and the grass have a dull shiver in they under the afternoon
cloud that hide the sun fitfully; even the sustain thought which
have become habit seem to have in they the weariness of long future
day in which she would still live with they for her sole companion.
it be another or rather a full sort of companionship that poor
Dorothea be hunger for, and the hunger have grow from the perpetual
effort demand by her married life. she be always try to be what
her husband wish, and never able to repose on his delight in what she
be. the thing that she like, that she spontaneously care to have,
seem to be always exclude from her life; for if it be only grant
and not share by her husband it might as well have be deny. about
will Ladislaw there have be a difference between they from the first,
and it have end, since Mr. Casaubon have so severely repulse
Dorothea's strong feeling about his claim on the family property, by
she be convince that she be in the right and her husband in the
wrong, but that she be helpless. this afternoon the helplessness be
more wretchedly benumb than ever: she long for object who could
be dear to she, and to whom she could be dear. she long for work
which would be directly beneficent like the sunshine and the rain, and
now it appear that she be to live more and more in a virtual tomb,
where there be the apparatus of a ghastly labor produce what would
never see the light. today she have stand at the door of the tomb and
see will Ladislaw recede into the distant world of warm activity and
fellowship--turn his face towards she as he go.
book be of no use. thinking be of no use. it be Sunday, and she
could not have the carriage to go to Celia, who have lately have a baby.
there be no refuge now from spiritual emptiness and discontent, and
Dorothea have to bear her bad mood, as she would have bear a headache.
after dinner, at the hour when she usually begin to read aloud, Mr.
Casaubon propose that they should go into the library, where, he say,
he have order a fire and light. he seem to have revive, and to be
think intently.
in the library Dorothea observe that he have newly arrange a row of
his note-book on a table, and now he take up and put into her hand a
well-know volume, which be a table of content to all the other.
"you will oblige I, my dear," he say, seat himself, "if instead of
other reading this evening, you will go through this aloud, pencil in
hand, and at each point where I say 'mark,' will make a cross with your
pencil. this be the first step in a sifting process which I have long
have in view, and as we go on I shall be able to indicate to you certain
principle of selection whereby you will, I trust, have an intelligent
participation in my purpose."
this proposal be only one more sign add to many since his memorable
interview with Lydgate, that Mr. Casaubon's original reluctance to let
Dorothea work with he have give place to the contrary disposition,
namely, to demand much interest and labor from she.
after she have read and mark for two hour, he say, "we will take the
volume up-stair--and the pencil, if you please--and in case of
reading in the night, we can pursue this task. it be not wearisome to
you, I trust, Dorothea?"
"I prefer always read what you like well to hear," say Dorothea,
who tell the simple truth; for what she dread be to exert herself in
reading or anything else which leave he as joyless as ever.
it be a proof of the force with which certain characteristic in
Dorothea impress those around she, that her husband, with all his
jealousy and suspicion, have gather implicit trust in the integrity of
her promise, and her power of devote herself to her idea of the
right and well. of late he have begin to feel that these quality be
a peculiar possession for himself, and he want to engross they.
the reading in the night do come. Dorothea in her young weariness have
sleep soon and fast: she be awaken by a sense of light, which seem
to she at first like a sudden vision of sunset after she have climb a
steep hill: she open her eye and see her husband wrap in his warm
gown seat himself in the arm-chair near the fire-place where the
ember be still glow. he have light two candle, expect that
Dorothea would awake, but not like to rouse she by more direct mean.
"be you ill, Edward?" she say, rise immediately.
"I feel some uneasiness in a reclining posture. I will sit here for a
time." she throw wood on the fire, wrap herself up, and say, "you
would like I to read to you?"
"you would oblige I greatly by do so, Dorothea," say Mr. Casaubon,
with a shade more meekness than usual in his polite manner. "I be
wakeful: my mind be remarkably lucid."
"I fear that the excitement may be too great for you," say Dorothea,
remember Lydgate's caution.
"no, I be not conscious of undue excitement. thought be easy."
Dorothea dare not insist, and she read for an hour or more on the same
plan as she have do in the evening, but get over the page with
more quickness. Mr. Casaubon's mind be more alert, and he seem to
anticipate what be come after a very slight verbal indication,
say, "that will do--mark that"--or "pass on to the next head--I omit
the second excursus on Crete." Dorothea be amazed to think of the
bird-like speed with which his mind be survey the ground where it
have be creep for year. at last he said--
"close the book now, my dear. we will resume our work to-morrow. I
have defer it too long, and would gladly see it complete. but you
observe that the principle on which my selection be make, be to give
adequate, and not disproportionate illustration to each of the thesis
enumerate in my introduction, as at present sketched. you have
perceive that distinctly, Dorothea?"
"yes," say Dorothea, rather tremulously. she feel sick at heart.
"and now I think that I can take some repose," say Mr. Casaubon. he
lay down again and beg she to put out the light. when she have
lain down too, and there be a darkness only break by a dull glow on
the hearth, he said--
"before I sleep, I have a request to make, Dorothea."
"what be it?" say Dorothea, with dread in her mind.
"it be that you will let I know, deliberately, whether, in case of my
death, you will carry out my wish: whether you will avoid do what
I should deprecate, and apply yourself to do what I should desire."
Dorothea be not take by surprise: many incident have be lead she
to the conjecture of some intention on her husband's part which might
make a new yoke for she. she do not answer immediately.
"you refuse?" say Mr. Casaubon, with more edge in his tone.
"no, I do not yet refuse," say Dorothea, in a clear voice, the need of
freedom assert itself within she; "but it be too solemn--I think it
be not right--to make a promise when I be ignorant what it will bind I
to. whatever affection prompt I would do without promise."
"but you would use your own judgment: I ask you to obey mine; you
refuse."
"no, dear, no!" say Dorothea, beseechingly, crush by oppose fear.
"but may I wait and reflect a little while? I desire with my whole
soul to do what will comfort you; but I cannot give any pledge
suddenly--still less a pledge to do I know not what."
"you cannot then confide in the nature of my wish?"
"grant I till to-morrow," say Dorothea, beseechingly.
"till to-morrow then," say Mr. Casaubon.
soon she could hear that he be sleep, but there be no more sleep
for she. while she constrain herself to lie still lest she should
disturb he, her mind be carry on a conflict in which imagination
range its force first on one side and then on the other. she have no
presentiment that the power which her husband wish to establish over
her future action have relation to anything else than his work. but it
be clear enough to she that he would expect she to devote herself to
sift those mixed heap of material, which be to be the doubtful
illustration of principle still more doubtful. the poor child have
become altogether unbelieve as to the trustworthiness of that Key
which have make the ambition and the labor of her husband's life. it
be not wonderful that, in spite of her small instruction, her judgment
in this matter be true than his: for she look with unbiassed
comparison and healthy sense at probability on which he have risk
all his egoism. and now she picture to herself the day, and month,
and year which she must spend in sort what might be call
shattered mummy, and fragment of a tradition which be itself a
mosaic work from crushed ruin--sort they as food for a theory
which be already wither in the birth like an elfin child. Doubtless
a vigorous error vigorously pursue have keep the embryo of truth
a-breathing: the quest of gold be at the same time a questioning of
substance, the body of chemistry be prepare for its soul, and
Lavoisier be bear. but Mr. Casaubon's theory of the element which
make the seed of all tradition be not likely to bruise itself unawares
against discovery: it float among flexible conjecture no more
solid than those etymology which seem strong because of likeness in
sound until it be show that likeness in sound make they impossible:
it be a method of interpretation which be not test by the necessity
of form anything which have sharp collision than an elaborate
notion of Gog and Magog: it be as free from interruption as a plan for
thread the star together. and Dorothea have so often have to check
her weariness and impatience over this questionable riddle-guessing, as
it reveal itself to she instead of the fellowship in high knowledge
which be to make life worthy! she could understand well enough now
why her husband have come to cling to she, as possibly the only hope
leave that his labor would ever take a shape in which they could be
give to the world. at first it have seem that he wish to keep even
her aloof from any close knowledge of what he be do; but gradually
the terrible stringency of human need--the prospect of a too speedy
death--
and here Dorothea's pity turn from her own future to her husband's
past--nay, to his present hard struggle with a lot which have grow out
of that past: the lonely labor, the ambition breathe hardly under the
pressure of self-distrust; the goal recede, and the heavy limb;
and now at last the sword visibly tremble above he! and have she not
wish to marry he that she might help he in his life's labor?--but
she have think the work be to be something great, which she could
serve in devoutly for its own sake. be it right, even to soothe his
grief--would it be possible, even if she promise--to work as in a
treadmill fruitlessly?
and yet, could she deny he? could she say, "I refuse to content this
pin hunger?" it would be refuse to do for he dead, what she be
almost sure to do for he live. if he live as Lydgate have say he
might, for fifteen year or more, her life would certainly be spend in
help he and obey he.
still, there be a deep difference between that devotion to the living
and that indefinite promise of devotion to the dead. while he live,
he could claim nothing that she would not still be free to remonstrate
against, and even to refuse. but--the thought pass through her mind
more than once, though she could not believe in it--might he not mean
to demand something more from she than she have be able to imagine,
since he want her pledge to carry out his wish without tell she
exactly what they be? no; his heart be bind up in his work only:
that be the end for which his fail life be to be eke out by her.
and now, if she be to say, "no! if you die, I will put no finger to
your work"--it seem as if she would be crush that bruise heart.
for four hour Dorothea lie in this conflict, till she feel ill and
bewilder, unable to resolve, pray mutely. helpless as a child
which have sob and seek too long, she fall into a late morning
sleep, and when she wake Mr. Casaubon be already up. Tantripp tell
she that he have read prayer, breakfast, and be in the library.
"I never see you look so pale, madam," say Tantripp, a solid-figured
woman who have be with the sister at Lausanne.
"be I ever high-color, Tantripp?" say Dorothea, smile faintly.
"well, not to say high-color, but with a bloom like a Chiny rise.
but always smell those leather book, what can be expect? do rest
a little this morning, madam. let I say you be ill and not able to
go into that close library."
"oh no, no! let I make haste," say Dorothea. "Mr. Casaubon want I
particularly."
when she go down she feel sure that she should promise to fulfil his
wish; but that would be later in the day--not yet.
as Dorothea enter the library, Mr. Casaubon turn round from the
table where he have be place some book, and said--
"I be wait for your appearance, my dear. I have hop to set to
work at once this morning, but I find myself under some indisposition,
probably from too much excitement yesterday. I be go now to take a
turn in the shrubbery, since the air be milder."
"I be glad to hear that," say Dorothea. "your mind, I fear, be too
active last night."
"I would fain have it set at rest on the point I last speak of,
Dorothea. you can now, I hope, give I an answer."
"may I come out to you in the garden presently?" say Dorothea, win
a little breathing space in that way.
"I shall be in the Yew-tree Walk for the next half-hour," say Mr.
Casaubon, and then he leave she.
Dorothea, feel very weary, rang and ask Tantripp to bring she some
wrap. she have be sit still for a few minute, but not in any
renewal of the former conflict: she simply feel that she be go to
say "yes" to her own doom: she be too weak, too full of dread at the
thought of inflict a keen-edge blow on her husband, to do anything
but submit completely. she sit still and let Tantripp put on her
bonnet and shawl, a passivity which be unusual with she, for she like
to wait on herself.
"God bless you, madam!" say Tantripp, with an irrepressible movement
of love towards the beautiful, gentle creature for whom she feel unable
to do anything more, now that she have finish tie the bonnet.
this be too much for Dorothea's highly-string feeling, and she burst
into tear, sob against Tantripp's arm. but soon she check
herself, dry her eye, and go out at the glass door into the
shrubbery.
"I wish every book in that library be build into a caticom for your
master," say Tantripp to Pratt, the butler, find he in the
breakfast-room. she have be at Rome, and visit the antiquity, as
we know; and she always decline to call Mr. Casaubon anything but
"your master," when speak to the other servant.
Pratt laugh. he like his master very well, but he like Tantripp
well.
when Dorothea be out on the gravel walk, she linger among the
nearer clump of tree, hesitating, as she have do once before, though
from a different cause. then she have fear lest her effort at
fellowship should be unwelcome; now she dread go to the spot where
she foresaw that she must bind herself to a fellowship from which she
shrink. neither law nor the world's opinion compel she to
this--only her husband's nature and her own compassion, only the ideal
and not the real yoke of marriage. she see clearly enough the whole
situation, yet she be fetter: she could not smite the stricken soul
that entreat her. if that be weakness, Dorothea be weak. but
the half-hour be pass, and she must not delay long. when she
enter the Yew-tree Walk she could not see her husband; but the walk
have bend, and she go, expect to catch sight of his figure wrap
in a blue cloak, which, with a warm velvet cap, be his outer garment
on chill day for the garden. it occur to she that he might be
rest in the summer-house, towards which the path diverge a little.
turn the angle, she could see he seat on the bench, close to a
stone table. his arm be rest on the table, and his brow be
bow down on they, the blue cloak be drag forward and screen
his face on each side.
"he exhaust himself last night," Dorothea say to herself, think
at first that he be asleep, and that the summer-house be too damp a
place to rest in. but then she remember that of late she have see
he take that attitude when she be read to he, as if he find it
easy than any other; and that he would sometimes speak, as well as
listen, with his face down in that way. she go into the summerhouse
and say, "I be come, Edward; I be ready."
he take no notice, and she think that he must be fast asleep. she
lay her hand on his shoulder, and repeat, "I be ready!" still he be
motionless; and with a sudden confused fear, she lean down to he,
take off his velvet cap, and lean her cheek close to his head, cry
in a distressed tone--
"wake, dear, wake! listen to I. I be come to answer." but Dorothea
never give her answer.
later in the day, Lydgate be seat by her bedside, and she be
talk deliriously, think aloud, and recall what have go
through her mind the night before. she know he, and call he by his
name, but appear to think it right that she should explain everything
to he; and again, and again, beg he to explain everything to her
husband.
"tell he I shall go to he soon: I be ready to promise. only,
think about it be so dreadful--it have make I ill. not very ill.
I shall soon be well. go and tell he."
but the silence in her husband's ear be never more to be break.
CHAPTER XLIX.
a task too strong for wizard spell
this squire have bring about;
't be easy drop stone in well,
but who shall get they out?"
"I wish to God we could hinder Dorothea from know this," say Sir
James Chettam, with a little frown on his brow, and an expression of
intense disgust about his mouth.
he be stand on the hearth-rug in the library at Lowick Grange, and
speak to Mr. Brooke. it be the day after Mr. Casaubon have be
bury, and Dorothea be not yet able to leave her room.
"that would be difficult, you know, Chettam, as she be an executrix,
and she like to go into these thing--property, land, that kind of
thing. she have her notion, you know," say Mr. Brooke, stick his
eye-glass on nervously, and explore the edge of a fold paper
which he hold in his hand; "and she would like to act--depend upon it,
as an executrix Dorothea would want to act. and she be twenty-one
last December, you know. I can hinder nothing."
Sir James look at the carpet for a minute in silence, and then
lift his eye suddenly fix they on Mr. Brooke, say, "I will
tell you what we can do. until Dorothea be well, all business must be
keep from she, and as soon as she be able to be move she must come to
we. be with Celia and the baby will be the good thing in the world
for she, and will pass away the time. and meanwhile you must get rid
of Ladislaw: you must send he out of the country." here Sir James's
look of disgust return in all its intensity.
Mr. Brooke put his hand behind he, walk to the window and
straighten his back with a little shake before he reply.
"that be easily say, Chettam, easily say, you know."
"my dear sir," persist Sir James, restrain his indignation within
respectful form, "it be you who bring he here, and you who keep
he here--I mean by the occupation you give he."
"yes, but I cannot dismiss he in an instant without assign reason,
my dear Chettam. Ladislaw have be invaluable, most satisfactory. I
consider that I have do this part of the country a service by
bring he--by bring he, you know." Mr. Brooke end with a nod,
turn round to give it.
"itbe a pity this part of the country donot do without he, thatbe all
I have to say about it. at any rate, as Dorothea's brother-in-law, I
feel warrant in object strongly to his be keep here by any
action on the part of her friend. you admit, I hope, that I have a
right to speak about what concern the dignity of my wife's sister?"
Sir James be get warm.
"of course, my dear Chettam, of course. but you and I have different
idea--different--"
"not about this action of Casaubon's, I should hope," interrupt Sir
James. "I say that he have most unfairly compromise Dorothea. I say
that there never be a meaner, more ungentlemanly action than this--a
codicil of this sort to a will which he make at the time of his
marriage with the knowledge and reliance of her family--a positive
insult to Dorothea!"
"well, you know, Casaubon be a little twisted about Ladislaw.
Ladislaw have tell I the reason--dislike of the bent he take, you
know--Ladislaw donot think much of Casaubon's notion, Thoth and
Dagon--that sort of thing: and I fancy that Casaubon donot like the
independent position Ladislaw have take up. I see the letter between
they, you know. poor Casaubon be a little bury in book--he donot
know the world."
"itbe all very well for Ladislaw to put that color on it," say Sir
James. "but I believe Casaubon be only jealous of he on Dorothea's
account, and the world will suppose that she give he some reason; and
that be what make it so abominable--couple her name with this young
fellow's."
"my dear Chettam, it willnot lead to anything, you know," say Mr.
Brooke, seat himself and stick on his eye-glass again. "itbe all
of a piece with Casaubon's oddity. this paper, now, 'Synoptical
Tabulation' and so on, 'for the use of Mrs. Casaubon,' it be lock up
in the desk with the will. I suppose he mean Dorothea to publish his
research, eh? and shewill do it, you know; she have go into his
study uncommonly."
"my dear sir," say Sir James, impatiently, "that be neither here nor
there. the question be, whether you donot see with I the propriety of
send young Ladislaw away?"
"well, no, not the urgency of the thing. by-and-by, perhaps, it may
come round. as to gossip, you know, send he away willnot hinder
gossip. People say what they like to say, not what they have chapter
and verse for," say Mr Brooke, become acute about the truth that
lie on the side of his own wish. "I might get rid of Ladislaw up to
a certain point--take away the 'Pioneer' from he, and that sort of
thing; but I couldnot send he out of the country if he donot choose
to go--didn't choose, you know."
Mr. Brooke, persist as quietly as if he be only discuss the
nature of last year's weather, and nod at the end with his usual
amenity, be an exasperating form of obstinacy.
"Good God!" say Sir James, with as much passion as he ever show,
"let we get he a post; let we spend money on he. if he could go in
the suite of some Colonial Governor! Grampus might take he--and I
could write to fulke about it."
"but Ladislaw willnot be ship off like a head of cattle, my dear
fellow; Ladislaw have his idea. itbe my opinion that if he be to
part from I to-morrow, youwould only hear the more of he in the country.
with his talent for speak and draw up document, there be few
man who could come up to he as an agitator--an agitator, you know."
"Agitator!" say Sir James, with bitter emphasis, feel that the
syllable of this word properly repeat be a sufficient exposure of
its hatefulness.
"but be reasonable, Chettam. Dorothea, now. as you say, she have
well go to Celia as soon as possible. she can stay under your roof,
and in the mean time thing may come round quietly. donot let we be
fire off our gun in a hurry, you know. Standish will keep our
counsel, and the news will be old before itbe know. twenty thing may
happen to carry off Ladislaw--without my do anything, you know."
"then I be to conclude that you decline to do anything?"
"Decline, Chettam?--no--I donot say decline. but I really donot see
what I could do. Ladislaw be a gentleman."
"I be glad to hear it!" say Sir James, his irritation make he
forget himself a little. "I be sure Casaubon be not."
"well, it would have be bad if he have make the codicil to hinder
she from marry again at all, you know."
"I donot know that," say Sir James. "it would have be less
indelicate."
"one of poor Casaubon's freak! that attack upset his brain a little.
it all go for nothing. she donot _want_ to marry Ladislaw."
"but this codicil be frame so as to make everybody believe that she
do. I donot believe anything of the sort about Dorothea," say Sir
James--then frowningly, "but I suspect Ladislaw. I tell you frankly,
I suspect Ladislaw."
"I couldnot take any immediate action on that ground, Chettam. in
fact, if it be possible to pack he off--send he to Norfolk
Island--that sort of thing--it would look all the bad for Dorothea
to those who know about it. it would seem as if we distrust
she--distrust she, you know."
that Mr. Brooke have hit on an undeniable argument, do not tend to
soothe Sir James. he put out his hand to reach his hat, imply that
he do not mean to contend far, and say, still with some heat--
"well, I can only say that I think Dorothea be sacrifice once,
because her friend be too careless. I shall do what I can, as she
brother, to protect she now."
"you cannot do well than get she to freshitt as soon as possible,
Chettam. I approve that plan altogether," say Mr. Brooke, well
please that he have win the argument. it would have be highly
inconvenient to he to part with Ladislaw at that time, when a
dissolution might happen any day, and elector be to be convince of
the course by which the interest of the country would be well serve.
Mr. Brooke sincerely believe that this end could be secure by his own
return to Parliament: he offer the force of his mind honestly to the
nation.
CHAPTER L.
"'this Loller here wol precilen we somewhat.'
'nay by my father's soule! that schal he nat,'
Sayde the Schipman, 'here schal he not preche,
we schal no gospel glosen here ne teche.
we leven all in the gret God,' quod he.
he wolden sowen some diffcultee."
Canterbury Tales.
Dorothea have be safe at Freshitt Hall nearly a week before she have
ask any dangerous question. every morning now she sit with Celia in
the prettiest of up-stair sitting-room, open into a small
conservatory--Celia all in white and lavender like a bunch of mixed
violet, watch the remarkable act of the baby, which be so
dubious to her inexperienced mind that all conversation be interrupt
by appeal for their interpretation make to the oracular nurse.
Dorothea sit by in her widow's dress, with an expression which rather
provoke Celia, as be much too sad; for not only be baby quite
well, but really when a husband have be so dull and troublesome while
he live, and besides that have--well, well! Sir James, of course, have
tell Celia everything, with a strong representation how important it
be that Dorothea should not know it soon than be inevitable.
but Mr. Brooke have be right in predict that Dorothea would not
long remain passive where action have be assign to she; she know the
purport of her husband's will make at the time of their marriage, and
her mind, as soon as she be clearly conscious of her position, be
silently occupy with what she ought to do as the owner of Lowick
Manor with the patronage of the living attach to it.
one morning when her uncle pay his usual visit, though with an unusual
alacrity in his manner which he account for by say that it be now
pretty certain Parliament would be dissolve forthwith, Dorothea said--
"Uncle, it be right now that I should consider who be to have the
living at Lowick. after Mr. Tucker have be provide for, I never
hear my husband say that he have any clergyman in his mind as a
successor to himself. I think I ought to have the key now and go to
Lowick to examine all my husband's paper. there may be something that
would throw light on his wish."
"no hurry, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, quietly. "by-and-by, you know,
you can go, if you like. but I cast my eye over thing in the desk
and drawer--there be nothing--nothing but deep subject, you
know--besides the will. everything can be do by-and-by. as to the
living, I have have an application for interest already--I should say
rather good. Mr. Tyke have be strongly recommend to I--I have
something to do with get he an appointment before. an apostolic
man, I believe--the sort of thing that would suit you, my dear."
"I should like to have full knowledge about he, uncle, and judge for
myself, if Mr. Casaubon have not leave any expression of his wish. he
have perhaps make some addition to his will--there may be some
instruction for I," say Dorothea, who have all the while have this
conjecture in her mind with relation to her husband's work.
"nothing about the rectory, my dear--nothing," say Mr. Brooke, rise
to go away, and put out his hand to his niece: "nor about his
research, you know. nothing in the will."
Dorothea's lip quiver.
"come, you must not think of these thing yet, my dear. by-and-by, you
know."
"I be quite well now, uncle; I wish to exert myself."
"well, well, we shall see. but I must run away now--I have no end of
work now--itbe a crisis--a political crisis, you know. and here be
Celia and her little man--you be an aunt, you know, now, and I be a
sort of grandfather," say Mr. Brooke, with placid hurry, anxious to
get away and tell Chettam that it would not be his (Mr. Brooke's) fault
if Dorothea insist on look into everything.
Dorothea sink back in her chair when her uncle have leave the room, and
cast her eye down meditatively on her crossed hand.
"look, Dodo! look at he! do you ever see anything like that?" say
Celia, in her comfortable staccato.
"what, Kitty?" say Dorothea, lift her eye rather absently.
"what? why, his upper lip; see how he be draw it down, as if he
mean to make a face. benot it wonderful! he may have his little
thought. I wish nurse be here. do look at he."
a large tear which have be for some time gathering, roll down
Dorothea's cheek as she look up and try to smile.
"donot be sad, Dodo; kiss baby. what be you brood over so? I be
sure you do everything, and a great deal too much. you should be
happy now."
"I wonder if Sir James would drive I to Lowick. I want to look over
everything--to see if there be any word write for I."
"you be not to go till Mr. Lydgate say you may go. and he have not
say so yet (here you be, nurse; take baby and walk up and down the
gallery). besides, you have get a wrong notion in your head as usual,
Dodo--I can see that: it vex I."
"where be I wrong, Kitty?" say Dorothea, quite meekly. she be almost
ready now to think Celia wise than herself, and be really wonder
with some fear what her wrong notion be. Celia feel her advantage,
and be determined to use it. none of they know Dodo as well as she
do, or know how to manage she. since Celia's baby be bear, she have
have a new sense of her mental solidity and calm wisdom. it seem
clear that where there be a baby, thing be right enough, and that
error, in general, be a mere lack of that central poising force.
"I can see what you be think of as well as can be, Dodo," say
Celia. "you be want to find out if there be anything uncomfortable
for you to do now, only because Mr. Casaubon wish it. as if you have
not be uncomfortable enough before. and he donot deserve it, and
you will find that out. he have behave very badly. James be as angry
with he as can be. and I have well tell you, to prepare you."
"Celia," say Dorothea, entreatingly, "you distress I. tell I at
once what you mean." it glance through her mind that' Mr. Casaubon
have leave the property away from she--which would not be so very
distressing.
"why, he have make a codicil to his will, to say the property be all to
go away from you if you marry--I mean--"
"that be of no consequence," say Dorothea, break in impetuously.
"but if you marry Mr. Ladislaw, not anybody else," Celia go on with
persevere quietude. "of course that be of no consequence in one
way--you never _would_ marry Mr. Ladislaw; but that only make it bad
of Mr. Casaubon."
the blood rush to Dorothea's face and neck painfully. but Celia be
administer what she think a sobering dose of fact. it be take
up notion that have do Dodo's health so much harm. so she go on in
her neutral tone, as if she have be remark on baby's robe.
"James say so. he say it be abominable, and not like a gentleman.
and there never be a well judge than James. it be as if Mr.
Casaubon want to make people believe that you would wish to marry Mr.
Ladislaw--which be ridiculous. only James say it be to hinder Mr.
Ladislaw from want to marry you for your money--just as if he ever
would think of make you an offer. Mrs. Cadwallader say you might as
well marry an italian with white mouse! but I must just go and look at
baby," Celia add, without the least change of tone, throw a light
shawl over she, and trip away.
Dorothea by this time have turn cold again, and now throw herself back
helplessly in her chair. she might have compare her experience at
that moment to the vague, alarmed consciousness that her life be
take on a new form that she be undergo a metamorphosis in which
memory would not adjust itself to the stirring of new organ.
everything be change its aspect: her husband's conduct, her own
duteous feeling towards he, every struggle between they--and yet
more, her whole relation to Will Ladislaw. her world be in a state of
convulsive change; the only thing she could say distinctly to herself
be, that she must wait and think anew. one change terrify she as if
it have be a sin; it be a violent shock of repulsion from her
depart husband, who have have hide thought, perhaps pervert
everything she say and do. then again she be conscious of another
change which also make her tremulous; it be a sudden strange yearning
of heart towards Will Ladislaw. it have never before enter her mind
that he could, under any circumstance, be her lover: conceive the
effect of the sudden revelation that another have think of he in that
light--that perhaps he himself have be conscious of such a
possibility,--and this with the hurrying, crowd vision of unfit
condition, and question not soon to be solve.
it seem a long while--she do not know how long--before she hear
Celia say, "that will do, nurse; he will be quiet on my lap now.
you can go to lunch, and let Garratt stay in the next room." "what I
think, Dodo," Celia go on, observe nothing more than that Dorothea
be lean back in her chair, and likely to be passive, "be that Mr.
Casaubon be spiteful. I never do like he, and James never do. I
think the corner of his mouth be dreadfully spiteful. and now he
have behave in this way, I be sure religion do not require you to
make yourself uncomfortable about he. if he have be take away, that
be a mercy, and you ought to be grateful. we should not grieve, should
we, baby?" say Celia confidentially to that unconscious centre and
poise of the world, who have the most remarkable fist all complete even
to the nail, and hair enough, really, when you take his cap off, to
make--you donot know what:--in short, he be Bouddha in a western
form.
at this crisis Lydgate be announce, and one of the first thing he
say be, "I fear you be not so well as you be, Mrs. Casaubon; have
you be agitate? allow I to feel your pulse." Dorothea's hand be
of a marble coldness.
"she want to go to Lowick, to look over paper," say Celia. "she
ought not, ought she?"
Lydgate do not speak for a few moment. then he say, look at
Dorothea. "I hardly know. in my opinion Mrs. Casaubon should do what
would give she the most repose of mind. that repose will not always
come from be forbid to act."
"thank you," say Dorothea, exert herself, "I be sure that be wise.
there be so many thing which I ought to attend to. why should I sit
here idle?" then, with an effort to recall subject not connect with
her agitation, she add, abruptly, "you know every one in Middlemarch,
I think, Mr. Lydgate. I shall ask you to tell I a great deal. I have
serious thing to do now. I have a living to give away. you know Mr.
Tyke and all the--" but Dorothea's effort be too much for she; she
break off and burst into sob. Lydgate make she drink a dose of sal
volatile.
"let Mrs. Casaubon do as she like," he say to Sir James, whom he
ask to see before quit the house. "she want perfect freedom, I
think, more than any other prescription."
his attendance on Dorothea while her brain be excited, have enable he
to form some true conclusion concern the trial of her life. he
feel sure that she have be suffer from the strain and conflict of
self-repression; and that she be likely now to feel herself only in
another sort of pinfold than that from which she have be release.
lydgate's advice be all the easy for Sir James to follow when he
find that Celia have already tell Dorothea the unpleasant fact about
the will. there be no help for it now--no reason for any further
delay in the execution of necessary business. and the next day Sir
James comply at once with her request that he would drive she to
Lowick.
"I have no wish to stay there at present," say Dorothea; "I could
hardly bear it. I be much happy at Freshitt with Celia. I shall be
able to think well about what should be do at Lowick by look at
it from a distance. and I should like to be at the Grange a little
while with my uncle, and go about in all the old walk and among the
people in the village."
"not yet, I think. your uncle be have political company, and you be
well out of the way of such doing," say Sir James, who at that
moment thought of the Grange chiefly as a haunt of young Ladislaw's.
but no word pass between he and Dorothea about the objectionable
part of the will; indeed, both of they feel that the mention of it
between they would be impossible. Sir James be shy, even with man,
about disagreeable subject; and the one thing that Dorothea would have
choose to say, if she have speak on the matter at all, be forbid to
she at present because it seem to be a further exposure of her
husband's injustice. yet she do wish that Sir James could know what
have pass between she and her husband about Will Ladislaw's moral
claim on the property: it would then, she think, be apparent to he
as it be to she, that her husband's strange indelicate proviso have
be chiefly urge by his bitter resistance to that idea of claim, and
not merely by personal feeling more difficult to talk about. also, it
must be admit, Dorothea wish that this could be know for Will's
sake, since her friend seem to think of he as simply an object of
Mr. Casaubon's charity. why should he be compare with an italian
carry white mouse? that word quote from Mrs. Cadwallader seem
like a mocking travesty work in the dark by an impish finger.
at Lowick Dorothea search desk and drawer--search all her husband's
place of deposit for private writing, but find no paper address
especially to she, except that "Synoptical Tabulation," which be
probably only the beginning of many intended direction for her
guidance. in carry out this bequest of labor to Dorothea, as in all
else, Mr. Casaubon have be slow and hesitating, oppress in the plan
of transmit his work, as he have be in execute it, by the sense
of move heavily in a dim and clog medium: distrust of Dorothea's
competence to arrange what he have prepare be subdue only by distrust
of any other redactor. but he have come at last to create a trust for
himself out of Dorothea's nature: she could do what she resolve to do:
and he willingly imagine she toil under the fetter of a promise to
erect a tomb with his name upon it. (not that Mr. Casaubon call the
future volume a tomb; he call they the Key to all Mythologies.) but
the month gain on he and leave his plan belate: he have only have
time to ask for that promise by which he seek to keep his cold grasp
on Dorothea's life.
the grasp have slip away. bind by a pledge give from the depth of
her pity, she would have be capable of undertake a toil which she
judgment whisper be vain for all us except that consecration of
faithfulness which be a supreme use. but now her judgment, instead of
be control by duteous devotion, be make active by the
imbittere discovery that in her past union there have lurk the
hide alienation of secrecy and suspicion. the living, suffer man
be no long before she to awaken her pity: there remain only the
retrospect of painful subjection to a husband whose thought have be
low than she have believe, whose exorbitant claim for himself have
even blind his scrupulous care for his own character, and make he
defeat his own pride by shocking man of ordinary honor. as for the
property which be the sign of that break tie, she would have be
glad to be free from it and have nothing more than her original fortune
which have be settle on she, if there have not be duty attach to
ownership, which she ought not to flinch from. about this property
many troublous question insist on rise: have she not be right in
think that the half of it ought to go to Will Ladislaw?--but be it
not impossible now for she to do that act of justice? Mr. Casaubon have
take a cruelly effective mean of hinder she: even with indignation
against he in her heart, any act that seem a triumphant eluding of
his purpose revolt she.
after collect paper of business which she wish to examine, she
lock up again the desk and drawer--all empty of personal word for
she--empty of any sign that in her husband's lonely brood his heart
have go out to she in excuse or explanation; and she go back to
Freshitt with the sense that around his last hard demand and his last
injurious assertion of his power, the silence be unbroken.
Dorothea try now to turn her thought towards immediate duty, and
one of these be of a kind which other be determined to remind she
of. Lydgate's ear have catch eagerly her mention of the living, and as
soon as he could, he reopen the subject, see here a possibility of
make amend for the casting-vote he have once give with an
ill-satisfied conscience. "instead of tell you anything about Mr.
Tyke," he say, "I should like to speak of another man--Mr.
Farebrother, the Vicar of St. Botolph's. his living be a poor one, and
give he a stint provision for himself and his family. his mother,
aunt, and sister all live with he, and depend upon he. I believe he
have never marry because of they. I never hear such good preaching
as his--such plain, easy eloquence. he would have do to preach at
St. Paul's Cross after old Latimer. his talk be just as good about all
subject: original, simple, clear. I think he a remarkable fellow: he
ought to have do more than he have do."
"why have he not do more?" say Dorothea, interested now in all who
have slip below their own intention.
"thatbe a hard question," say Lydgate. "I find myself that itbe
uncommonly difficult to make the right thing work: there be so many
string pull at once. Farebrother often hint that he have get into
the wrong profession; he want a wide range than that of a poor
clergyman, and I suppose he have no interest to help he on. he be very
fond of Natural history and various scientific matter, and he be
hamper in reconcile these taste with his position. he have no
money to spare--hardly enough to use; and that have lead he into
card-playing--Middlemarch be a great place for whist. he do play for
money, and he win a good deal. of course that take he into company
a little beneath he, and make he slack about some thing; and yet,
with all that, look at he as a whole, I think he be one of the most
blameless man I ever know. he have neither venom nor doubleness in he,
and those often go with a more correct outside."
"I wonder whether he suffer in his conscience because of that habit,"
say Dorothea; "I wonder whether he wish he could leave it off."
"I have no doubt he would leave it off, if he be transplant into
plenty: he would be glad of the time for other thing."
"my uncle say that Mr. Tyke be speak of as an apostolic man," say
Dorothea, meditatively. she be wish it be possible to restore
the time of primitive zeal, and yet think of Mr. Farebrother with a
strong desire to rescue he from his chance-get money.
"I donot pretend to say that Farebrother be apostolic," say Lydgate.
"his position be not quite like that of the apostle: he be only a
parson among parishioner whose life he have to try and make well.
practically I find that what be call be apostolic now, be an
impatience of everything in which the parson donot cut the principal
figure. I see something of that in Mr. Tyke at the Hospital: a good
deal of his doctrine be a sort of pinch hard to make people
uncomfortably--aware of he. besides, an apostolic man at Lowick!--he
ought to think, as St. Francis do, that it be needful to preach to the
bird."
"true," say Dorothea. "it be hard to imagine what sort of notion our
farmer and laborer get from their teaching. I have be look into
a volume of sermon by Mr. Tyke: such sermon would be of no use at
Lowick--I mean, about imputed righteousness and the prophecy in the
Apocalypse. I have always be think of the different way in which
Christianity be teach, and whenever I find one way that make it a
wide blessing than any other, I cling to that as the true--I mean
that which take in the most good of all kind, and bring in the most
people as sharer in it. it be surely well to pardon too much, than
to condemn too much. but I should like to see Mr. Farebrother and hear
he preach."
"do," say Lydgate; "I trust to the effect of that. he be very much
beloved, but he have his enemy too: there be always people who cannot
forgive an able man for differ from they. and that money-win
business be really a blot. you donot, of course, see many middlemarch
people: but Mr. Ladislaw, who be constantly see Mr. Brooke, be a
great friend of Mr. Farebrother's old lady, and would be glad to sing
the Vicar's praise. one of the old lady--Miss Noble, the aunt--be a
wonderfully quaint picture of self-forgetful goodness, and Ladislaw
gallant she about sometimes. I meet they one day in a back street: you
know Ladislaw's look--a sort of Daphnis in coat and waistcoat; and this
little old maid reach up to his arm--they look like a couple
drop out of a romantic comedy. but the good evidence about
Farebrother be to see he and hear he."
Happily Dorothea be in her private sitting-room when this conversation
occur, and there be no one present to make Lydgate's innocent
introduction of Ladislaw painful to she. as be usual with he in
matter of personal gossip, Lydgate have quite forget Rosamond's
remark that she think will adore Mrs. Casaubon. at that moment he
be only care for what would recommend the Farebrother family; and he
have purposely give emphasis to the bad that could be say about the
Vicar, in order to forestall objection. in the week since Mr.
Casaubon's death he have hardly see Ladislaw, and he have hear no rumor
to warn he that Mr. Brooke's confidential secretary be a dangerous
subject with Mrs. Casaubon. when he be go, his picture of Ladislaw
linger in her mind and dispute the ground with that question of the
Lowick living. what be Will Ladislaw think about she? would he
hear of that fact which make her cheek burn as they never use to do?
and how would he feel when he hear it?--but she could see as well as
possible how he smile down at the little old maid. an italian with
white mice!--on the contrary, he be a creature who enter into every
one's feeling, and could take the pressure of their thought instead of
urge his own with iron resistance.
CHAPTER LI.
Party be Nature too, and you shall see
by force of Logic how they both agree:
the many in the one, the one in many;
all be not some, nor some the same as Any:
Genus hold specie, both be great or small;
one genus high, one not high at all;
each specie have its differentia too,
this be not that, and he be never you,
though this and that be ayes, and you and he
be like as one to one, or three to three.
no gossip about Mr. Casaubon's will have yet reach Ladislaw: the air
seem to be fill with the dissolution of Parliament and the come
election, as the old wake and fair be fill with the rival clatter
of itinerant show; and more private noise be take little notice
of. the famous "dry election" be at hand, in which the depth of
public feeling might be measure by the low flood-mark of drink. will
Ladislaw be one of the busy at this time; and though Dorothea's
widowhood be continually in his thought, he be so far from wish to
be speak to on the subject, that when Lydgate seek he out to tell
he what have pass about the Lowick living, he answer rather
waspishly--
"why should you bring I into the matter? I never see Mrs. Casaubon,
and be not likely to see she, since she be at Freshitt. I never go
there. it be Tory ground, where I and the 'Pioneer' be no more
welcome than a poacher and his gun."
the fact be that will have be make the more susceptible by observe
that Mr. Brooke, instead of wish he, as before, to come to the
Grange oftener than be quite agreeable to himself, seem now to
contrive that he should go there as little as possible. this be a
shuffle concession of Mr. Brooke's to Sir James Chettam's indignant
remonstrance; and will, awake to the slight hint in this direction,
conclude that he be to be keep away from the Grange on Dorothea's
account. her friend, then, regard he with some suspicion? their
fear be quite superfluous: they be very much mistaken if they
imagine that he would put himself forward as a needy adventurer try
to win the favor of a rich woman.
until now will have never fully see the chasm between himself and
Dorothea--until now that he be come to the brink of it, and see she on
the other side. he begin, not without some inward rage, to think of
go away from the neighborhood: it would be impossible for he to
show any further interest in Dorothea without subject himself to
disagreeable imputation--perhaps even in her mind, which other might
try to poison.
"we be forever divide," say will. "I might as well be at Rome; she
would be no far from I." but what we call our despair be often
only the painful eagerness of unfed hope. there be plenty of reason
why he should not go--public reason why he should not quit his post at
this crisis, leave Mr. Brooke in the lurch when he need "coach"
for the election, and when there be so much canvassing, direct and
indirect, to be carry on. will could not like to leave his own
chessman in the heat of a game; and any candidate on the right side,
even if his brain and marrow have be as soft as be consistent with a
gentlemanly bearing, might help to turn a majority. to coach Mr.
Brooke and keep he steadily to the idea that he must pledge himself to
vote for the actual Reform Bill, instead of insist on his
independence and power of pull up in time, be not an easy task.
Mr. Farebrother's prophecy of a fourth candidate "in the bag" have not
yet be fulfil, neither the Parliamentary Candidate Society nor any
other power on the watch to secure a reform majority see a worthy
nodus for interference while there be a second reform candidate
like Mr. Brooke, who might be return at his own expense; and the
fight lie entirely between Pinkerton the old Tory member, Bagster the
new Whig member return at the last election, and Brooke the future
independent member, who be to fetter himself for this occasion only.
Mr. Hawley and his party would bend all their force to the return of
Pinkerton, and Mr. Brooke's success must depend either on plumper
which would leave Bagster in the rear, or on the new minting of Tory
vote into reform vote. the latter mean, of course, would be
preferable.
this prospect of converting vote be a dangerous distraction to Mr.
Brooke: his impression that waverer be likely to be allure by
wavering statement, and also the liability of his mind to stick afresh
at oppose argument as they turn up in his memory, give will
ladislaw much trouble.
"you know there be tactic in these thing," say Mr. Brooke; "meeting
people half-way--temper your idea--say, 'well now, therebe
something in that,' and so on. I agree with you that this be a
peculiar occasion--the country with a will of its own--political
union--that sort of thing--but we sometimes cut with rather too sharp
a knife, Ladislaw. these ten-pound householder, now: why ten? draw
the line somewhere--yes: but why just at ten? thatbe a difficult
question, now, if you go into it."
"of course it be," say will, impatiently. "but if you be to wait
till we get a logical bill, you must put yourself forward as a
revolutionist, and then Middlemarch would not elect you, I fancy. as
for trimming, this be not a time for trim."
Mr. Brooke always end by agree with Ladislaw, who still appear
to he a sort of Burke with a leaven of Shelley; but after an interval
the wisdom of his own method reassert itself, and he be again draw
into use they with much hopefulness. at this stage of affair he be
in excellent spirit, which even support he under large advance of
money; for his power of convincing and persuading have not yet be,
test by anything more difficult than a chairman's speech introduce
other orator, or a dialogue with a Middlemarch voter, from which he
come away with a sense that he be a tactician by nature, and that it
be a pity he have not go early into this kind of thing. he be a
little conscious of defeat, however, with Mr. Mawmsey, a chief
representative in Middlemarch of that great social power, the retail
trader, and naturally one of the most doubtful voter in the
borough--willing for his own part to supply an equal quality of tea
and sugar to reformer and anti-reformer, as well as to agree
impartially with both, and feel like the burgess of old that this
necessity of elect member be a great burthen to a town; for even
if there be no danger in hold out hope to all party beforehand,
there would be the painful necessity at last of disappointing
respectable people whose name be on his book. he be accustom to
receive large order from Mr. Brooke of Tipton; but then, there be
many of Pinkerton's committee whose opinion have a great weight of
grocery on their side. Mr. Mawmsey think that Mr. Brooke, as not
too "clever in his intellect," be the more likely to forgive a grocer
who give a hostile vote under pressure, have become confidential in his
back parlor.
"as to reform, sir, put it in a family light," he say, rattle the
small silver in his pocket, and smile affably. "will it support Mrs.
Mawmsey, and enable she to bring up six child when I be no more? I
put the question _fictiously_, know what must be the answer. very
well, sir. I ask you what, as a husband and a father, I be to do when
gentleman come to I and say, 'do as you like, Mawmsey; but if you vote
against we, I shall get my grocery elsewhere: when I sugar my liquor
I like to feel that I be benefit the country by maintain
tradesman of the right color.' those very word have be speak to
I, sir, in the very chair where you be now sit. I donot mean by
your honorable self, Mr. Brooke."
"no, no, no--thatbe narrow, you know. until my butler complain to I
of your good, Mr. Mawmsey," say Mr. Brooke, soothingly, "until I hear
that you send bad sugar, spice--that sort of thing--I shall never
order he to go elsewhere."
"Sir, I be your humble servant, and greatly oblige," say Mr. Mawmsey,
feel that politic be clear up a little. "there would be some
pleasure in voting for a gentleman who speak in that honorable manner."
"well, you know, Mr. Mawmsey, you would find it the right thing to put
yourself on our side. this reform will touch everybody by-and-by--a
thoroughly popular measure--a sort of A, B, C, you know, that must come
first before the rest can follow. I quite agree with you that youhave
get to look at the thing in a family light: but public spirit, now.
webe all one family, you know--itbe all one cupboard. such a thing
as a vote, now: why, it may help to make man's fortune at the
Cape--therebe no knowing what may be the effect of a vote," Mr. Brooke
end, with a sense of be a little out at sea, though find it
still enjoyable. but Mr. Mawmsey answer in a tone of decisive check.
"I beg your pardon, sir, but I cannot afford that. when I give a vote I
must know what I be do; I must look to what will be the effect on
my till and ledger, speak respectfully. price, Iwill admit, be
what nobody can know the merit of; and the sudden fall after youhave
buy in currant, which be a good that will not keep--i've never;
myself see into the in and out there; which be a rebuke to human
pride. but as to one family, there's debtor and creditor, I hope;
theybe not go to reform that away; else I should vote for thing
stay as they be. few man have less need to cry for change than I
have, personally speak--that be, for self and family. I be not one
of those who have nothing to lose: I mean as to respectability both in
parish and private business, and noway in respect of your honorable
self and custom, which you be good enough to say you would not
withdraw from I, vote or no vote, while the article send in be
satisfactory."
after this conversation Mr. Mawmsey go up and boast to his wife
that he have be rather too many for Brooke of Tipton, and that he
donot mind so much now about go to the poll.
Mr. Brooke on this occasion abstain from boasting of his tactic to
Ladislaw, who for his part be glad enough to persuade himself that he
have no concern with any canvassing except the purely argumentative
sort, and that he work no mean engine than knowledge. Mr. Brooke,
necessarily, have his agent, who understand the nature of the
Middlemarch voter and the mean of enlist his ignorance on the side
of the Bill--which be remarkably similar to the mean of enlist it
on the side against the Bill. will stop his ear. occasionally
Parliament, like the rest of our life, even to our eating and apparel,
could hardly go on if our imagination be too active about process.
there be plenty of dirty-handed man in the world to do dirty
business; and will protested to himself that his share in bring Mr.
Brooke through would be quite innocent.
but whether he should succeed in that mode of contribute to the
majority on the right side be very doubtful to he. he have write
out various speech and memorandum for speech, but he have begin to
perceive that Mr. Brooke's mind, if it have the burthen of remember
any train of thought, would let it drop, run away in search of it, and
not easily come back again. to collect document be one mode of
serve your country, and to remember the content of a document be
another. no! the only way in which Mr. Brooke could be coerce into
thinking of the right argument at the right time be to be well ply
with they till they take up all the room in his brain. but here there
be the difficulty of find room, so many thing have be take in
beforehand. Mr. Brooke himself observe that his idea stand rather in
his way when he be speak.
however, Ladislaw's coaching be forthwith to be put to the test, for
before the day of nomination Mr. Brooke be to explain himself to the
worthy elector of Middlemarch from the balcony of the White Hart,
which look out advantageously at an angle of the market-place,
command a large area in front and two converging street. it be a
fine May morning, and everything seem hopeful: there be some
prospect of an understanding between Bagster's committee and Brooke's,
to which Mr. Bulstrode, Mr. Standish as a liberal lawyer, and such
manufacturer as Mr. Plymdale and Mr. Vincy, give a solidity which
almost counterbalance Mr. Hawley and his associate who sit for
Pinkerton at the Green Dragon. Mr. Brooke, conscious of have
weaken the blast of the "Trumpet" against he, by his reform as a
landlord in the last half year, and hear himself cheer a little as
he drive into the town, feel his heart tolerably light under his
buff-color waistcoat. but with regard to critical occasion, it
often happen that all moment seem comfortably remote until the last.
"this look well, eh?" say Mr. Brooke as the crowd gather. "I shall
have a good audience, at any rate. I like this, now--this kind of
public make up of one's own neighbor, you know."
the weaver and tanner of Middlemarch, unlike Mr. Mawmsey, have never
thought of Mr. Brooke as a neighbor, and be not more attached to he
than if he have be send in a box from London. but they listen
without much disturbance to the speaker who introduce the candidate,
one of they--a political personage from Brassing, who come to tell
Middlemarch its duty--speak so fully, that it be alarming to think
what the candidate could find to say after he. meanwhile the crowd
become denser, and as the political personage near the end of his
speech, Mr. Brooke feel a remarkable change in his sensation while he
still handle his eye-glass, trifle with document before he, and
exchange remark with his committee, as a man to whom the moment of
summon be indifferent.
"Iwill take another glass of sherry, Ladislaw," he say, with an easy
air, to Will, who be close behind he, and presently hand he the
suppose fortifier. it be ill-choose; for Mr. Brooke be an
abstemious man, and to drink a second glass of sherry quickly at no
great interval from the first be a surprise to his system which tend
to scatter his energy instead of collect they. pray pity he: so
many english gentleman make themselves miserable by speechify on
entirely private ground! whereas Mr. Brooke wish to serve his
country by stand for Parliament--which, indeed, may also be do on
private ground, but be once undertake do absolutely demand some
speechifying.
it be not about the beginning of his speech that Mr. Brooke be at all
anxious; this, he feel sure, would be all right; he should have it
quite pat, cut out as neatly as a set of couplet from Pope. embark
would be easy, but the vision of open sea that might come after be
alarming. "and question, now," hint the demon just wake up in his
stomach, "somebody may put question about the schedules.--ladislaw,"
he continue, aloud, "just hand I the memorandum of the schedule."
when Mr. Brooke present himself on the balcony, the cheer be quite
loud enough to counterbalance the yell, groan, braying, and other
expression of adverse theory, which be so moderate that Mr. Standish
(decidedly an old bird) observe in the ear next to he, "this look
dangerous, by God! Hawley have get some deep plan than this." still,
the cheer be exhilarate, and no candidate could look more amiable
than Mr. Brooke, with the memorandum in his breast-pocket, his left
hand on the rail of the balcony, and his right trifling with his
eye-glass. the striking point in his appearance be his buff
waistcoat, short-clip blond hair, and neutral physiognomy. he begin
with some confidence.
"gentleman--elector of Middlemarch!"
this be so much the right thing that a little pause after it seem
natural.
"Ibe uncommonly glad to be here--I be never so proud and happy in my
life--never so happy, you know."
this be a bold figure of speech, but not exactly the right thing; for,
unhappily, the pat opening have slip away--even couplet from Pope
may be but "falling from we, vanishing," when fear clutch we, and a
glass of sherry be hurry like smoke among our idea. Ladislaw, who
stand at the window behind the speaker, think, "itbe all up now. the
only chance be that, since the good thing willnot always do, flounder
may answer for once." Mr. Brooke, meanwhile, have lose other clew,
fall back on himself and his qualification--always an appropriate
graceful subject for a candidate.
"I be a close neighbor of your, my good friend--you've know I on
the bench a good while--i've always go a good deal into public
question--machinery, now, and machine-breaking--you're many of you
concerned with machinery, and Ihave be go into that lately. it
willnot do, you know, break machine: everything must go on--trade,
manufacture, commerce, interchange of staple--that kind of
thing--since Adam Smith, that must go on. we must look all over the
globe:--'observation with extensive view,' must look everywhere, 'from
China to Peru,' as somebody say--Johnson, I think, 'the Rambler,' you
know. that be what I have do up to a certain point--not as far as
Peru; but Ihave not always stay at home--I see it wouldnot do. Ihave
be in the Levant, where some of your middlemarch good go--and then,
again, in the Baltic. the Baltic, now."
ply among his recollection in this way, Mr. Brooke might have get
along, easily to himself, and would have come back from the remotest
sea without trouble; but a diabolical procedure have be set up by the
enemy. at one and the same moment there have rise above the shoulder
of the crowd, nearly opposite Mr. Brooke, and within ten yard of he,
the effigy of himself: buff-color waistcoat, eye-glass, and neutral
physiognomy, paint on rag; and there have arise, apparently in the
air, like the note of the cuckoo, a parrot-like, Punch-voice echo of
his word. everybody look up at the open window in the house at
the opposite angle of the converge street; but they be either
blank, or fill by laugh listener. the most innocent echo have an
impish mockery in it when it follow a gravely persistent speaker, and
this echo be not at all innocent; if it do not follow with the
precision of a natural echo, it have a wicked choice of the word it
overtake. by the time it say, "the Baltic, now," the laugh which have
be run through the audience become a general shout, and but for
the sobering effect of party and that great public cause which the
entanglement of thing have identify with "Brooke of Tipton," the
laugh might have catch his committee. Mr. Bulstrode ask,
reprehensively, what the new police be do; but a voice could not
well be collar, and an attack on the effigy of the candidate would
have be too equivocal, since Hawley probably mean it to be pelt.
Mr. Brooke himself be not in a position to be quickly conscious of
anything except a general slip away of idea within himself: he have
even a little singing in the ear, and he be the only person who have
not yet take distinct account of the echo or discern the image of
himself. few thing hold the perception more thoroughly captive than
anxiety about what we have get to say. Mr. Brooke hear the laughter;
but he have expect some Tory effort at disturbance, and he be at
this moment additionally excite by the tickling, stinging sense that
his lost exordium be come back to fetch he from the Baltic.
"that remind I," he go on, thrust a hand into his side-pocket,
with an easy air, "if I want a precedent, you know--but we never want
a precedent for the right thing--but there be Chatham, now; I cannot say
I should have support Chatham, or Pitt, the young Pitt--he be not
a man of idea, and we want idea, you know."
"blast your idea! we want the Bill," say a loud rough voice from the
crowd below.
immediately the invisible Punch, who have hitherto follow Mr. Brooke,
repeat, "blast your idea! we want the Bill." the laugh be loud
than ever, and for the first time Mr. Brooke be himself silent,
hear distinctly the mocking echo. but it seem to ridicule his
interrupter, and in that light be encouraging; so he reply with
amenity--
"there be something in what you say, my good friend, and what do we
meet for but to speak our mind--freedom of opinion, freedom of the
press, liberty--that kind of thing? the Bill, now--you shall have the
bill"--here Mr. Brooke pause a moment to fix on his eye-glass and take
the paper from his breast-pocket, with a sense of be practical and
come to particular. the invisible Punch followed:--
"you shall have the Bill, Mr. Brooke, per electioneering contest, and a
seat outside Parliament as deliver, five thousand pound, seven
shilling, and fourpence."
Mr. Brooke, amid the roar of laughter, turn red, let his eye-glass
fall, and look about he confusedly, see the image of himself, which
have come nearer. the next moment he see it dolorously bespatter with
egg. his spirit rise a little, and his voice too.
"Buffoonery, trick, ridicule the test of truth--all that be very
well"--here an unpleasant egg break on Mr. Brooke's shoulder, as the
echo say, "all that be very well;" then come a hail of egg, chiefly
aim at the image, but occasionally hit the original, as if by
chance. there be a stream of new man push among the crowd;
whistle, yell, bellowing, and fife make all the great hubbub
because there be shout and struggle to put they down. no voice
would have have wing enough to rise above the uproar, and Mr. Brooke,
disagreeably anoint, stand his ground no long. the frustration
would have be less exasperating if it have be less gamesome and
boyish: a serious assault of which the newspaper reporter "can aver
that it endanger the learn gentleman's rib," or can respectfully
bear witness to "the sol of that gentleman's boot have be
visible above the railing," have perhaps more consolation attach to
it.
Mr. Brooke re-enter the committee-room, say, as carelessly as he
could, "this be a little too bad, you know. I should have get the ear
of the people by-and-by--but they donot give I time. I should have
go into the Bill by-and-by, you know," he add, glance at
Ladislaw. "however, thing will come all right at the nomination."
but it be not resolve unanimously that thing would come right; on
the contrary, the committee look rather grim, and the political
personage from Brassing be write busily, as if he be brew new
device.
"it be Bowyer who do it," say Mr. Standish, evasively. "I know it
as well as if he have be advertise. hebe uncommonly good at
ventriloquism, and he do it uncommonly well, by God! Hawley have be
have he to dinner lately: therebe a fund of talent in Bowyer."
"well, you know, you never mention he to I, Standish, else I would
have invite he to dine," say poor Mr. Brooke, who have go through a
great deal of invite for the good of his country.
"therebe not a more paltry fellow in Middlemarch than Bowyer," say
Ladislaw, indignantly, "but it seem as if the paltry fellow be
always to turn the scale."
will be thoroughly out of temper with himself as well as with his
"principal," and he go to shut himself in his room with a
half-form resolve to throw up the "Pioneer" and Mr. Brooke together.
why should he stay? if the impassable gulf between himself and
Dorothea be ever to be fill up, it must rather be by his go away
and get into a thoroughly different position than by stay here
and slip into deserve contempt as an understrapper of Brooke's.
then come the young dream of wonder that he might do--in five year,
for example: political writing, political speaking, would get a high
value now public life be go to be wide and more national, and they
might give he such distinction that he would not seem to be ask
Dorothea to step down to he. five years:--if he could only be sure
that she care for he more than for other; if he could only make she
aware that he stand aloof until he could tell his love without lower
himself--then he could go away easily, and begin a career which at
five-and-twenty seem probable enough in the inward order of thing,
where talent bring fame, and fame everything else which be delightful.
he could speak and he could write; he could master any subject if he
choose, and he mean always to take the side of reason and justice, on
which he would carry all his ardor. why should he not one day be
lift above the shoulder of the crowd, and feel that he have win that
eminence well? without doubt he would leave Middlemarch, go to town,
and make himself fit for celebrity by "eat his dinner."
but not immediately: not until some kind of sign have pass between he
and Dorothea. he could not be satisfied until she know why, even if he
be the man she would choose to marry, he would not marry she. hence
he must keep his post and bear with Mr. Brooke a little long.
but he soon have reason to suspect that Mr. Brooke have anticipate he
in the wish to break up their connection. deputation without and
voice within have concur in induce that philanthropist to take a
strong measure than usual for the good of mankind; namely, to
withdraw in favor of another candidate, to whom he leave the advantage
of his canvass machinery. he himself call this a strong measure,
but observe that his health be less capable of sustain excitement
than he have imagine.
"I have feel uneasy about the chest--it willnot do to carry that too
far," he say to Ladislaw in explain the affair. "I must pull up.
Poor Casaubon be a warning, you know. Ihave make some heavy advance,
but Ihave dig a channel. itbe rather coarse work--this electioneering,
eh, Ladislaw? dare say you be tired of it. however, we have dig a
channel with the 'pioneer'--put thing in a track, and so on. a more
ordinary man than you might carry it on now--more ordinary, you know."
"do you wish I to give it up?" say will, the quick color come in
his face, as he rise from the writing-table, and take a turn of three
step with his hand in his pocket. "I be ready to do so whenever you
wish it."
"as to wish, my dear Ladislaw, I have the high opinion of your
power, you know. but about the 'Pioneer,' I have be consult a
little with some of the man on our side, and they be inclined to take
it into their hand--indemnify I to a certain extent--carry it on, in
fact. and under the circumstance, you might like to give up--might
find a well field. these people might not take that high view of you
which I have always take, as an alter ego, a right hand--though I
always look forward to your do something else. I think of have
a run into France. but Iwill write you any letter, you know--to
Althorpe and people of that kind. Ihave meet Althorpe."
"I be exceedingly oblige to you," say Ladislaw, proudly. "since you
be go to part with the 'Pioneer,' I need not trouble you about the
step I shall take. I may choose to continue here for the present."
after Mr. Brooke have leave he will said to himself, "the rest of the
family have be urge he to get rid of I, and he donot care now
about my going. I shall stay as long as I like. I shall go of my own
movement and not because they be afraid of I."
CHAPTER LII.
"his heart
the lowly duty on itself do lie."
--wordsworth.
on that June evening when Mr. Farebrother know that he be to have the
Lowick living, there be joy in the old fashioned parlor, and even the
portrait of the great lawyer seem to look on with satisfaction.
his mother leave her tea and toast untouched, but sit with her usual
pretty primness, only show her emotion by that flush in the cheek
and brightness in the eye which give an old woman a touching momentary
identity with her far-off youthful self, and say decisively--
"the great comfort, Camden, be that you have deserve it."
"when a man get a good berth, mother, half the deserve must come
after," say the son, brimful of pleasure, and not try to conceal
it. the gladness in his face be of that active kind which seem to
have energy enough not only to flash outwardly, but to light up busy
vision within: one seem to see thought, as well as delight, in his
glance.
"now, aunt," he go on, rub his hand and look at Miss Noble,
who be make tender little beaver-like noise, "there shall be
sugar-candy always on the table for you to steal and give to the
child, and you shall have a great many new stocking to make
present of, and you shall darn your own more than ever!"
Miss Noble nod at her nephew with a subdue half-frightened laugh,
conscious of have already drop an additional lump of sugar into
her basket on the strength of the new preferment.
"as for you, winny"--the Vicar go on--"i shall make no difficulty
about your marry any Lowick bachelor--Mr. Solomon Featherstone, for
example, as soon as I find you be in love with he."
Miss Winifred, who have be look at her brother all the while and
cry heartily, which be her way of rejoice, smile through her
tear and say, "you must set I the example, cam: _you_ must marry
now."
"with all my heart. but who be in love with I? I be a seedy old
fellow," say the Vicar, rise, push his chair away and look
down at himself. "what do you say, mother?"
"you be a handsome man, Camden: though not so fine a figure of a man
as your father," say the old lady.
"I wish you would marry Miss Garth, brother," say Miss Winifred. "she
would make we so lively at Lowick."
"very fine! you talk as if young woman be tie up to be choose, like
poultry at market; as if I have only to ask and everybody would have
I," say the Vicar, not care to specify.
"we donot want everybody," say Miss Winifred. "but _you_ would like
Miss Garth, mother, shouldnot you?"
"my son's choice shall be mine," say Mrs. Farebrother, with majestic
discretion, "and a wife would be most welcome, Camden. you will want
your whist at home when we go to Lowick, and Henrietta Noble never be
a whist-player." (Mrs. Farebrother always call she tiny old sister by
that magnificent name.)
"I shall do without whist now, mother."
"why so, Camden? in my time whist be think an undeniable amusement
for a good churchman," say Mrs. Farebrother, innocent of the meaning
that whist have for her son, and speak rather sharply, as at some
dangerous countenancing of new doctrine.
"I shall be too busy for whist; I shall have two parish," say the
Vicar, prefer not to discuss the virtue of that game.
he have already say to Dorothea, "I donot feel bound to give up St.
Botolph's. it be protest enough against the pluralism they want to
reform if I give somebody else most of the money. the strong thing
be not to give up power, but to use it well."
"I have think of that," say Dorothea. "so far as self be concern,
I think it would be easy to give up power and money than to keep
they. it seem very unfit that I should have this patronage, yet I
feel that I ought not to let it be use by some one else instead of I."
"it be I who be bind to act so that you will not regret your power,"
say Mr. Farebrother.
his be one of the nature in which conscience get the more active
when the yoke of life cease to gall they. he make no display of
humility on the subject, but in his heart he feel rather ashamed that
his conduct have show lache which other who do not get benefice
be free from.
"I use often to wish I have be something else than a clergyman," he
say to Lydgate, "but perhaps it will be well to try and make as good
a clergyman out of myself as I can. that be the well-benefice point
of view, you perceive, from which difficulty be much simplify," he
end, smile.
the Vicar do feel then as if his share of duty would be easy. but
Duty have a trick of behave unexpectedly--something like a heavy
friend whom we have amiably ask to visit we, and who break his leg
within our gate.
hardly a week later, Duty present itself in his study under the
disguise of Fred Vincy, now return from Omnibus College with his
bachelor's degree.
"I be ashamed to trouble you, Mr. Farebrother," say Fred, whose fair
open face be propitiate, "but you be the only friend I can consult.
I tell you everything once before, and you be so good that I cannot
help come to you again."
"sit down, Fred, Ibe ready to hear and do anything I can," say the
Vicar, who be busy pack some small object for removal, and go on
with his work.
"I want to tell you--" Fred hesitate an instant and then go on
plungingly, "I might go into the Church now; and really, look where I
may, I cannot see anything else to do. I donot like it, but I know itbe
uncommonly hard on my father to say so, after he have spend a good deal
of money in educate I for it." Fred pause again an instant, and
then repeat, "and I cannot see anything else to do."
"I do talk to your father about it, Fred, but I make little way with
he. he say it be too late. but you have get over one bridge now:
what be your other difficulty?"
"merely that I donot like it. I donot like divinity, and preach,
and feel oblige to look serious. I like rid across country, and
do as other man do. I donot mean that I want to be a bad fellow in
any way; but Ihave no taste for the sort of thing people expect of a
clergyman. and yet what else be I to do? my father cannot spare I any
capital, else I might go into farming. and he have no room for I in
his trade. and of course I cannot begin to study for law or physic now,
when my father want I to earn something. itbe all very well to say
Ibe wrong to go into the Church; but those who say so might as well
tell I to go into the backwood."
Fred's voice have take a tone of grumble remonstrance, and Mr.
Farebrother might have be incline to smile if his mind have not be
too busy in imagine more than Fred tell he.
"have you any difficulty about doctrine--about the Articles?" he
say, try hard to think of the question simply for Fred's sake.
"no; I suppose the Articles be right. I be not prepare with any
argument to disprove they, and much well, cleverer fellow than I be
go in for they entirely. I think it would be rather ridiculous in I
to urge scruple of that sort, as if I be a judge," say Fred, quite
simply.
"I suppose, then, it have occur to you that you might be a fair
parish priest without be much of a divine?"
"of course, if I be oblige to be a clergyman, I shall try and do my
duty, though I maynot like it. do you think any body ought to blame
I?"
"for go into the Church under the circumstance? that depend on
your conscience, Fred--how far you have count the cost, and see what
your position will require of you. I can only tell you about myself,
that I have always be too lax, and have be uneasy in consequence."
"but there be another hindrance," say Fred, color. "I do not tell
you before, though perhaps I may have say thing that make you guess
it. there be somebody I be very fond of: I have love she ever since
we be child."
"Miss Garth, I suppose?" say the Vicar, examine some label very
closely.
"yes. I shouldnot mind anything if she would have I. and I know I
could be a good fellow then."
"and you think she return the feeling?"
"she never will say so; and a good while ago she make I promise not to
speak to she about it again. and she have set her mind especially
against my be a clergyman; I know that. but I cannot give she up. I
do think she care about I. I see Mrs. Garth last night, and she say
that Mary be stay at Lowick Rectory with Miss Farebrother."
"yes, she be very kindly help my sister. do you wish to go there?"
"no, I want to ask a great favor of you. I be ashamed to bother you in
this way; but Mary might listen to what you say, if you mention the
subject to she--I mean about my go into the Church."
"that be rather a delicate task, my dear Fred. I shall have to
presuppose your attachment to she; and to enter on the subject as you
wish I to do, will be ask she to tell I whether she return it."
"that be what I want she to tell you," say Fred, bluntly. "I donot
know what to do, unless I can get at her feeling."
"you mean that you would be guide by that as to your go into the
Church?"
"if Mary say she would never have I I might as well go wrong in one
way as another."
"that be nonsense, Fred. man outlive their love, but they donot
outlive the consequence of their recklessness."
"not my sort of love: I have never be without love Mary. if I have
to give she up, it would be like begin to live on wooden leg."
"will she not be hurt at my intrusion?"
"no, I feel sure she will not. she respect you more than any one, and
she would not put you off with fun as she do I. of course I could
not have tell any one else, or ask any one else to speak to she, but
you. there be no one else who could be such a friend to both of we."
Fred pause a moment, and then say, rather complainingly, "and she
ought to acknowledge that I have work in order to pass. she ought to
believe that I would exert myself for her sake."
there be a moment's silence before Mr. Farebrother lay down his work,
and put out his hand to Fred said--
"very well, my boy. I will do what you wish."
that very day Mr. Farebrother go to Lowick parsonage on the nag which
he have just set up. "decidedly I be an old stalk," he think, "the
young growth be push I aside."
he find Mary in the garden gathering rose and sprinkle the petal
on a sheet. the sun be low, and tall tree send their shadow across
the grassy walk where Mary be move without bonnet or parasol. she
do not observe Mr. Farebrother's approach along the grass, and have
just stoop down to lecture a small black-and-tan terrier, which would
persist in walk on the sheet and smell at the rose-leaf as Mary
sprinkle they. she take his fore-paw in one hand, and lift up the
forefinger of the other, while the dog wrinkle his brow and look
embarrassed. "Fly, Fly, I be ashamed of you," Mary be say in a
grave contralto. "this be not become in a sensible dog; anybody
would think you be a silly young gentleman."
"you be unmerciful to young gentleman, Miss Garth," say the Vicar,
within two yard of she.
Mary start up and blush. "it always answer to reason with Fly,"
she say, laughingly.
"but not with young gentleman?"
"oh, with some, I suppose; since some of they turn into excellent man."
"I be glad of that admission, because I want at this very moment to
interest you in a young gentleman."
"not a silly one, I hope," say Mary, begin to pluck the rose
again, and feel her heart beat uncomfortably.
"no; though perhaps wisdom be not his strong point, but rather
affection and sincerity. however, wisdom lie more in those two
quality than people be apt to imagine. I hope you know by those
mark what young gentleman I mean."
"yes, I think I do," say Mary, bravely, her face get more serious,
and her hand cold; "it must be Fred Vincy."
"he have ask I to consult you about his go into the Church. I
hope you will not think that I consent to take a liberty in promise
to do so."
"on the contrary, Mr. Farebrother," say Mary, give up the rose, and
fold her arm, but unable to look up, "whenever you have anything to
say to I I feel honor."
"but before I enter on that question, let I just touch a point on
which your father take I into confidence; by the way, it be that very
evening on which I once before fulfil a mission from Fred, just
after he have go to college. Mr. Garth tell I what happen on the
night of Featherstone's death--how you refuse to burn the will; and he
say that you have some heart-pricking on that subject, because you have
be the innocent mean of hinder Fred from get his ten thousand
pound. I have keep that in mind, and I have hear something that may
relieve you on that score--may show you that no sin-offering be
demand from you there."
Mr. Farebrother pause a moment and look at Mary. he mean to give
Fred his full advantage, but it would be well, he think, to clear her
mind of any superstition, such as woman sometimes follow when they do
a man the wrong of marry he as an act of atonement. Mary's cheek
have begin to burn a little, and she be mute.
"I mean, that your action make no real difference to Fred's lot. I
find that the first will would not have be legally good after the
burning of the last; it would not have stand if it have be dispute,
and you may be sure it would have be dispute. so, on that score,
you may feel your mind free."
"thank you, Mr. Farebrother," say Mary, earnestly. "I be grateful to
you for remember my feeling."
"well, now I may go on. Fred, you know, have take his degree. he have
work his way so far, and now the question be, what be he to do? that
question be so difficult that he be inclined to follow his father's
wish and enter the Church, though you know well than I do that he
be quite set against that formerly. I have question he on the
subject, and I confess I see no insuperable objection to his be a
clergyman, as thing go. he say that he could turn his mind to do
his good in that vocation, on one condition. if that condition be
fulfil I would do my utmost in help Fred on. after a time--not,
of course, at first--he might be with I as my curate, and he would
have so much to do that his stipend would be nearly what I use to get
as vicar. but I repeat that there be a condition without which all
this good cannot come to pass. he have open his heart to I, Miss
Garth, and ask I to plead for he. the condition lie entirely in
your feeling."
Mary look so much move, that he say after a moment, "let we walk a
little;" and when they be walk he add, "to speak quite plainly,
Fred will not take any course which would lessen the chance that you
would consent to be his wife; but with that prospect, he will try his
good at anything you approve."
"I cannot possibly say that I will ever be his wife, Mr. Farebrother:
but I certainly never will be his wife if he become a clergyman. what
you say be most generous and kind; I donot mean for a moment to correct
your judgment. it be only that I have my girlish, mock way of
look at thing," say Mary, with a return sparkle of playfulness
in her answer which only make its modesty more charming.
"he wish I to report exactly what you think," say Mr. Farebrother.
"I could not love a man who be ridiculous," say Mary, not choose to
go deeply. "Fred have sense and knowledge enough to make he
respectable, if he like, in some good worldly business, but I can
never imagine he preach and exhorting, and pronounce blessing,
and pray by the sick, without feel as if I be look at a
caricature. his be a clergyman would be only for gentility's sake,
and I think there be nothing more contemptible than such imbecile
gentility. I use to think that of Mr. Crowse, with his empty face and
neat umbrella, and mince little speech. what right have such man
to represent Christianity--as if it be an institution for get up
idiot genteelly--as if--" Mary check herself. she have be carry
along as if she have be speak to Fred instead of Mr. Farebrother.
"young woman be severe: they donot feel the stress of action as man
do, though perhaps I ought to make you an exception there. but you
donot put Fred Vincy on so low a level as that?"
"no, indeed, he have plenty of sense, but I think he would not show it
as a clergyman. he would be a piece of professional affectation."
"then the answer be quite decide. as a clergyman he could have no
hope?"
Mary shake her head.
"but if he brave all the difficulty of get his bread in some
other way--will you give he the support of hope? may he count on
win you?"
"I think Fred ought not to need tell again what I have already say
to he," Mary answer, with a slight resentment in her manner. "I
mean that he ought not to put such question until he have do
something worthy, instead of say that he could do it."
Mr. Farebrother be silent for a minute or more, and then, as they
turn and pause under the shadow of a maple at the end of a grassy
walk, say, "I understand that you resist any attempt to fetter you,
but either your feeling for Fred Vincy exclude your entertain
another attachment, or it do not: either he may count on your
remain single until he shall have earn your hand, or he may in any
case be disappoint. pardon I, Mary--you know I use to catechise
you under that name--but when the state of a woman's affection touch
the happiness of another life--of more life than one--I think it would
be the nobler course for she to be perfectly direct and open."
Mary in her turn be silent, wonder not at Mr. Farebrother's manner
but at his tone, which have a grave restrain emotion in it. when the
strange idea flash across she that his word have reference to
himself, she be incredulous, and ashamed of entertain it. she have
never think that any man could love she except Fred, who have espouse
she with the umbrella ring, when she wear sock and little strapped
shoe; still less that she could be of any importance to Mr.
Farebrother, the clever man in her narrow circle. she have only time
to feel that all this be hazy and perhaps illusory; but one thing be
clear and determine--her answer.
"since you think it my duty, Mr. Farebrother, I will tell you that I
have too strong a feeling for Fred to give he up for any one else. I
should never be quite happy if I think he be unhappy for the loss of
I. it have take such deep root in I--my gratitude to he for always
love I good, and mind so much if I hurt myself, from the time
when we be very little. I cannot imagine any new feeling come to
make that weak. I should like well than anything to see he worthy
of every one's respect. but please tell he I will not promise to
marry he till then: I should shame and grieve my father and mother.
he be free to choose some one else."
"then I have fulfil my commission thoroughly," say Mr. Farebrother,
put out his hand to Mary, "and I shall ride back to Middlemarch
forthwith. with this prospect before he, we shall get Fred into the
right niche somehow, and I hope I shall live to join your hand. God
bless you!"
"oh, please stay, and let I give you some tea," say Mary. her eye
fill with tear, for something indefinable, something like the
resolute suppression of a pain in Mr. Farebrother's manner, make she
feel suddenly miserable, as she have once feel when she see her father's
hand tremble in a moment of trouble.
"no, my dear, no. I must get back."
in three minute the Vicar be on horseback again, have go
magnanimously through a duty much hard than the renunciation of
whist, or even than the writing of penitential meditation.
CHAPTER LIII.
it be but a shallow haste which concludeth insincerity from
what outsider call inconsistency--put a dead mechanism
of "if" and "therefore" for the live myriad of hide
sucker whereby the belief and the conduct be work into
mutual sustainment.
Mr. Bulstrode, when he be hop to acquire a new interest in Lowick,
have naturally have an especial wish that the new clergyman should be one
whom he thoroughly approve; and he believe it to be a chastisement
and admonition direct to his own shortcoming and those of the nation
at large, that just about the time when he come in possession of the
deed which make he the proprietor of Stone Court, Mr. Farebrother
"read himself" into the quaint little church and preach his first
sermon to the congregation of farmer, laborer, and village artisan.
it be not that Mr. Bulstrode intend to frequent Lowick Church or to
reside at Stone Court for a good while to come: he have buy the
excellent farm and fine homestead simply as a retreat which he might
gradually enlarge as to the land and beautify as to the dwelling, until
it should be conducive to the divine glory that he should enter on it
as a residence, partially withdraw from his present exertion in the
administration of business, and throw more conspicuously on the side
of Gospel truth the weight of local land proprietorship, which
Providence might increase by unforeseen occasion of purchase. a
strong lead in this direction seem to have be give in the
surprising facility of get Stone Court, when every one have expect
that Mr. Rigg Featherstone would have clung to it as the Garden of
Eden. that be what poor old Peter himself have expect; have often,
in imagination, look up through the sod above he, and, unobstructe
by. perspective, see his frog-face legatee enjoy the fine old
place to the perpetual surprise and disappointment of other survivor.
but how little we know what would make paradise for our neighbor! we
judge from our own desire, and our neighbor themselves be not always
open enough even to throw out a hint of theirs. the cool and judicious
Joshua Rigg have not allow his parent to perceive that Stone Court be
anything less than the chief good in his estimation, and he have
certainly wish to call it his own. but as Warren Hastings look at
gold and thought of buy Daylesford, so Joshua Rigg look at Stone
Court and thought of buy gold. he have a very distinct and intense
vision of his chief good, the vigorous greed which he have inherit
have take a special form by dint of circumstance: and his chief good
be to be a moneychanger. from his early employment as an
errand-boy in a seaport, he have look through the window of the
moneychanger as other boy look through the window of the
pastry-cook; the fascination have work itself gradually into a deep
special passion; he mean, when he have property, to do many thing, one
of they be to marry a genteel young person; but these be all
accident and joy that imagination could dispense with. the one joy
after which his soul thirst be to have a money-changer's shop on a
much-frequent quay, to have lock all round he of which he hold the
key, and to look sublimely cool as he handle the breeding coin of
all nation, while helpless cupidity look at he enviously from the
other side of an iron lattice. the strength of that passion have be a
power enable he to master all the knowledge necessary to gratify it.
and when other be think that he have settle at Stone Court for
life, Joshua himself be think that the moment now be not far off
when he should settle on the North Quay with the good appointment in
safe and lock.
enough. we be concern with look at Joshua Rigg's sale of his
land from Mr. Bulstrode's point of view, and he interpret it as a
cheer dispensation conveying perhaps a sanction to a purpose which
he have for some time entertain without external encouragement; he
interpret it thus, but not too confidently, offer up his
thanksgiving in guarded phraseology. his doubt do not arise from the
possible relation of the event to Joshua Rigg's destiny, which
belong to the unmapped region not take under the providential
government, except perhaps in an imperfect colonial way; but they arise
from reflect that this dispensation too might be a chastisement for
himself, as Mr. Farebrother's induction to the living clearly be.
this be not what Mr. Bulstrode say to any man for the sake of
deceive he: it be what he say to himself--it be as genuinely his
mode of explain event as any theory of yours may be, if you happen
to disagree with he. for the egoism which enter into our theory
do not affect their sincerity; rather, the more our egoism be
satisfied, the more robust be our belief.
however, whether for sanction or for chastisement, Mr. Bulstrode,
hardly fifteen month after the death of Peter Featherstone, have become
the proprietor of Stone Court, and what Peter would say "if he be
worthy to know," have become an inexhaustible and consolatory subject of
conversation to his disappointed relative. the table be now turn
on that dear brother depart, and to contemplate the frustration of
his cunning by the superior cunning of thing in general be a cud of
delight to Solomon. Mrs. Waule have a melancholy triumph in the proof
that it do not answer to make false featherstone and cut off the
genuine; and Sister Martha receive the news in the Chalky Flats say,
"dear, dear! then the Almighty could have be none so pleased with the
almshouse after all."
Affectionate Mrs. Bulstrode be particularly glad of the advantage
which her husband's health be likely to get from the purchase of Stone
Court. few day pass without his rid thither and look over
some part of the farm with the bailiff, and the evening be delicious
in that quiet spot, when the new hay-rick lately set up be send
forth odor to mingle with the breath of the rich old garden. one
evening, while the sun be still above the horizon and burn in
golden lamp among the great walnut bough, Mr. Bulstrode be pause
on horseback outside the front gate wait for Caleb Garth, who have
meet he by appointment to give an opinion on a question of stable
drainage, and be now advise the bailiff in the rick-yard.
Mr. Bulstrode be conscious of be in a good spiritual frame and more
than usually serene, under the influence of his innocent recreation.
he be doctrinally convince that there be a total absence of merit in
himself; but that doctrinal conviction may be hold without pain when
the sense of demerit do not take a distinct shape in memory and
revive the tingling of shame or the pang of remorse. Nay, it may be
hold with intense satisfaction when the depth of our sinning be but a
measure for the depth of forgiveness, and a clench proof that we be
peculiar instrument of the divine intention. the memory have as many
mood as the temper, and shift its scenery like a diorama. at this
moment Mr. Bulstrode feel as if the sunshine be all one with that of
far-off evening when he be a very young man and use to go out
preach beyond Highbury. and he would willingly have have that
service of exhortation in prospect now. the text be there still,
and so be his own facility in expound they. his brief reverie be
interrupt by the return of Caleb Garth, who also be on horseback,
and be just shake his bridle before start, when he exclaimed--
"bless my heart! whatbe this fellow in black come along the lane?
hebe like one of those man one see about after the race."
Mr. Bulstrode turn his horse and look along the lane, but make no
reply. the comer be our slight acquaintance Mr. Raffles, whose
appearance present no other change than such as be due to a suit of
black and a crape hat-band. he be within three yard of the horseman
now, and they could see the flash of recognition in his face as he
whirl his stick upward, look all the while at Mr. Bulstrode, and
at last exclaiming:--
"by Jove, Nick, itbe you! I couldnot be mistake, though the
five-and-twenty year have play old Boguy with we both! how be you,
eh? you donot expect to see _I_ here. come, shake we by the hand."
to say that Mr. Raffles' manner be rather excited would be only one
mode of say that it be evening. Caleb Garth could see that there
be a moment of struggle and hesitation in Mr. Bulstrode, but it end
in his put out his hand coldly to Raffles and saying--
"I do not indeed expect to see you in this remote country place."
"well, it belong to a stepson of mine," say Raffles, adjust
himself in a swagger attitude. "I come to see he here before. Ibe
not so surprised at see you, old fellow, because I pick up a
letter--what you may call a providential thing. itbe uncommonly
fortunate I meet you, though; for I donot care about see my stepson:
hebe not affectionate, and his poor mother's go now. to tell the
truth, I come out of love to you, Nick: I come to get your address,
for--look here!" Raffles draw a crumpled paper from his pocket.
almost any other man than Caleb Garth might have be tempt to linger
on the spot for the sake of hear all he could about a man whose
acquaintance with Bulstrode seem to imply passage in the banker's
life so unlike anything that be know of he in Middlemarch that they
must have the nature of a secret to pique curiosity. but Caleb be
peculiar: certain human tendency which be commonly strong be
almost absent from his mind; and one of these be curiosity about
personal affair. especially if there be anything discreditable to be
find out concern another man, Caleb prefer not to know it; and
if he have to tell anybody under he that his evil doing be
discover, he be more embarrassed than the culprit. he now spur
his horse, and say, "I wish you good evening, Mr. Bulstrode; I must
be get home," set off at a trot.
"you donot put your full address to this letter," Raffles continue.
"that be not like the first-rate man of business you use to be. 'the
shrubs,'--they may be anywhere: you live near at hand, eh?--have cut
the London concern altogether--perhaps turn country squire--have a
rural mansion to invite I to. Lord, how many year it be ago! the
old lady must have be dead a pretty long while--go to glory without
the pain of know how poor her daughter be, eh? but, by Jove!
yoube very pale and pasty, Nick. Come, if yoube go home, Iwill
walk by your side."
Mr. Bulstrode's usual paleness have in fact take an almost deathly hue.
five minute before, the expanse of his life have be submerge in its
evening sunshine which shine backward to its remembered morning: sin
seem to be a question of doctrine and inward penitence, humiliation
an exercise of the closet, the bearing of his deed a matter of private
vision adjust solely by spiritual relation and conception of the
divine purpose. and now, as if by some hideous magic, this loud red
figure have rise before he in unmanageable solidity--an incorporate
past which have not enter into his imagination of chastisement. but
Mr. Bulstrode's thought be busy, and he be not a man to act or speak
rashly.
"I be go home," he say, "but I can defer my ride a little. and
you can, if you please, rest here."
"thank you," say Raffles, make a grimace. "I donot care now about
see my stepson. Iwould rather go home with you."
"your stepson, if Mr. Rigg Featherstone be he, be here no long. I
be master here now."
Raffles open wide eye, and give a long whistle of surprise, before
he say, "well then, Ihave no objection. Ihave have enough walk from
the coach-road. I never be much of a walker, or rider either. what I
like be a smart vehicle and a spirited cob. I be always a little
heavy in the saddle. what a pleasant surprise it must be to you to see
I, old fellow!" he continue, as they turn towards the house. "you
donot say so; but you never take your luck heartily--you be always
think of improve the occasion--you'd such a gift for improve
your luck."
Mr. Raffles seem greatly to enjoy his own wit, and Swung his leg in a
swaggering manner which be rather too much for his companion's
judicious patience.
"if I remember rightly," Mr. Bulstrode observe, with chill anger, "our
acquaintance many year ago have not the sort of intimacy which you be
now assume, Mr. Raffles. any service you desire of I will be the
more readily render if you will avoid a tone of familiarity which do
not lie in our former intercourse, and can hardly be warrant by more
than twenty year of separation."
"you donot like be call Nick? why, I always call you Nick in my
heart, and though lose to sight, to memory dear. by Jove! my feeling
have ripen for you like fine old cognac. I hope youhave get some in
the house now. Josh fill my flask well the last time."
Mr. Bulstrode have not yet fully learn that even the desire for cognac
be not strong in Raffles than the desire to torment, and that a hint
of annoyance always serve he as a fresh cue. but it be at least
clear that further objection be useless, and Mr. Bulstrode, in give
order to the housekeeper for the accommodation of the guest, have a
resolute air of quietude.
there be the comfort of think that this housekeeper have be in the
service of Rigg also, and might accept the idea that Mr. Bulstrode
entertain Raffles merely as a friend of her former master.
when there be food and drink spread before his visitor in the
wainscote parlor, and no witness in the room, Mr. Bulstrode said--
"your habit and mine be so different, Mr. Raffles, that we can hardly
enjoy each other's society. the wise plan for both of we will
therefore be to part as soon as possible. since you say that you
wish to meet I, you probably consider that you have some business
to transact with I. but under the circumstance I will invite you to
remain here for the night, and I will myself ride over here early
to-morrow morning--before breakfast, in fact, when I can receive any
Communication you have to make to I."
"with all my heart," say Raffles; "this be a comfortable place--a
little dull for a continuance; but I can put up with it for a night,
with this good liquor and the prospect of see you again in the
morning. yoube a much well host than my stepson be; but Josh owe
I a bit of a grudge for marry his mother; and between you and I
there be never anything but kindness."
Mr. Bulstrode, hop that the peculiar mixture of joviality and
sneer in Raffles' manner be a good deal the effect of drink, have
determine to wait till he be quite sober before he spend more word
upon he. but he ride home with a terribly lucid vision of the
difficulty there would be in arrange any result that could be
permanently count on with this man. it be inevitable that he should
wish to get rid of John Raffles, though his reappearance could not be
regard as lie outside the divine plan. the spirit of evil might
have send he to threaten Mr. Bulstrode's subversion as an instrument
of good; but the threat must have be permit, and be a
chastisement of a new kind. it be an hour of anguish for he very
different from the hour in which his struggle have be securely
private, and which have end with a sense that his secret misdeed be
pardon and his service accept. those misdeed even when
commit--have they not be half sanctify by the singleness of his
desire to devote himself and all he possess to the furtherance of the
divine scheme? and be he after all to become a mere stone of
stumbling and a rock of offence? for who would understand the work
within he? who would not, when there be the pretext of cast
disgrace upon he, confound his whole life and the truth he have
espouse, in one heap of obloquy?
in his close meditation the life-long habit of Mr. Bulstrode's mind
clothe his most egoistic terror in doctrinal reference to superhuman
end. but even while we be talk and meditate about the earth's
orbit and the solar system, what we feel and adjust our movement to be
the stable earth and the change day. and now within all the
automatic succession of theoretic phrase--distinct and inmost as the
shiver and the ache of oncoming fever when we be discuss abstract
pain, be the forecast of disgrace in the presence of his neighbor and
of his own wife. for the pain, as well as the public estimate of
disgrace, depend on the amount of previous profession. to man who
only aim at escape felony, nothing short of the prisoner's dock be
disgrace. but Mr. Bulstrode have aim at be an eminent Christian.
it be not more than half-past seven in the morning when he again
reach Stone Court. the fine old place never look more like a
delightful home than at that moment; the great white lily be in
flower, the nasturtium, their pretty leaf all silver with dew,
be run away over the low stone wall; the very noise all around
have a heart of peace within they. but everything be spoil for the
owner as he walk on the gravel in front and await the descent of
Mr. Raffles, with whom he be condemn to breakfast.
it be not long before they be seat together in the wainscote
parlor over their tea and toast, which be as much as Raffles care to
take at that early hour. the difference between his morning and
evening self be not so great as his companion have imagine that it
might be; the delight in tormenting be perhaps even the strong
because his spirit be rather less highly pitch. certainly his
manner seem more disagreeable by the morning light.
"as I have little time to spare, Mr. Raffles," say the banker, who
could hardly do more than sip his tea and break his toast without
eat it, "I shall be oblige if you will mention at once the ground
on which you wish to meet with I. I presume that you have a home
elsewhere and will be glad to return to it."
"why, if a man have get any heart, donot he want to see an old friend,
nick?--i must call you Nick--we always do call you young Nick when we
know you mean to marry the old widow. some say you have a handsome
family likeness to old Nick, but that be your mother's fault, call
you Nicholas. benot you glad to see I again? I expect an invite
to stay with you at some pretty place. my own establishment be break
up now my wife's dead. Ihave no particular attachment to any spot; I
would as soon settle hereabout as anywhere."
"may I ask why you return from America? I consider that the strong
wish you express to go there, when an adequate sum be furnish, be
tantamount to an engagement that you would remain there for life."
"never know that a wish to go to a place be the same thing as a wish
to stay. but I do stay a matter of ten year; it donot suit I to
stay any long. and Ibe not go again, Nick." here Mr. Raffles
wink slowly as he look at Mr. Bulstrode.
"do you wish to be settle in any business? what be your call now?"
"thank you, my calling be to enjoy myself as much as I can. I donot
care about work any more. if I do anything it would be a little
travel in the tobacco line--or something of that sort, which take
a man into agreeable company. but not without an independence to fall
back upon. thatbe what I want: Ibe not so strong as I be, Nick,
though Ihave get more color than you. I want an independence."
"that could be supply to you, if you would engage to keep at a
distance," say Mr. Bulstrode, perhaps with a little too much eagerness
in his undertone.
"that must be as it suit my convenience," say Raffles coolly. "I see
no reason why I shouldnot make a few acquaintance hereabout. Ibe not
ashamed of myself as company for anybody. I drop my portmanteau at
the turnpike when I get down--change of linen--genuine--honor bright--more
than front and wristband; and with this suit of mourning, strap
and everything, I should do you credit among the nob here." Mr.
Raffles have push away his chair and look down at himself,
particularly at his strap. his chief intention be to annoy
Bulstrode, but he really think that his appearance now would produce
a good effect, and that he be not only handsome and witty, but clothe in
a mourning style which imply solid connection.
"if you intend to rely on I in any way, Mr. Raffles," say Bulstrode,
after a moment's pause, "you will expect to meet my wish."
"ah, to be sure," say Raffles, with a mocking cordiality. "donot I
always do it? Lord, you make a pretty thing out of I, and I get but
little. Ihave often think since, I might have do well by tell
the old woman that Iwould find her daughter and her grandchild: it would
have suit my feeling well; Ihave get a soft place in my heart. but
youhave bury the old lady by this time, I suppose--itbe all one to she
now. and youhave get your fortune out of that profitable business which
have such a blessing on it. youhave take to be a nob, buy land,
be a country bashaw. still in the dissent line, eh? still
godly? or take to the Church as more genteel?"
this time Mr. Raffles' slow wink and slight protrusion of his tongue
be bad than a nightmare, because it hold the certitude that it be
not a nightmare, but a wake misery. Mr. Bulstrode feel a shuddering
nausea, and do not speak, but be consider diligently whether he
should not leave Raffles to do as he would, and simply defy he as a
slanderer. the man would soon show himself disreputable enough to make
people disbelieve he. "but not when he tell any ugly-look truth
about _you_," say discern consciousness. and again: it seem no
wrong to keep Raffles at a distance, but Mr. Bulstrode shrink from the
direct falsehood of deny true statement. it be one thing to look
back on forgive sin, nay, to explain questionable conformity to lax
custom, and another to enter deliberately on the necessity of
falsehood.
but since Bulstrode do not speak, Raffles run on, by way of use time
to the utmost.
"Ihave not have such fine luck as you, by Jove! thing go confoundedly
with I in New York; those Yankees be cool hand, and a man of
gentlemanly feeling have no chance with they. I marry when I come
back--a nice woman in the tobacco trade--very fond of I--but the
trade be restrict, as we say. she have be settle there a good
many year by a friend; but there be a son too much in the case. Josh
and I never hit it off. however, I make the most of the position, and
Ihave always take my glass in good company. itbe be all on the
square with I; Ibe as open as the day. you willnot take it ill of I
that I donot look you up before. Ihave get a complaint that make I a
little dilatory. I think you be trade and pray away in London
still, and donot find you there. but you see I be send to you,
Nick--perhaps for a blessing to both of we."
Mr. Raffles end with a jocose snuffle: no man feel his intellect more
superior to religious canot. and if the cunning which calculate on the
mean feeling in man could be, call intellect, he have his share,
for under the blurting rallying tone with which he speak to Bulstrode,
there be an evident selection of statement, as if they have be so
many move at chess. meanwhile Bulstrode have determine on his move,
and he say, with gather resolution--
"you will do well to reflect, Mr. Raffles, that it be possible for a
man to overreach himself in the effort to secure undue advantage.
although I be not in any way bind to you, I be willing to supply you
with a regular annuity--in quarterly payment--so long as you fulfil a
promise to remain at a distance from this neighborhood. it be in your
power to choose. if you insist on remain here, even for a short
time, you will get nothing from I. I shall decline to know you."
"ha, ha!" say Raffles, with an affected explosion, "that remind I of
a droll dog of a thief who decline to know the constable."
"your allusion be lose on I sir," say Bulstrode, with white heat;
"the law have no hold on I either through your agency or any other."
"you cannot understand a joke, my good fellow. I only mean that I
should never decline to know you. but let we be serious. your
quarterly payment willnot quite suit I. I like my freedom."
here Raffles rise and stalk once or twice up and down the room,
swing his leg, and assume an air of masterly meditation. at last
he stop opposite Bulstrode, and say, "Iwill tell you what! give we
a couple of hundred--come, thatbe modest--and Iwill go away--honor
bright!--pick up my portmanteau and go away. but I shall not give up
my Liberty for a dirty annuity. I shall come and go where I like.
perhaps it may suit I to stay away, and correspond with a friend;
perhaps not. have you the money with you?"
"no, I have one hundred," say Bulstrode, feel the immediate
riddance too great a relief to be reject on the ground of future
uncertainty. "I will forward you the other if you will mention an
address."
"no, Iwill wait here till you bring it," say Raffles. "Iwill take a
stroll and have a snack, and youwill be back by that time."
Mr. Bulstrode's sickly body, shatter by the agitation he have go
through since the last evening, make he feel abjectly in the power of
this loud invulnerable man. at that moment he snatch at a temporary
repose to be win on any term. he be rise to do what Raffles
suggest, when the latter say, lift up his finger as if with a
sudden recollection--
"I do have another look after Sarah again, though I donot tell you;
Ihave a tender conscience about that pretty young woman. I donot find
she, but I find out her husband's name, and I make a note of it. but
hang it, I lose my pocketbook. however, if I hear it, I should know
it again. Ihave get my faculty as if I be in my prime, but name
wear out, by Jove! sometimes Ibe no well than a confound tax-paper
before the name be fill in. however, if I hear of she and her
family, you shall know, Nick. youwould like to do something for she, now
shebe your step-daughter."
"Doubtless," say Mr. Bulstrode, with the usual steady look of his
light-gray eye; "though that might reduce my power of assist you."
as he walk out of the room, Raffles wink slowly at his back, and
then turn towards the window to watch the banker rid away--virtually
at his command. his lip first curl with a smile and then open
with a short triumphant laugh.
"but what the deuce be the name?" he presently say, half aloud,
scratch his head, and wrinkle his brow horizontally. he have not
really care or think about this point of forgetfulness until it
occur to he in his invention of annoyance for Bulstrode.
"it begin with L; it be almost all l's I fancy," he go on, with a
sense that he be get hold of the slippery name. but the hold be
too slight, and he soon get tired of this mental chase; for few man
be more impatient of private occupation or more in need of make
themselves continually hear than Mr. Raffles. he prefer use his
time in pleasant conversation with the bailiff and the housekeeper,
from whom he gather as much as he want to know about Mr.
Bulstrode's position in Middlemarch.
after all, however, there be a dull space of time which need
relieve with bread and cheese and ale, and when he be seat alone
with these resource in the wainscoted parlor, he suddenly slap his
knee, and exclaim, "Ladislaw!" that action of memory which he have
try to set go, and have abandon in despair, have suddenly
complete itself without conscious effort--a common experience,
agreeable as a complete sneeze, even if the name remember be of no
value. raffle immediately take out his pocket-book, and write down
the name, not because he expect to use it, but merely for the sake of
not be at a loss if he ever do happen to want it. he be not go
to tell Bulstrode: there be no actual good in telling, and to a mind
like that of Mr. Raffles there be always probable good in a secret.
he be satisfied with his present success, and by three o'clock that
day he have take up his portmanteau at the turnpike and mount the
coach, relieve Mr. Bulstrode's eye of an ugly black spot on the
landscape at Stone Court, but not relieve he of the dread that the
black spot might reappear and become inseparable even from the vision
of his hearth.
BOOK VI.
the WIDOW and the wife.
CHAPTER LIV.
"Negli occhi porta la mia donna Amore;
per che si fa gentil eio ch'ella mira:
Ov'ella passa, ogni uom ver lei si gira,
e cui saluta fa tremar lo core.
Sicche, bassando il viso, tutto smore,
E d'ogni suo difetto allor sospira:
Fuggon dinanzi a lei Superbia ed Ira:
Aiutatemi, donne, a farle onore.
Ogni dolcezza, ogni pensiero umile
Nasee nel core a chi parlar la sente;
ond' e beato chi prima la vide.
Quel ch'ella par quand' un poco sorride,
non si pub dicer, ne tener a mente,
Si e nuovo miracolo gentile."
--DANTE: la Vita Nuova.
by that delightful morning when the hay-rick at Stone Court be
scent the air quite impartially, as if Mr. Raffles have be a guest
worthy of fine incense, Dorothea have again take up her abode at
Lowick Manor. after three month Freshitt have become rather
oppressive: to sit like a model for Saint Catherine look rapturously
at Celia's baby would not do for many hour in the day, and to remain
in that momentous babe's presence with persistent disregard be a
course that could not have be tolerate in a childless sister.
Dorothea would have be capable of carry baby joyfully for a mile
if there have be nee, and of love it the more tenderly for that
labor; but to an aunt who do not recognize her infant nephew as
Bouddha, and have nothing to do for he but to admire, his behavior be
apt to appear monotonous, and the interest of watch he exhaustible.
this possibility be quite hide from Celia, who feel that Dorothea's
childless widowhood fall in quite prettily with the birth of little
Arthur (baby be name after Mr. Brooke).
"Dodo be just the creature not to mind about have anything of her
own--child or anything!" say Celia to her husband. "and if she
have have a baby, it never could have be such a dear as Arthur. could
it, James?
"not if it have be like Casaubon," say Sir James, conscious of some
indirectness in his answer, and of hold a strictly private opinion
as to the perfection of his first-bear.
"no! just imagine! really it be a mercy," say Celia; "and I think it
be very nice for Dodo to be a widow. she can be just as fond of our
baby as if it be her own, and she can have as many notion of her own
as she like."
"it be a pity she be not a queen," say the devout Sir James.
"but what should we have be then? we must have be something else,"
say Celia, object to so laborious a flight of imagination. "I like
she well as she be."
hence, when she find that Dorothea be make arrangement for her
final departure to Lowick, Celia raise her eyebrow with
disappointment, and in her quiet unemphatic way shoot a needle-arrow of
sarcasm.
"what will you do at Lowick, Dodo? you say yourself there be nothing
to be do there: everybody be so clean and well off, it make you
quite melancholy. and here you have be so happy go all about
Tipton with Mr. Garth into the bad backyard. and now uncle be
abroad, you and Mr. Garth can have it all your own way; and I be sure
James do everything you tell he."
"I shall often come here, and I shall see how baby grow all the
well," say Dorothea.
"but you will never see he wash," say Celia; "and that be quite the
good part of the day." she be almost pout: it do seem to her very
hard in Dodo to go away from the baby when she might stay.
"Dear Kitty, I will come and stay all night on purpose," say Dorothea;
"but I want to be alone now, and in my own home. I wish to know the
farebrother well, and to talk to Mr. Farebrother about what there be
to be do in Middlemarch."
Dorothea's native strength of will be no long all convert into
resolute submission. she have a great yearning to be at Lowick, and be
simply determined to go, not feel bound to tell all her reason.
but every one around she disapprove. Sir James be much pained, and
offer that they should all migrate to Cheltenham for a few month
with the sacred ark, otherwise call a cradle: at that period a man
could hardly know what to propose if Cheltenham be reject.
the Dowager Lady Chettam, just return from a visit to her daughter in
town, wish, at least, that Mrs. Vigo should be write to, and
invite to accept the office of companion to Mrs. Casaubon: it be not
credible that Dorothea as a young widow would think of live alone in
the house at Lowick. Mrs. Vigo have be reader and secretary to royal
personage, and in point of knowledge and sentiment even Dorothea
could have nothing to object to she.
Mrs. Cadwallader say, privately, "you will certainly go mad in that
house alone, my dear. you will see vision. we have all get to exert
ourselves a little to keep sane, and call thing by the same name as
other people call they by. to be sure, for young son and woman who
have no money, it be a sort of provision to go mad: they be take care
of then. but you must not run into that. I dare say you be a little
bored here with our good dowager; but think what a bore you might
become yourself to your fellow-creature if you be always play
tragedy queen and take thing sublimely. sit alone in that
library at Lowick you may fancy yourself rule the weather; you must
get a few people round you who wouldnot believe you if you tell they.
that be a good lower medicine."
"I never call everything by the same name that all the people about
I do," say Dorothea, stoutly.
"but I suppose you have find out your mistake, my dear," say Mrs.
Cadwallader, "and that be a proof of sanity."
Dorothea be aware of the sting, but it do not hurt she. "no," she
say, "I still think that the great part of the world be mistaken
about many thing. surely one may be sane and yet think so, since the
great part of the world have often have to come round from its opinion."
Mrs. Cadwallader say no more on that point to Dorothea, but to her
husband she remark, "it will be well for she to marry again as soon
as it be proper, if one could get she among the right people. of
course the Chettams would not wish it. but I see clearly a husband be
the good thing to keep she in order. if we be not so poor I would
invite Lord Triton. he will be marquis some day, and there be no
deny that she would make a good marchioness: she look handsomer
than ever in her mourning."
"my dear Elinor, do let the poor woman alone. such contrivance be of
no use," say the easy Rector.
"no use? how be match make, except by bring man and woman
together? and it be a shame that her uncle should have run away and
shut up the Grange just now. there ought to be plenty of eligible
match invite to Freshitt and the Grange. Lord Triton be precisely
the man: full of plan for make the people happy in a soft-headed
sort of way. that would just suit Mrs. Casaubon."
"let Mrs. Casaubon choose for herself, Elinor."
"that be the nonsense you wise man talk! how can she choose if she have
no variety to choose from? a woman's choice usually mean take the
only man she can get. mark my word, Humphrey. if her friend donot
exert themselves, there will be a bad business than the Casaubon
business yet."
"for heaven's sake donot touch on that topic, Elinor! it be a very sore
point with Sir James he would be deeply offend if you enter on it
to he unnecessarily."
"I have never enter on it," say Mrs Cadwallader, open her hand.
"Celia tell I all about the will at the beginning, without any asking
of mine."
"yes, yes; but they want the thing hush up, and I understand that the
young fellow be go out of the neighborhood."
Mrs. Cadwallader say nothing, but give she husband three significant
nod, with a very sarcastic expression in her dark eye.
Dorothea quietly persist in spite of remonstrance and persuasion. so
by the end of June the shutter be all open at Lowick Manor, and
the morning gaze calmly into the library, shin on the row of
note-book as it shin on the weary waste plant with huge stone,
the mute memorial of a forget faith; and the evening laden with
rose enter silently into the blue-green boudoir where Dorothea choose
oftenest to sit. at first she walk into every room, question the
eighteen month of her married life, and carry on her thought as if
they be a speech to be hear by her husband. then, she linger in
the library and could not be at rest till she have carefully range all
the note-book as she imagine that he would wish to see they, in
orderly sequence. the pity which have be the restrain compelling
motive in her life with he still clung about his image, even while she
remonstrate with he in indignant thought and tell he that he be
unjust. one little act of hers may perhaps be smile at as
superstitious. the Synoptical Tabulation for the use of Mrs. Casaubon,
she carefully enclose and seal, write within the envelope, "I
could not use it. do you not see now that I could not submit my soul
to your, by work hopelessly at what I have no belief in--Dorothea?"
then she deposit the paper in her own desk.
that silent colloquy be perhaps only the more earnest because
underneath and through it all there be always the deep longing which
have really determine she to come to Lowick. the longing be to see
Will Ladislaw. she do not know any good that could come of their
meeting: she be helpless; her hand have be tie from make up to
he for any unfairness in his lot. but her soul thirst to see he.
how could it be otherwise? if a princess in the day of enchantment
have see a four-footed creature from among those which live in herd
come to she once and again with a human gaze which rest upon she with
choice and beseech, what would she think of in her journeying, what
would she look for when the herd pass she? surely for the gaze
which have find she, and which she would know again. life would be no
well than candle-light tinsel and daylight rubbish if our spirit
be not touch by what have be, to issue of longing and constancy.
it be true that Dorothea want to know the farebrother well, and
especially to talk to the new rector, but also true that remember
what Lydgate have tell she about Will Ladislaw and little Miss Noble,
she count on Willbe come to Lowick to see the Farebrother family.
the very first Sunday, _before_ she enter the church, she see he as
she have see he the last time she be there, alone in the clergyman's
pew; but _when_ she enter his figure be go.
in the week-day when she go to see the lady at the Rectory, she
listen in vain for some word that they might let fall about Will; but
it seem to she that Mrs. Farebrother talk of every one else in the
neighborhood and out of it.
"probably some of Mr. Farebrother's Middlemarch hearer may follow he
to Lowick sometimes. do you not think so?" say Dorothea, rather
despise herself for have a secret motive in ask the question.
"if they be wise they will, Mrs. Casaubon," say the old lady. "I see
that you set a right value on my son's preaching. his grandfather on
my side be an excellent clergyman, but his father be in the law:--most
exemplary and honest nevertheless, which be a reason for our never
be rich. they say Fortune be a woman and capricious. but sometimes
she be a good woman and give to those who merit, which have be the
case with you, Mrs. Casaubon, who have give a living to my son."
Mrs. Farebrother recur to her knitting with a dignified satisfaction
in her neat little effort at oratory, but this be not what Dorothea
want to hear. poor thing! she do not even know whether Will
Ladislaw be still at Middlemarch, and there be no one whom she dare
to ask, unless it be Lydgate. but just now she could not see lydgate
without send for he or go to seek he. perhaps will Ladislaw,
have hear of that strange ban against he leave by Mr. Casaubon, have
feel it well that he and she should not meet again, and perhaps she
be wrong to wish for a meeting that other might find many good
reason against. still "I do wish it" come at the end of those wise
reflection as naturally as a sob after hold the breath. and the
meeting do happen, but in a formal way quite unexpected by she.
one morning, about eleven, Dorothea be seat in her boudoir with a
map of the land attach to the manor and other paper before she,
which be to help she in make an exact statement for herself of her
income and affair. she have not yet apply herself to her work, but
be seat with her hand fold on her lap, look out along the
avenue of lime to the distant field. every leaf be at rest in the
sunshine, the familiar scene be changeless, and seem to represent
the prospect of her life, full of motiveless ease--motiveless, if she
own energy could not seek out reason for ardent action. the widow's
cap of those time make an oval frame for the face, and have a crown
stand up; the dress be an experiment in the utmost lay on of
crape; but this heavy solemnity of clothing make her face look all the
young, with its recover bloom, and the sweet, inquire candor of
her eye.
her reverie be break by Tantripp, who come to say that Mr. Ladislaw
be below, and beg permission to see Madam if it be not too early.
"I will see he," say Dorothea, rise immediately. "let he be show
into the drawing-room."
the drawing-room be the most neutral room in the house to she--the
one least associate with the trial of her married life: the damask
match the wood-work, which be all white and gold; there be two
tall mirror and table with nothing on they--in brief, it be a room
where you have no reason for sit in one place rather than in
another. it be below the boudoir, and have also a bow-window looking
out on the avenue. but when Pratt show will Ladislaw into it the
window be open; and a wing visitor, buzz in and out now and then
without mind the furniture, make the room look less formal and
uninhabited.
"glad to see you here again, sir," say Pratt, linger to adjust a
blind.
"I be only come to say good-by, Pratt," say Will, who wish even the
butler to know that he be too proud to hang about Mrs. Casaubon now
she be a rich widow.
"very sorry to hear it, sir," say Pratt, retire. of course, as a
servant who be to be tell nothing, he know the fact of which Ladislaw
be still ignorant, and have draw his inference; indeed, have not
differ from his betrothed Tantripp when she say, "your master be as
jealous as a fiend--and no reason. Madam would look high than Mr.
Ladislaw, else I donot know she. Mrs. Cadwallader's maid say therebe
a lord come who be to marry she when the mourningbe over."
there be not many moment for Will to walk about with his hat in his
hand before Dorothea enter. the meeting be very different from that
first meeting in Rome when will have be embarrassed and Dorothea calm.
this time he feel miserable but determine, while she be in a state of
agitation which could not be hide. just outside the door she have
feel that this long-for meeting be after all too difficult, and when
she see will advance towards she, the deep blush which be rare in
she come with painful suddenness. neither of they know how it be, but
neither of they speak. she give her hand for a moment, and then they
go to sit down near the window, she on one settee and he on another
opposite. will be peculiarly uneasy: it seem to he not like
Dorothea that the mere fact of she be a widow should cause such a
change in her manner of receive he; and he know of no other
condition which could have affect their previous relation to each
other--except that, as his imagination at once tell he, her friend
might have be poison her mind with their suspicion of he.
"I hope I have not presume too much in call," say will; "I could
not bear to leave the neighborhood and begin a new life without see
you to say good-by."
"presume? surely not. I should have think it unkind if you have not
wish to see I," say Dorothea, her habit of speak with perfect
genuineness assert itself through all her uncertainty and agitation.
"be you go away immediately?"
"very soon, I think. I intend to go to town and eat my dinner as a
barrister, since, they say, that be the preparation for all public
business. there will be a great deal of political work to be do
by-and-by, and I mean to try and do some of it. other man have manage
to win an honorable position for themselves without family or money."
"and that will make it all the more honorable," say Dorothea,
ardently. "besides, you have so many talent. I have hear from my
uncle how well you speak in public, so that every one be sorry when you
leave off, and how clearly you can explain thing. and you care that
justice should be do to every one. I be so glad. when we be in
Rome, I think you only care for poetry and art, and the thing that
adorn life for we who be well off. but now I know you think about the
rest of the world."
while she be speak Dorothea have lose her personal embarrassment,
and have become like her former self. she look at Will with a direct
glance, full of delighted confidence.
"you approve of my go away for year, then, and never come here
again till I have make myself of some mark in the world?" say will,
try hard to reconcile the utmost pride with the utmost effort to get
an expression of strong feeling from Dorothea.
she be not aware how long it be before she answer. she have turn
her head and be look out of the window on the rose-bush, which
seem to have in they the summer of all the year when will would be
away. this be not judicious behavior. but Dorothea never think of
study her manner: she think only of bow to a sad necessity
which divide she from Will. those first word of his about his
intention have seem to make everything clear to she: he know, she
suppose, all about Mr. Casaubon's final conduct in relation to he,
and it have come to he with the same sort of shock as to herself. he
have never feel more than friendship for she--have never have anything in
his mind to justify what she feel to be her husband's outrage on the
feeling of both: and that friendship he still feel. something which
may be call an inward silent sob have go on in Dorothea before she
say with a pure voice, just tremble in the last word as if only
from its liquid flexibility--
"yes, it must be right for you to do as you say. I shall be very happy
when I hear that you have make your value feel. but you must have
patience. it will perhaps be a long while."
will never quite know how it be that he save himself from fall
down at her foot, when the "long while" come forth with its gentle
tremor. he use to say that the horrible hue and surface of her crape
dress be most likely the sufficient control force. he sit still,
however, and only said--
"I shall never hear from you. and you will forget all about I."
"no," say Dorothea, "I shall never forget you. I have never forget
any one whom I once know. my life have never be crowd, and seem
not likely to be so. and I have a great deal of space for memory at
Lowick, havenot I?" she smile.
"Good God!" will burst out passionately, rise, with his hat still in
his hand, and walk away to a marble table, where he suddenly turn
and lean his back against it. the blood have mount to his face and
neck, and he look almost angry. it have seem to he as if they be
like two creature slowly turn to marble in each other's presence,
while their heart be conscious and their eye be yearn. but
there be no help for it. it should never be true of he that in this
meeting to which he have come with bitter resolution he have end by a
confession which might be interpret into ask for her fortune.
moreover, it be actually true that he be fearful of the effect which
such confession might have on Dorothea herself.
she look at he from that distance in some trouble, imagine that
there might have be an offence in her word. but all the while there
be a current of thought in she about his probable want of money, and
the impossibility of she help he. if her uncle have be at home,
something might have be do through he! it be this preoccupation
with the hardship of Willbe want money, while she have what ought to
have be his share, which lead she to say, see that he remain
silent and look away from her--
"I wonder whether you would like to have that miniature which hang
up-stair--I mean that beautiful miniature of your grandmother. I
think it be not right for I to keep it, if you would wish to have it.
it be wonderfully like you."
"you be very good," say will, irritably. "no; I donot mind about it.
it be not very consoling to have one's own likeness. it would be more
console if other want to have it."
"I think you would like to cherish her memory--I thought--" Dorothea
break off an instant, her imagination suddenly warn she away from
Aunt Julia's history--"you would surely like to have the miniature as a
family memorial."
"why should I have that, when I have nothing else! a man with only a
portmanteau for his stowage must keep his memorial in his head."
will speak at random: he be merely vent his petulance; it be a
little too exasperating to have his grandmother's portrait offer he
at that moment. but to Dorothea's feel his word have a peculiar
sting. she rise and say with a touch of indignation as well as
hauteur--
"you be much the happy of we two, Mr. Ladislaw, to have nothing."
will be startle. whatever the word might be, the tone seem like a
dismissal; and quit his lean posture, he walk a little way
towards she. their eye meet, but with a strange questioning gravity.
something be keep their mind aloof, and each be leave to
conjecture what be in the other. will have really never think of
himself as have a claim of inheritance on the property which be hold
by Dorothea, and would have require a narrative to make he understand
her present feeling.
"I never feel it a misfortune to have nothing till now," he say. "but
poverty may be as bad as leprosy, if it divide we from what we most
care for."
the word cut Dorothea to the heart, and make her relent. she answer
in a tone of sad fellowship.
"sorrow come in so many way. two year ago I have no notion of
that--I mean of the unexpected way in which trouble come, and tie our
hand, and make we silent when we long to speak. I use to despise
woman a little for not shape their life more, and do well
thing. I be very fond of do as I like, but I have almost give
it up," she end, smile playfully.
"I have not give up do as I like, but I can very seldom do it,"
say will. he be stand two yard from she with his mind full of
contradictory desire and resolve--desire some unmistakable proof
that she love he, and yet dread the position into which such a
proof might bring he. "the thing one most long for may be surround
with condition that would be intolerable."
at this moment Pratt enter and say, "Sir James Chettam be in the
library, madam."
"ask Sir James to come in here," say Dorothea, immediately. it be as
if the same electric shock have pass through she and will. each of
they feel proudly resistant, and neither look at the other, while
they await Sir James's entrance.
after shake hand with Dorothea, he bow as slightly as possible to
Ladislaw, who repay the slightness exactly, and then go towards
Dorothea, said--
"I must say good-by, Mrs. Casaubon; and probably for a long while."
Dorothea put out her hand and say her good-by cordially. the sense
that Sir James be depreciate Will, and behave rudely to he,
rouse her resolution and dignity: there be no touch of confusion in
her manner. and when will have leave the room, she look with such calm
self-possession at Sir James, say, "how be Celia?" that he be
oblige to behave as if nothing have annoy he. and what would be the
use of behave otherwise? indeed, Sir James shrink with so much
dislike from the association even in thought of Dorothea with Ladislaw
as her possible lover, that he would himself have wish to avoid an
outward show of displeasure which would have recognize the
disagreeable possibility. if any one have ask he why he shrink in
that way, I be not sure that he would at first have say anything
full or more precise than "_that_ ladislaw!"--though on reflection
he might have urge that Mr. Casaubon's codicil, bar Dorothea's
marriage with Will, except under a penalty, be enough to cast
unfitness over any relation at all between they. his aversion be all
the strong because he feel himself unable to interfere.
but Sir James be a power in a way unguesse by himself. enter at
that moment, he be an incorporation of the strong reason through
which will's pride become a repellent force, keep he asunder from
Dorothea.
CHAPTER LV.
hath she her fault? I would you have they too.
they be the fruity must of sound wine;
or say, they be regenerate fire
such as hath turn the dense black element
into a crystal pathway for the sun.
if youth be the season of hope, it be often so only in the sense that
our elder be hopeful about we; for no age be so apt as youth to think
its emotion, parting, and resolve be the last of their kind. each
crisis seem final, simply because it be new. we be tell that the
old inhabitant in Peru do not cease to be agitate by the
earthquake, but they probably see beyond each shock, and reflect that
there be plenty more to come.
to Dorothea, still in that time of youth when the eye with their long
full lash look out after their rain of tear unsoile and unwearie
as a freshly open passion-flower, that morning's parting with Will
Ladislaw seem to be the close of their personal relation. he be
go away into the distance of unknown year, and if ever he come back
he would be another man. the actual state of his mind--his proud
resolve to give the lie beforehand to any suspicion that he would play
the needy adventurer seek a rich woman--lie quite out of her
imagination, and she have interpret all his behavior easily enough by
her supposition that Mr. Casaubon's codicil seem to he, as it do to
she, a gross and cruel interdict on any active friendship between they.
their young delight in speak to each other, and say what no one
else would care to hear, be forever end, and become a treasure of
the past. for this very reason she dwelt on it without inward check.
that unique happiness too be dead, and in its shadowed silent chamber
she might vent the passionate grief which she herself wonder at. for
the first time she take down the miniature from the wall and keep it
before she, like to blend the woman who have be too hardly judge
with the grandson whom her own heart and judgment defend. can any
one who have rejoice in woman's tenderness think it a reproach to she
that she take the little oval picture in her palm and make a bed for it
there, and lean she cheek upon it, as if that would soothe the
creature who have suffer unjust condemnation? she do not know then
that it be Love who have come to she briefly, as in a dream before
awake, with the hue of morning on his wing--that it be Love to
whom she be sob her farewell as his image be banish by the
blameless rigor of irresistible day. she only feel that there be
something irrevocably amiss and lose in her lot, and her thought about
the future be the more readily shapen into resolve. ardent soul,
ready to construct their come life, be apt to commit themselves to
the fulfilment of their own vision.
one day that she go to Freshitt to fulfil her promise of stay all
night and see baby wash, Mrs. Cadwallader come to dine, the Rector
be go on a fishing excursion. it be a warm evening, and even in
the delightful drawing-room, where the fine old turf slop from the
open window towards a lilie pool and well-plant mound, the heat be
enough to make Celia in her white muslin and light curl reflect with
pity on what Dodo must feel in her black dress and close cap. but this
be not until some episode with baby be over, and have leave her mind
at leisure. she have seat herself and take up a fan for some time
before she say, in her quiet guttural--
"Dear Dodo, do throw off that cap. I be sure your dress must make you
feel ill."
"I be so used to the cap--it have become a sort of shell," say
Dorothea, smile. "I feel rather bare and expose when it be off."
"I must see you without it; it make we all warm," say Celia, throw
down her fan, and go to Dorothea. it be a pretty picture to see
this little lady in white muslin unfasten the widow's cap from her
more majestic sister, and toss it on to a chair. just as the coil
and braid of dark-brown hair have be set free, Sir James enter the
room. he look at the release head, and say, "ah!" in a tone of
satisfaction.
"it be I who do it, James," say Celia. "dodo need not make such a
slavery of her mourning; she need not wear that cap any more among her
friend."
"my dear Celia," say Lady Chettam, "a widow must wear her mourning at
least a year."
"not if she marry again before the end of it," say Mrs. Cadwallader,
who have some pleasure in startle her good friend the Dowager. Sir
James be annoy, and lean forward to play with Celia's maltese dog.
"that be very rare, I hope," say Lady Chettam, in a tone intend to
guard against such event. "no friend of ours ever commit herself
in that way except Mrs. Beevor, and it be very painful to Lord
Grinsell when she do so. her first husband be objectionable, which
make it the great wonder. and severely she be punish for it.
they say Captain Beevor drag she about by the hair, and hold up
load pistol at she."
"oh, if she take the wrong man!" say Mrs. Cadwallader, who be in a
decidedly wicked mood. "marriage be always bad then, first or second.
priority be a poor recommendation in a husband if he have get no other.
I would rather have a good second husband than an indifferent first."
"my dear, your clever tongue run away with you," say Lady Chettam.
"I be sure you would be the last woman to marry again prematurely, if
our dear Rector be take away."
"oh, I make no vow; it might be a necessary economy. it be lawful to
marry again, I suppose; else we might as well be Hindoos instead of
Christians. of course if a woman accept the wrong man, she must take
the consequence, and one who do it twice over deserve her fate.
but if she can marry blood, beauty, and bravery--the soon the
well."
"I think the subject of our conversation be very ill-choose," say Sir
James, with a look of disgust. "suppose we change it."
"not on my account, Sir James," say Dorothea, determine not to lose
the opportunity of free herself from certain oblique reference to
excellent match. "if you be speak on my behalf, I can assure you
that no question can be more indifferent and impersonal to I than
second marriage. it be no more to I than if you talk of woman go
fox-hunting: whether it be admirable in they or not, I shall not follow
they. pray let Mrs. Cadwallader amuse herself on that subject as much
as on any other."
"my dear Mrs. Casaubon," say Lady Chettam, in her stateliest way, "you
do not, I hope, think there be any allusion to you in my mentioning
Mrs. Beevor. it be only an instance that occur to I. she be
step-daughter to Lord Grinsell: he marry Mrs. Teveroy for his second
wife. there could be no possible allusion to you."
"oh no," say Celia. "nobody choose the subject; it all come out of
Dodo's cap. Mrs. Cadwallader only say what be quite true. a woman
could not be marry in a widow's cap, James."
"Hush, my dear!" say Mrs. Cadwallader. "I will not offend again. I
will not even refer to Dido or Zenobia. only what be we to talk
about? I, for my part, object to the discussion of Human Nature,
because that be the nature of rector' wife."
later in the evening, after Mrs. Cadwallader be go, Celia say
privately to Dorothea, "really, Dodo, take your cap off make you like
yourself again in more way than one. you speak up just as you use to
do, when anything be say to displease you. but I could hardly make
out whether it be James that you think wrong, or Mrs. Cadwallader."
"Neither," say Dorothea. "James speak out of delicacy to I, but he
be mistake in suppose that I mind what Mrs. Cadwallader say. I
should only mind if there be a law oblige I to take any piece of
blood and beauty that she or anybody else recommend."
"but you know, Dodo, if you ever do marry, it would be all the well
to have blood and beauty," say Celia, reflect that Mr. Casaubon have
not be richly endow with those gift, and that it would be well to
caution Dorothea in time.
"donot be anxious, Kitty; I have quite other thought about my life. I
shall never marry again," say Dorothea, touch her sister's chin,
and look at she with indulgent affection. Celia be nurse her
baby, and Dorothea have come to say good-night to she.
"really--quite?" say Celia. "not anybody at all--if he be very
wonderful indeed?"
Dorothea shake her head slowly. "not anybody at all. I have
delightful plan. I should like to take a great deal of land, and
drain it, and make a little colony, where everybody should work, and
all the work should be do well. I should know every one of the
people and be their friend. I be go to have great consultation
with Mr. Garth: he can tell I almost everything I want to know."
"then you _will_ be happy, if you have a plan, Dodo?" say Celia.
"perhaps little Arthur will like plan when he grow up, and then he
can help you."
Sir James be inform that same night that Dorothea be really quite
set against marry anybody at all, and be go to take to "all
sort of plan," just like what she use to have. Sir James make no
remark. to his secret feeling there be something repulsive in a
woman's second marriage, and no match would prevent he from feel it
a sort of desecration for Dorothea. he be aware that the world would
regard such a sentiment as preposterous, especially in relation to a
woman of one-and-twenty; the practice of "the world" be to treat of
a young widow's second marriage as certain and probably near, and to
smile with meaning if the widow act accordingly. but if Dorothea do
choose to espouse her solitude, he feel that the resolution would well
become she.
CHAPTER LVI.
"how happy be he bear and teach
that serveth not another's will;
whose armor be his honest thought,
and simple truth his only skill!
. . . . . . .
this man be free from servile band
of hope to rise or fear to fall;
Lord of himself though not of land;
and have nothing yet hath all."
--sir HENRY WOTTON.
Dorothea's confidence in Caleb Garth's knowledge, which have begin on
her hearing that he approve of her cottage, have grow fast during she
stay at Freshitt, Sir James have induce she to take ride over the
two estate in company with himself and Caleb, who quite return she
admiration, and tell his wife that Mrs. Casaubon have a head for
business most uncommon in a woman. it must be remember that by
"business" Caleb never mean money transaction, but the skilful
application of labor.
"most uncommon!" repeat Caleb. "she say a thing I often use to
think myself when I be a lad:--'mr. Garth, I should like to feel, if I
live to be old, that I have improve a great piece of land and build a
great many good cottage, because the work be of a healthy kind while
it be be do, and after it be do, man be the well for it.'
those be the very word: she see into thing in that way."
"but womanly, I hope," say Mrs. Garth, half suspect that Mrs.
Casaubon might not hold the true principle of subordination.
"oh, you cannot think!" say Caleb, shake his head. "you would like
to hear her speak, Susan. she speak in such plain word, and a voice
like music. bless I! it remind I of bit in the 'messiah'--'and
straightway there appear a multitude of the heavenly host, praise
God and say;' it have a tone with it that satisfy your ear."
Caleb be very fond of music, and when he could afford it go to hear
an oratorio that come within his reach, return from it with a
profound reverence for this mighty structure of tone, which make he
sit meditatively, look on the floor and throw much unutterable
language into his outstretche hand.
with this good understanding between they, it be natural that Dorothea
ask Mr. Garth to undertake any business connect with the three
farm and the numerous tenement attach to Lowick Manor; indeed, his
expectation of get work for two be be fast fulfil. as he
say, "business breed." and one form of business which be begin
to breed just then be the construction of railway. a project line
be to run through Lowick parish where the cattle have hitherto graze
in a peace unbroken by astonishment; and thus it happen that the
infant struggle of the railway system enter into the affair of
Caleb Garth, and determine the course of this history with regard to
two person who be dear to he. the submarine railway may have its
difficulty; but the bed of the sea be not divide among various
land proprietor with claim for damage not only measurable but
sentimental. in the hundred to which Middlemarch belong railway
be as exciting a topic as the Reform Bill or the imminent horror of
Cholera, and those who hold the most decide view on the subject be
woman and landholder. woman both old and young regard travel by
steam as presumptuous and dangerous, and argue against it by say
that nothing should induce they to get into a railway carriage; while
proprietor, differ from each other in their argument as much as
Mr. Solomon Featherstone differ from Lord Medlicote, be yet
unanimous in the opinion that in sell land, whether to the Enemy of
mankind or to a company oblige to purchase, these pernicious agency
must be make to pay a very high price to landowner for permission to
injure mankind.
but the slow wit, such as Mr. Solomon and Mrs. Waule, who both
occupy land of their own, take a long time to arrive at this
conclusion, their mind halt at the vivid conception of what it
would be to cut the Big Pasture in two, and turn it into three-cornered
bit, which would be "nohow;" while accommodation-bridge and high
payment be remote and incredible.
"the cow will all cast their calf, brother," say Mrs. Waule, in a
tone of deep melancholy, "if the railway come across the Near Close;
and I shouldnot wonder at the mare too, if she be in foal. itbe a
poor tale if a widow's property be to be spade away, and the law say
nothing to it. whatbe to hinder them from cut right and leave if
they begin? itbe well know, _i_ cannot fight."
"the good way would be to say nothing, and set somebody on to send them
away with a flea in their ear, when they come spy and measure,"
say Solomon. "folk do that about Brassing, by what I can
understand. itbe all a pretence, if the truth be know, about their
be force to take one way. let them go cut in another parish.
and I donot believe in any pay to make amend for bring a lot of
ruffian to trample your crop. wherebe a company's pocket?"
"Brother Peter, God forgive he, get money out of a company," say Mrs.
Waule. "but that be for the manganese. that benot for railway to
blow you to piece right and left."
"well, therebe this to be say, Jane," Mr. Solomon conclude, lower
his voice in a cautious manner--"the more spoke we put in their wheel,
the more theywill pay we to let them go on, if they must come whether or
not."
this reasoning of Mr. Solomon's be perhaps less thorough than he
imagine, his cunning bearing about the same relation to the course of
railway as the cunning of a diplomatist bear to the general chill or
catarrh of the solar system. but he set about act on his view in a
thoroughly diplomatic manner, by stimulate suspicion. his side of
Lowick be the most remote from the village, and the house of the
labor people be either lone cottage or be collect in a hamlet
call Frick, where a water-mill and some stone-pit make a little
centre of slow, heavy-shoulder industry.
in the absence of any precise idea as to what railway be, public
opinion in Frick be against they; for the human mind in that grassy
corner have not the proverbial tendency to admire the unknown, hold
rather that it be likely to be against the poor man, and that
suspicion be the only wise attitude with regard to it. even the rumor
of Reform have not yet excite any millennial expectation in Frick,
there be no definite promise in it, as of gratuitous grain to
fatten Hiram Ford's pig, or of a publican at the "Weights and Scales"
who would brew beer for nothing, or of an offer on the part of the
three neighbor farmer to raise wage during winter. and without
distinct good of this kind in its promise, Reform seem on a footing
with the bragging of pedler, which be a hint for distrust to every
know person. the man of Frick be not ill-fed, and be less give
to fanaticism than to a strong muscular suspicion; less inclined to
believe that they be peculiarly care for by heaven, than to regard
heaven itself as rather disposed to take they in--a disposition
observable in the weather.
thus the mind of Frick be exactly of the sort for Mr. Solomon
Featherstone to work upon, he have more plenteous idea of the same
order, with a suspicion of heaven and earth which be well feed and
more entirely at leisure. Solomon be overseer of the road at that
time, and on his slow-pace cob often take his round by Frick to look
at the workman get the stone there, pause with a mysterious
deliberation, which might have mislead you into suppose that he have
some other reason for stay than the mere want of impulse to move.
after look for a long while at any work that be go on, he would
raise his eye a little and look at the horizon; finally he would shake
his bridle, touch his horse with the whip, and get it to move slowly
onward. the hour-hand of a clock be quick by comparison with Mr.
Solomon, who have an agreeable sense that he could afford to be slow.
he be in the habit of pausing for a cautious, vaguely design chat
with every hedger or ditcher on his way, and be especially willing to
listen even to news which he have hear before, feel himself at an
advantage over all narrator in partially disbelieve they. one day,
however, he get into a dialogue with Hiram Ford, a wagoner, in which he
himself contribute information. he wish to know whether Hiram have
see fellow with stave and instrument spy about: they call
themselves railroad people, but there be no tell what they be or
what they mean to do. the least they pretend be that they be
go to cut Lowick Parish into six and seven.
"why, therewill be no stirrin' from one pla-ace to another," say Hiram,
thinking of his wagon and horse.
"not a bit," say Mr. Solomon. "and cut up fine land such as this
parish! let them go into Tipton, say I. but therebe no knowing what
there be at the bottom of it. traffic be what they put for'ard; but
itbe to do harm to the land and the poor man in the long-run."
"why, theybe Lunnon chap, I reckon," say Hiram, who have a dim notion
of London as a centre of hostility to the country.
"ay, to be sure. and in some part against Brassing, by what Ihave
hear say, the folk fall on them when they be spy, and break their
peep-hole as they carry, and drive them away, so as they know well
than come again."
"it war good foon, Iwould be bind," say Hiram, whose fun be much
restrict by circumstance.
"well, I wouldnot meddle with them myself," say Solomon. "but some say
this country's see its good day, and the sign be, as itbe be
overrun with these fellow trample right and leave, and want to cut
it up into railway; and all for the big traffic to swallow up the
little, so as there shallnot be a team leave on the land, nor a whip to
crack."
"Iwill crack _my_ whip about their ear'n, afore they bring it to that,
though," say Hiram, while Mr. Solomon, shake his bridle, move
onward.
nettle-seed need no digging. the ruin of this countryside by
railroad be discuss, not only at the "Weights and Scales," but in
the hay-field, where the muster of work hand give opportunity for
talk such as be rarely have through the rural year.
one morning, not long after that interview between Mr. Farebrother and
Mary Garth, in which she confess to he her feeling for Fred Vincy,
it happen that her father have some business which take he to
Yoddrell's farm in the direction of Frick: it be to measure and value
an outlying piece of land belong to Lowick Manor, which Caleb
expect to dispose of advantageously for Dorothea (it must be
confess that his bias be towards get the good possible term
from railroad company). he put up his gig at Yoddrell's, and in
walk with his assistant and measuring-chain to the scene of his
work, he encounter the party of the company's agent, who be
adjust their spirit-level. after a little chat he leave they,
observe that by-and-by they would reach he again where he be go
to measure. it be one of those gray morning after light rain, which
become delicious about twelve o'clock, when the cloud part a little,
and the scent of the earth be sweet along the lane and by the
hedgerow.
the scent would have be sweet to Fred Vincy, who be come along
the lane on horseback, if his mind have not be worry by
unsuccessful effort to imagine what he be to do, with his father on
one side expect he straightway to enter the Church, with Mary on
the other threaten to forsake he if he do enter it, and with the
working-day world show no eager need whatever of a young gentleman
without capital and generally unskille. it be the hard to Fred's
disposition because his father, satisfied that he be no long
rebellious, be in good humor with he, and have send he on this
pleasant ride to see after some greyhound. even when he have fix on
what he should do, there would be the task of tell his father. but
it must be admit that the fixing, which have to come first, be the
more difficult task:--what secular avocation on earth be there for a
young man (whose friend could not get he an "appointment") which be
at once gentlemanly, lucrative, and to be follow without special
knowledge? rid along the lane by Frick in this mood, and
slacken his pace while he reflect whether he should venture to go
round by Lowick Parsonage to call on Mary, he could see over the hedge
from one field to another. suddenly a noise rouse his attention, and
on the far side of a field on his left hand he could see six or seven
man in smock-frock with hay-fork in their hand make an offensive
approach towards the four railway agent who be face they, while
Caleb Garth and his assistant be hasten across the field to join
the threaten group. Fred, delay a few moment by have to find
the gate, could not gallop up to the spot before the party in
smock-frock, whose work of turn the hay have not be too pressing
after swallow their mid-day beer, be drive the man in coat
before they with their hay-fork; while Caleb Garth's assistant, a lad
of seventeen, who have snatch up the spirit-level at Caleb's order,
have be knock down and seem to be lie helpless. the coated man
have the advantage as runner, and Fred cover their retreat by get
in front of the smock-frock and charge they suddenly enough to throw
their chase into confusion. "what do you confound fool mean?"
shout Fred, pursue the divide group in a zigzag, and cut right
and leave with his whip. "Iwill swear to every one of you before the
magistrate. youhave knock the lad down and kill he, for what I
know. youwill every one of you be hang at the next assize, if you
donot mind," say Fred, who afterwards laugh heartily as he
remember his own phrase.
the laborer have be drive through the gate-way into their hay-field,
and Fred have check his horse, when Hiram Ford, observe himself at a
safe challenging distance, turn back and shout a defiance which he
do not know to be homeric.
"yo're a coward, yo be. Yo git off your horse, young measter, and
Iwill have a round wi' ye, I wull. Yo daredn't come on wi'out your hoss
an' whip. Iwould soon knock the breath out on ye, I would."
"wait a minute, and Iwill come back presently, and have a round with you
all in turn, if you like," say Fred, who feel confidence in his power
of box with his dearly beloved brother. but just now he want to
hasten back to Caleb and the prostrate youth.
the lad's ankle be strained, and he be in much pain from it, but he
be no far hurt, and Fred place he on the horse that he might
ride to Yoddrell's and be take care of there.
"let they put the horse in the stable, and tell the surveyor they can
come back for their trap," say Fred. "the ground be clear now."
"no, no," say Caleb, "herebe a breakage. theywill have to give up for
to-day, and it will be as well. here, take the thing before you on
the horse, Tom. theywill see you come, and theywill turn back."
"Ibe glad I happen to be here at the right moment, Mr. Garth," say
Fred, as Tom ride away. "no know what might have happen if the
cavalry have not come up in time."
"ay, ay, it be lucky," say Caleb, speak rather absently, and
look towards the spot where he have be at work at the moment of
interruption. "but--deuce take it--this be what come of man be
fool--i'm hinder of my day's work. I cannot get along without
somebody to help I with the measuring-chain. however!" he be
begin to move towards the spot with a look of vexation, as if he
have forget Fred's presence, but suddenly he turn round and say
quickly, "what have you get to do to-day, young fellow?"
"nothing, Mr. Garth. Iwill help you with pleasure--can I?" say Fred,
with a sense that he should be court Mary when he be help she
father.
"well, you mustnot mind stoop and get hot."
"I donot mind anything. only I want to go first and have a round with
that hulky fellow who turn to challenge I. it would be a good
lesson for he. I shall not be five minute."
"nonsense!" say Caleb, with his most peremptory intonation. "I shall
go and speak to the man myself. itbe all ignorance. somebody have be
tell they lie. the poor fool donot know any well."
"I shall go with you, then," say Fred.
"no, no; stay where you be. I donot want your young blood. I can
take care of myself."
Caleb be a powerful man and know little of any fear except the fear of
hurt other and the fear of have to speechify. but he feel it his
duty at this moment to try and give a little harangue. there be a
strike mixture in he--which come from his have always be a
hard-work man himself--of rigorous notion about workman and
practical indulgence towards they. to do a good day's work and to do
it well, he hold to be part of their welfare, as it be the chief part
of his own happiness; but he have a strong sense of fellowship with
they. when he advance towards the laborer they have not go to work
again, but be stand in that form of rural grouping which consist
in each turn a shoulder towards the other, at a distance of two or
three yard. they look rather sulkily at Caleb, who walk quickly
with one hand in his pocket and the other thrust between the button of
his waistcoat, and have his every-day mild air when he pause among they.
"why, my lad, howbe this?" he begin, take as usual to brief phrase,
which seem pregnant to himself, because he have many thought lie
under they, like the abundant root of a plant that just manage to
peep above the water. "how come you to make such a mistake as this?
somebody have be tell you lie. you think those man up there
want to do mischief."
"aw!" be the answer, drop at interval by each accord to his
degree of unreadiness.
"Nonsense! no such thing! theybe look out to see which way the
railroad be to take. now, my lad, you cannot hinder the railroad: it
will be make whether you like it or not. and if you go fight
against it, youwill get yourself into trouble. the law give those
man leave to come here on the land. the owner have nothing to say
against it, and if you meddle with they youwill have to do with the
constable and Justice Blakesley, and with the handcuff and middlemarch
jail. and you might be in for it now, if anybody inform against you."
Caleb pause here, and perhaps the great orator could not have
choose either his pause or his image well for the occasion.
"but come, you donot mean any harm. somebody tell you the railroad
be a bad thing. that be a lie. it may do a bit of harm here and
there, to this and to that; and so do the sun in heaven. but the
railway's a good thing."
"aw! good for the big folk to make money out on," say old Timothy
Cooper, who have stay behind turn his hay while the other have be
go on their spree;--"i'n see lot o' thing turn up sin' I war a
young un--the war an' the peace, and the canell, an' the oald King
George, an' the Regen', an' the new King George, an' the new un as have
get a new ne-ame--an' itbe be all aloike to the poor mon. whatbe the
canell be t' he? they'n bring he neyther I-at nor be-acon, nor
wage to lay by, if he donot save it wi' clemmin' his own inside.
Times ha' get wusser for he sin' I war a young un. an' so itwill be
wi' the railroad. theywill on'y leave the poor mon furder behind. but
they be fool as meddle, and so I tell the chap here. this be the
big folk's world, this be. but yo're for the big folk, Muster Garth,
yo be."
Timothy be a wiry old laborer, of a type linger in those time--who
have his saving in a stocking-foot, live in a lone cottage, and be
not to be work on by any oratory, have as little of the feudal
spirit, and believe as little, as if he have not be totally
unacquainted with the Age of Reason and the Rights of Man. Caleb be
in a difficulty know to any person attempt in dark time and
unassiste by miracle to reason with rustic who be in possession of
an undeniable truth which they know through a hard process of feeling,
and can let it fall like a giant's club on your neatly carve argument
for a social benefit which they do not feel. Caleb have no canot at
command, even if he could have choose to use it; and he have be
accustom to meet all such difficulty in no other way than by do
his "business" faithfully. he answered--
"if you donot think well of I, Tim, never mind; thatbe neither here
nor there now. thing may be bad for the poor man--bad they be; but I
want the lad here not to do what will make thing bad for
themselves. the cattle may have a heavy load, but it willnot help them to
throw it over into the roadside pit, when itbe partly their own fodder."
"we war on'y for a bit o' foon," say Hiram, who be begin to see
consequence. "that war all we war arter."
"well, promise I not to meddle again, and Iwill see that nobody inform
against you."
"I'n ne'er meddle, an' i'n no call to promise," say Timothy.
"no, but the rest. come, Ibe as hard at work as any of you to-day, and
I cannot spare much time. say youwill be quiet without the constable."
"aw, we wooant meddle--they may do as they loike for oos"--were the
form in which Caleb get his pledge; and then he hasten back to
Fred, who have follow he, and watch he in the gateway.
they go to work, and Fred help vigorously. his spirit have rise,
and he heartily enjoy a good slip in the moist earth under the
hedgerow, which soil his perfect summer trouser. be it his
successful onset which have elate he, or the satisfaction of help
Mary's father? something more. the accident of the morning have
help his frustrated imagination to shape an employment for himself
which have several attraction. I be not sure that certain fibre in
Mr. Garth's mind have not resume their old vibration towards the very
end which now reveal itself to Fred. for the effective accident be
but the touch of fire where there be oil and tow; and it al ways
appear to Fred that the railway bring the need touch. but they
go on in silence except when their business demand speech. at
last, when they have finish and be walk away, Mr. Garth said--
"a young fellow neednot be a B. a. to do this sort of work, eh, Fred?"
"I wish I have take to it before I have think of be a B. a.," say
Fred. he pause a moment, and then add, more hesitatingly, "do you
think I be too old to learn your business, Mr. Garth?"
"my business be of many sort, my boy," say Mr. Garth, smile. "a
good deal of what I know can only come from experience: you cannot learn
it off as you learn thing out of a book. but you be young enough to
lay a foundation yet." Caleb pronounce the last sentence
emphatically, but pause in some uncertainty. he have be under the
impression lately that Fred have make up his mind to enter the Church.
"you do think I could do some good at it, if I be to try?" say Fred,
more eagerly.
"that depend," say Caleb, turn his head on one side and lower
his voice, with the air of a man who feel himself to be say
something deeply religious. "you must be sure of two thing: you must
love your work, and not be always look over the edge of it, want
your play to begin. and the other be, you must not be ashamed of your
work, and think it would be more honorable to you to be do something
else. you must have a pride in your own work and in learn to do it
well, and not be always say, therebe this and therebe that--if I have
this or that to do, I might make something of it. no matter what a man
be--I wouldnot give twopence for him"--here Caleb's mouth look
bitter, and he snap his fingers--"whether he be the prime minister
or the rick-thatcher, if he donot do well what he undertake to do."
"I can never feel that I should do that in be a clergyman," say
Fred, mean to take a step in argument.
"then let it alone, my boy," say Caleb, abruptly, "else youwill never
be easy. or, if you _be_ easy, youwill be a poor stick."
"that be very nearly what Mary think about it," say Fred, color.
"I think you must know what I feel for Mary, Mr. Garth: I hope it do
not displease you that I have always love she well than any one
else, and that I shall never love any one as I love she."
the expression of Caleb's face be visibly soften while Fred speak.
but he swing his head with a solemn slowness, and said--
"that make thing more serious, Fred, if you want to take Mary's
happiness into your keeping."
"I know that, Mr. Garth," say Fred, eagerly, "and I would do anything
for _her_. she say she will never have I if I go into the Church;
and I shall be the most miserable devil in the world if I lose all hope
of Mary. really, if I could get some other profession,
business--anything that I be at all fit for, I would work hard, I would
deserve your good opinion. I should like to have to do with outdoor
thing. I know a good deal about land and cattle already. I use to
believe, you know--though you will think I rather foolish for it--that
I should have land of my own. I be sure knowledge of that sort would
come easily to I, especially if I could be under you in any way."
"softly, my boy," say Caleb, have the image of "Susan" before his
eye. "what have you say to your father about all this?"
"nothing, yet; but I must tell he. I be only wait to know what I
can do instead of enter the Church. I be very sorry to disappoint
he, but a man ought to be allow to judge for himself when he be
four-and-twenty. how could I know when I be fifteen, what it would be
right for I to do now? my education be a mistake."
"but hearken to this, Fred," say Caleb. "be you sure Mary be fond of
you, or would ever have you?"
"I ask Mr. Farebrother to talk to she, because she have forbid
I--I donot know what else to do," say Fred, apologetically. "and he
say that I have every reason to hope, if I can put myself in an
honorable position--I mean, out of the Church I dare say you think it
unwarrantable in I, Mr. Garth, to be trouble you and obtrude my
own wish about Mary, before I have do anything at all for myself.
of course I have not the least claim--indeed, I have already a debt to
you which will never be discharge, even when I have be, able to pay
it in the shape of money."
"yes, my boy, you have a claim," say Caleb, with much feeling in his
voice. "the young one have always a claim on the old to help they
forward. I be young myself once and have to do without much help; but
help would have be welcome to I, if it have be only for the
fellow-feeling's sake. but I must consider. come to I to-morrow at
the office, at nine o'clock. at the office, mind."
Mr. Garth would take no important step without consult Susan, but it
must be confess that before he reach home he have take his
resolution. with regard to a large number of matter about which other
man be decide or obstinate, he be the most easily manageable man in
the world. he never know what meat he would choose, and if Susan have
say that they ought to live in a four-room cottage, in order to
save, he would have say, "let we go," without inquire into detail.
but where Caleb's feeling and judgment strongly pronounce, he be a
ruler; and in spite of his mildness and timidity in reprove, every
one about he know that on the exceptional occasion when he choose, he
be absolute. he never, indeed, choose to be absolute except on some
one else's behalf. on ninety-nine point Mrs. Garth decide, but on
the hundredth she be often aware that she would have to perform the
singularly difficult task of carry out her own principle, and to
make herself subordinate.
"it be come round as I think, Susan," say Caleb, when they be
seat alone in the evening. he have already narrate the adventure
which have bring about Fred's sharing in his work, but have keep back
the further result. "the child _be_ fond of each other--I mean,
Fred and Mary."
Mrs. Garth lay her work on her knee, and fix she penetrate eye
anxiously on her husband.
"after wehave do our work, Fred pour it all out to I. he cannot bear
to be a clergyman, and Mary say she willnot have he if he be one; and
the lad would like to be under I and give his mind to business. and
Ihave determine to take he and make a man of he."
"Caleb!" say Mrs. Garth, in a deep contralto, expressive of resign
astonishment.
"itbe a fine thing to do," say Mr. Garth, settle himself firmly
against the back of his chair, and grasp the elbow. "I shall have
trouble with he, but I think I shall carry it through. the lad love
Mary, and a true love for a good woman be a great thing, Susan. it
shape many a rough fellow."
"have Mary speak to you on the subject?" say Mrs Garth, secretly a
little hurt that she have to be inform on it herself.
"not a word. I ask she about Fred once; I give she a bit of a
warning. but she assure I she would never marry an idle
self-indulgent man--nothing since. but it seem Fred set on Mr.
Farebrother to talk to she, because she have forbid he to speak
himself, and Mr. Farebrother have find out that she be fond of Fred,
but say he must not be a clergyman. Fred's heart be fix on Mary,
that I can see: it give I a good opinion of the lad--and we always
like he, Susan."
"it be a pity for Mary, I think," say Mrs. Garth.
"why--a pity?"
"because, Caleb, she might have have a man who be worth twenty Fred
Vincy's."
"ah?" say Caleb, with surprise.
"I firmly believe that Mr. Farebrother be attach to she, and mean to
make she an offer; but of course, now that Fred have use he as an
envoy, there be an end to that well prospect." there be a severe
precision in Mrs. Garth's utterance. she be vex and disappoint,
but she be bent on abstain from useless word.
Caleb be silent a few moment under a conflict of feeling. he look
at the floor and move his head and hand in accompaniment to some
inward argumentation. at last he said--
"that would have make I very proud and happy, Susan, and I should have
be glad for your sake. Ihave always feel that your belonging have
never be on a level with you. but you take I, though I be a plain
man."
"I take the good and cleverest man I have ever know," say Mrs. Garth,
convince that _she_ would never have love any one who come short of
that mark.
"well, perhaps other think you might have do well. but it would
have be bad for I. and that be what touch I close about Fred.
the lad be good at bottom, and clever enough to do, if hebe put in the
right way; and he love and honor my daughter beyond anything, and she
have give he a sort of promise accord to what he turn out. I say,
that young man's soul be in my hand; and Iwill do the good I can for
he, so help I God! itbe my duty, Susan."
Mrs. Garth be not give to tear, but there be a large one roll
down her face before her husband have finish. it come from the
pressure of various feeling, in which there be much affection and
some vexation. she wipe it away quickly, saying--
"few man besides you would think it a duty to add to their anxiety in
that way, Caleb."
"that signify nothing--what other man would think. Ihave get a clear
feeling inside I, and that I shall follow; and I hope your heart will
go with I, Susan, in make everything as light as can be to Mary,
poor child."
Caleb, lean back in his chair, look with anxious appeal towards
his wife. she rise and kiss he, say, "God bless you, Caleb! our
child have a good father."
but she go out and have a hearty cry to make up for the suppression of
her word. she feel sure that her husband's conduct would be
misunderstood, and about Fred she be rational and unhopeful. which
would turn out to have the more foresight in it--her rationality or
Caleb's ardent generosity?
when Fred go to the office the next morning, there be a test to be
go through which he be not prepare for.
"now Fred," say Caleb, "you will have some desk-work. I have always
do a good deal of write myself, but I cannot do without help, and as
I want you to understand the account and get the value into your
head, I mean to do without another clerk. so you must buckle to. how
be you at writing and arithmetic?"
Fred feel an awkward movement of the heart; he have not think of
desk-work; but he be in a resolute mood, and not go to shrink.
"Ibe not afraid of arithmetic, Mr. Garth: it always come easily to I.
I think you know my writing."
"let we see," say Caleb, take up a pen, examine it carefully and
hand it, well dip, to Fred with a sheet of rule paper. "copy I
a line or two of that valuation, with the figure at the end."
at that time the opinion exist that it be beneath a gentleman to
write legibly, or with a hand in the least suitable to a clerk. Fred
write the line demand in a hand as gentlemanly as that of any
viscount or bishop of the day: the vowel be all alike and the
consonant only distinguishable as turn up or down, the stroke have
a blot solidity and the letter disdain to keep the line--in
short, it be a manuscript of that venerable kind easy to interpret
when you know beforehand what the writer mean.
as Caleb look on, his visage show a grow depression, but when
Fred hand he the paper he give something like a snarl, and rap
the paper passionately with the back of his hand. bad work like this
dispel all Caleb's mildness.
"the deuce!" he exclaim, snarlingly. "to think that this be a
country where a man's education may cost hundred and hundred, and it
turn you out this!" then in a more pathetic tone, push up his
spectacle and look at the unfortunate scribe, "the Lord have mercy
on we, Fred, I cannot put up with this!"
"what can I do, Mr. Garth?" say Fred, whose spirit have sink very low,
not only at the estimate of his handwriting, but at the vision of
himself as liable to be rank with office clerk.
"do? why, you must learn to form your letter and keep the line.
whatbe the use of writing at all if nobody can understand it?" ask
Caleb, energetically, quite preoccupied with the bad quality of the
work. "be there so little business in the world that you must be
send puzzle over the country? but thatbe the way people be
bring up. I should lose no end of time with the letter some people
send I, if Susan do not make they out for I. itbe disgusting." here
Caleb toss the paper from he.
any stranger peep into the office at that moment might have wonder
what be the drama between the indignant man of business, and the
fine-look young fellow whose blond complexion be get rather
patchy as he bite his lip with mortification. Fred be struggle with
many thought. Mr. Garth have be so kind and encouraging at the
beginning of their interview, that gratitude and hopefulness have be
at a high pitch, and the downfall be proportionate. he have not
think of desk-work--in fact, like the majority of young gentleman, he
want an occupation which should be free from disagreeable. I cannot
tell what might have be the consequence if he have not distinctly
promise himself that he would go to Lowick to see Mary and tell she
that he be engage to work under her father. he do not like to
disappoint himself there.
"I be very sorry," be all the word that he could muster. but Mr.
Garth be already relent.
"we must make the good of it, Fred," he begin, with a return to his
usual quiet tone. "every man can learn to write. I teach myself. go
at it with a will, and sit up at night if the day-time benot enough.
wewill be patient, my boy. Callum shall go on with the book for a bit,
while you be learn. but now I must be off," say Caleb, rise.
"you must let your father know our agreement. youwill save I Callum's
salary, you know, when you can write; and I can afford to give you
eighty pound for the first year, and more after."
when Fred make the necessary disclosure to his parent, the relative
effect on the two be a surprise which enter very deeply into his
memory. he go straight from Mr. Garth's office to the warehouse,
rightly feel that the most respectful way in which he could behave
to his father be to make the painful communication as gravely and
formally as possible. moreover, the decision would be more certainly
understand to be final, if the interview take place in his father's
grave hour, which be always those spend in his private room at the
warehouse.
Fred enter on the subject directly, and declare briefly what he have
do and be resolve to do, express at the end his regret that he
should be the cause of disappointment to his father, and take the
blame on his own deficiency. the regret be genuine, and inspire
Fred with strong, simple word.
Mr. Vincy listen in profound surprise without utter even an
exclamation, a silence which in his impatient temperament be a sign of
unusual emotion. he have not be in good spirit about trade that
morning, and the slight bitterness in his lip grow intense as he
listen. when Fred have end, there be a pause of nearly a minute,
during which Mr. Vincy replace a book in his desk and turn the key
emphatically. then he look at his son steadily, and said--
"so youhave make up your mind at last, sir?"
"yes, father."
"very well; stick to it. Ihave no more to say. youhave throw away your
education, and go down a step in life, when I have give you the mean
of rise, thatbe all."
"I be very sorry that we differ, father. I think I can be quite as
much of a gentleman at the work I have undertake, as if I have be a
curate. but I be grateful to you for wish to do the good for I."
"very well; I have no more to say. I wash my hand of you. I only
hope, when you have a son of your own he will make a well return for
the pain you spend on he."
this be very cut to Fred. his father be use that unfair
advantage possess by we all when we be in a pathetic situation and
see our own past as if it be simply part of the pathos. in reality,
Mr. Vincy's wish about his son have have a great deal of pride,
inconsiderateness, and egoistic folly in they. but still the
disappointed father hold a strong lever; and Fred feel as if he be
be banish with a malediction.
"I hope you will not object to my remain at home, sir?" he say,
after rise to go; "I shall have a sufficient salary to pay for my
board, as of course I should wish to do."
"Board be hang!" say Mr. Vincy, recover himself in his disgust at
the notion that Fred's keep would be miss at his table. "of course
your mother will want you to stay. but I shall keep no horse for you,
you understand; and you will pay your own tailor. you will do with a
suit or two less, I fancy, when you have to pay for them."
Fred linger; there be still something to be say. at last it come.
"I hope you will shake hand with I, father, and forgive I the
vexation I have cause you."
Mr. Vincy from his chair throw a quick glance upward at his son, who
have advance near to he, and then give his hand, say hurriedly,
"yes, yes, let we say no more."
Fred go through much more narrative and explanation with his mother,
but she be inconsolable, have before her eye what perhaps her
husband have never think of, the certainty that Fred would marry Mary
Garth, that her life would henceforth be spoil by a perpetual
infusion of Garths and their way, and that her darling boy, with his
beautiful face and stylish air "beyond anybody else's son in
Middlemarch," would be sure to get like that family in plainness of
appearance and carelessness about his clothe. to she it seem that
there be a Garth conspiracy to get possession of the desirable Fred,
but she dare not enlarge on this opinion, because a slight hint of it
have make he "fly out" at she as he have never do before. her temper
be too sweet for she to show any anger, but she feel that her
happiness have receive a bruise, and for several day merely to look at
Fred make her cry a little as if he be the subject of some baleful
prophecy. perhaps she be the slow to recover her usual cheerfulness
because Fred have warn she that she must not reopen the sore question
with his father, who have accept his decision and forgive he. if
her husband have be vehement against Fred, she would have be urge
into defence of her darling. it be the end of the fourth day when Mr.
Vincy say to her--
"Come, Lucy, my dear, donot be so down-hearted. you always have spoil
the boy, and you must go on spoil he."
"nothing ever do cut I so before, Vincy," say the wife, her fair
throat and chin begin to tremble again, "only his illness."
"Pooh, pooh, never mind! we must expect to have trouble with our
child. donot make it bad by let I see you out of spirit."
"well, I willnot," say Mrs. Vincy, rouse by this appeal and adjust
herself with a little shake as of a bird which lay down its ruffled
plumage.
"it willnot do to begin make a fuss about one," say Mr. Vincy, wish
to combine a little grumbling with domestic cheerfulness. "therebe
Rosamond as well as Fred."
"yes, poor thing. Ibe sure I feel for she be disappoint of her
baby; but she get over it nicely."
"Baby, pooh! I can see Lydgate be make a mess of his practice, and
get into debt too, by what I hear. I shall have Rosamond come to
I with a pretty tale one of these day. but theywill get no money from
I, I know. let _his_ family help he. I never do like that
marriage. but itbe no use talk. ring the bell for lemon, and
donot look dull any more, Lucy. Iwill drive you and Louisa to Riverston
to-morrow."
CHAPTER LVII.
they number scarce eight summer when a name
Rose on their soul and stir such motion there
as thrill the bud and shape their hide frame
at penetration of the quicken air:
his name who tell of loyal Evan Dhu,
of quaint bradwardine, and Vich Ian Vor,
make the little world their childhood know
large with a land of mountain lake and scaur,
and large yet with wonder love belief
Toward Walter Scott who live far away
send they this wealth of joy and noble grief.
the book and they must part, but day by day,
in line that thwart like portly spider run
they write the tale, from Tully Veolan.
the evening that Fred Vincy walk to Lowick parsonage (he have begin to
see that this be a world in which even a spirited young man must
sometimes walk for want of a horse to carry he) he set out at five
o'clock and call on Mrs. Garth by the way, wish to assure himself
that she accept their new relation willingly.
he find the family group, dog and cat include, under the great
apple-tree in the orchard. it be a festival with Mrs. Garth, for she
eld son, Christy, her peculiar joy and pride, have come home for a
short holiday--Christy, who hold it the most desirable thing in the
world to be a tutor, to study all literature and be a regenerate
Porson, and who be an incorporate criticism on poor Fred, a sort of
object-lesson give to he by the educational mother. Christy himself,
a square-browed, broad-shoulder masculine edition of his mother not
much high than Fred's shoulder--which make it the hard that he
should be hold superior--be always as simple as possible, and think
no more of Fred's disinclination to scholarship than of a giraffe's,
wish that he himself be more of the same height. he be lie on
the ground now by his mother's chair, with his straw hat lay flat over
his eye, while Jim on the other side be read aloud from that
beloved writer who have make a chief part in the happiness of many young
life. the volume be "Ivanhoe," and Jim be in the great archery
scene at the tournament, but suffer much interruption from Ben, who
have fetch his own old bow and arrow, and be make himself
dreadfully disagreeable, Letty think, by beg all present to
observe his random shot, which no one wish to do except Brownie, the
active-minded but probably shallow mongrel, while the grizzle
Newfoundland lie in the sun look on with the dull-eyed neutrality
of extreme old age. Letty herself, show as to her mouth and
pinafore some slight sign that she have be assist at the gathering
of the cherry which stand in a coral-heap on the tea-table, be now
seat on the grass, listen open-eyed to the reading.
but the centre of interest be change for all by the arrival of Fred
Vincy. when, seat himself on a garden-stool, he say that he be on
his way to Lowick Parsonage, Ben, who have throw down his bow, and
snatch up a reluctant half-grow kitten instead, stride across Fred's
outstretche leg, and say "take I!"
"oh, and I too," say Letty.
"you cannot keep up with Fred and I," say Ben.
"yes, I can. mother, please say that I be to go," urge Letty, whose
life be much checker by resistance to her depreciation as a girl.
"I shall stay with Christy," observe Jim; as much as to say that he
have the advantage of those simpleton; whereupon Letty put her hand up
to her head and look with jealous indecision from the one to the
other.
"let we all go and see Mary," say Christy, open his arm.
"no, my dear child, we must not go in a swarm to the parsonage. and
that old Glasgow suit of yours would never do. besides, your father
will come home. we must let Fred go alone. he can tell Mary that you
be here, and she will come back to-morrow."
Christy glance at his own threadbare knee, and then at Fred's
beautiful white trouser. certainly Fred's tailoring suggest the
advantage of an english university, and he have a graceful way even of
look warm and of push his hair back with his handkerchief.
"child, run away," say Mrs. Garth; "it be too warm to hang about
your friend. take your brother and show he the rabbit."
the eld understood, and lead off the child immediately. Fred feel
that Mrs. Garth wish to give he an opportunity of say anything he
have to say, but he could only begin by observing--
"how glad you must be to have Christy here!"
"yes; he have come soon than I expect. he get down from the coach
at nine o'clock, just after his father go out. I be long for
Caleb to come and hear what wonderful progress Christy be make. he
have pay his expense for the last year by give lesson, carry on
hard study at the same time. he hop soon to get a private tutorship
and go abroad."
"he be a great fellow," say Fred, to whom these cheerful truth have a
medicinal taste, "and no trouble to anybody." after a slight pause, he
add, "but I fear you will think that I be go to be a great deal of
trouble to Mr. Garth."
"Caleb like take trouble: he be one of those man who always do more
than any one would have think of ask they to do," answer Mrs.
Garth. she be knit, and could either look at Fred or not, as she
choose--always an advantage when one be bent on load speech with
salutary meaning; and though Mrs. Garth intend to be duly reserve,
she do wish to say something that Fred might be the well for.
"I know you think I very undeserving, Mrs. Garth, and with good
reason," say Fred, his spirit rise a little at the perception of
something like a disposition to lecture he. "I happen to have behave
just the bad to the people I cannot help wish for the most from.
but while two man like Mr. Garth and Mr. Farebrother have not give I
up, I donot see why I should give myself up." Fred think it might be
well to suggest these masculine example to Mrs. Garth.
"assuredly," say she, with gather emphasis. "a young man for whom
two such elder have devote themselves would indeed be culpable if he
throw himself away and make their sacrifice vain."
Fred wonder a little at this strong language, but only say, "I hope
it will not be so with I, Mrs. Garth, since I have some encouragement
to believe that I may win Mary. Mr. Garth have tell you about that?
you be not surprised, I dare say?" Fred end, innocently refer
only to his own love as probably evident enough.
"not surprised that Mary have give you encouragement?" return Mrs.
Garth, who think it would be well for Fred to be more alive to the
fact that Mary's friend could not possibly have wish this
beforehand, whatever the Vincys might suppose. "yes, I confess I be
surprised."
"she never do give I any--not the least in the world, when I talk
to she myself," say Fred, eager to vindicate Mary. "but when I ask
Mr. Farebrother to speak for I, she allow he to tell I there be a
hope."
the power of admonition which have begin to stir in Mrs. Garth have not
yet discharge itself. it be a little too provoking even for _her_
self-control that this bloom youngster should flourish on the
disappointment of sad and wise people--make a meal of a
nightingale and never know it--and that all the while his family
should suppose that her be in eager need of this sprig; and her
vexation have ferment the more actively because of its total
repression towards her husband. exemplary wife will sometimes find
scapegoat in this way. she now say with energetic decision, "you
make a great mistake, Fred, in ask Mr. Farebrother to speak for you."
"do I?" say Fred, redden instantaneously. he be alarmed, but at
a loss to know what Mrs. Garth mean, and add, in an apologetic tone,
"Mr. Farebrother have always be such a friend of our; and Mary, I
know, would listen to he gravely; and he take it on himself quite
readily."
"yes, young people be usually blind to everything but their own
wish, and seldom imagine how much those wish cost other," say
Mrs. Garth she do not mean to go beyond this salutary general
doctrine, and throw her indignation into a needless unwind of she
worst, knit her brow at it with a grand air.
"I cannot conceive how it could be any pain to Mr. Farebrother," say
Fred, who nevertheless feel that surprising conception be begin
to form themselves.
"precisely; you cannot conceive," say Mrs. Garth, cut her word as
neatly as possible.
for a moment Fred look at the horizon with a dismayed anxiety, and
then turn with a quick movement say almost sharply--
"do you mean to say, Mrs. Garth, that Mr. Farebrother be in love with
Mary?"
"and if it be so, Fred, I think you be the last person who ought to
be surprised," return Mrs. Garth, lay she knitting down beside she
and fold her arm. it be an unwonted sign of emotion in she that
she should put her work out of her hand. in fact her feeling be
divide between the satisfaction of give Fred his discipline and the
sense of have go a little too far. Fred take his hat and stick and
rise quickly.
"then you think I be stand in his way, and in Mary's too?" he say,
in a tone which seem to demand an answer.
Mrs. Garth could not speak immediately. she have bring herself into
the unpleasant position of be call on to say what she really feel,
yet what she know there be strong reason for conceal. and to she
the consciousness of have exceed in word be peculiarly
mortifying. besides, Fred have give out unexpected electricity, and he
now add, "Mr. Garth seem pleased that Mary should be attach to
I. he could not have know anything of this."
Mrs. Garth feel a severe twinge at this mention of her husband, the
fear that Caleb might think she in the wrong not be easily
endurable. she answer, want to check unintended consequences--
"I speak from inference only. I be not aware that Mary know anything
of the matter."
but she hesitate to beg that he would keep entire silence on a subject
which she have herself unnecessarily mention, not be use to stoop
in that way; and while she be hesitate there be already a rush of
unintended consequence under the apple-tree where the tea-thing
stand. Ben, bounce across the grass with Brownie at his heel, and
see the kitten drag the knitting by a lengthen line of wool,
shout and clap his hand; Brownie bark, the kitten, desperate,
jump on the tea-table and upset the milk, then jump down again and
sweep half the cherry with it; and Ben, snatch up the half-knit
sock-top, fit it over the kitten's head as a new source of madness,
while Letty arrive cry out to her mother against this cruelty--it
be a history as full of sensation as "this be the house that Jack
build." Mrs. Garth be oblige to interfere, the other young one come
up and the tete-a-tete with Fred be end. he get away as soon as he
could, and Mrs. Garth could only imply some retractation of her
severity by say "God bless you" when she shake hand with he.
she be unpleasantly conscious that she have be on the verge of
speak as "one of the foolish woman speaketh"--telle first and
entreating silence after. but she have not entreat silence, and to
prevent Caleb's blame she determine to blame herself and confess all
to he that very night. it be curious what an awful tribunal the mild
Caleb's be to she, whenever he set it up. but she mean to point out
to he that the revelation might do Fred Vincy a great deal of good.
no doubt it be have a strong effect on he as he walk to Lowick.
Fred's light hopeful nature have perhaps never have so much of a bruise
as from this suggestion that if he have be out of the way Mary might
have make a thoroughly good match. also he be pique that he have be
what he call such a stupid lout as to ask that intervention from Mr.
Farebrother. but it be not in a lover's nature--it be not in
Fred's, that the new anxiety raise about Mary's feeling should not
surmount every other. notwithstanding his trust in Mr. Farebrother's
generosity, notwithstanding what Mary have say to he, Fred could not
help feel that he have a rival: it be a new consciousness, and he
object to it extremely, not be in the least ready to give up Mary
for her good, be ready rather to fight for she with any man
whatsoever. but the fighting with Mr. Farebrother must be of a
metaphorical kind, which be much more difficult to Fred than the
muscular. certainly this experience be a discipline for Fred hardly
less sharp than his disappointment about his uncle's will. the iron
have not enter into his soul, but he have begin to imagine what the
sharp edge would be. it do not once occur to Fred that Mrs. Garth
might be mistake about Mr. Farebrother, but he suspect that she
might be wrong about Mary. Mary have be stay at the parsonage
lately, and her mother might know very little of what have be pass
in her mind.
he do not feel easy when he find she look cheerful with the
three lady in the drawing-room. they be in animate discussion on
some subject which be drop when he enter, and Mary be copy
the label from a heap of shallow cabinet drawer, in a minute
handwriting which she be skilled in. Mr. Farebrother be somewhere in
the village, and the three lady know nothing of Fred's peculiar
relation to Mary: it be impossible for either of they to propose that
they should walk round the garden, and Fred predict to himself that
he should have to go away without say a word to she in private. he
tell she first of Christy's arrival and then of his own engagement with
her father; and he be comfort by see that this latter news
touch she keenly. she say hurriedly, "I be so glad," and then bent
over her writing to hinder any one from notice her face. but here
be a subject which Mrs. Farebrother could not let pass.
"you donot mean, my dear Miss Garth, that you be glad to hear of a
young man give up the Church for which he be educate: you only mean
that thing be so, you be glad that he should be under an excellent
man like your father."
"no, really, Mrs. Farebrother, I be glad of both, I fear," say Mary,
cleverly get rid of one rebellious tear. "I have a dreadfully
secular mind. I never like any clergyman except the Vicar of
Wakefield and Mr. Farebrother."
"now why, my dear?" say Mrs. Farebrother, pause on her large wooden
knitting-needle and look at Mary. "you have always a good reason
for your opinion, but this astonish I. of course I put out of the
question those who preach new doctrine. but why should you dislike
clergyman?"
"oh dear," say Mary, her face break into merriment as she seem to
consider a moment, "I donot like their neckcloth."
"why, you donot like Camden's, then," say Miss Winifred, in some
anxiety.
"yes, I do," say Mary. "I donot like the other clergyman's
neckcloth, because it be they who wear they."
"how very puzzling!" say Miss Noble, feel that her own intellect
be probably deficient.
"my dear, you be joke. you would have well reason than these for
slight so respectable a class of man," say Mrs. Farebrother,
majestically.
"Miss Garth have such severe notion of what people should be that it be
difficult to satisfy she," say Fred.
"well, I be glad at least that she make an exception in favor of my
son," say the old lady.
Mary be wonder at Fred's pique tone, when Mr. Farebrother come in
and have to hear the news about the engagement under Mr. Garth. at the
end he say with quiet satisfaction, "_that_ be right;" and then bent
to look at Mary's label and praise her handwriting. Fred feel
horribly jealous--be glad, of course, that Mr. Farebrother be so
estimable, but wish that he have be ugly and fat as man at forty
sometimes be. it be clear what the end would be, since Mary openly
place Farebrother above everybody, and these woman be all evidently
encourage the affair. he, be feel sure that he should have no
chance of speak to Mary, when Mr. Farebrother said--
"Fred, help I to carry these drawer back into my study--you have
never see my fine new study. pray come too, Miss Garth. I want you
to see a stupendous spider I find this morning."
Mary at once see the Vicar's intention. he have never since the
memorable evening deviate from his old pastoral kindness towards she,
and her momentary wonder and doubt have quite go to sleep. Mary be
accustomed to think rather rigorously of what be probable, and if a
belief flatter her vanity she feel warn to dismiss it as
ridiculous, have early have much exercise in such dismissal. it be
as she have foresee: when Fred have be ask to admire the fitting of
the study, and she have be ask to admire the spider, Mr. Farebrother
said--
"wait here a minute or two. I be go to look out an engraving which
Fred be tall enough to hang for I. I shall be back in a few minute."
and then he go out. nevertheless, the first word Fred say to Mary
was--
"it be of no use, whatever I do, Mary. you be sure to marry
Farebrother at last." there be some rage in his tone.
"what do you mean, Fred?" Mary exclaim indignantly, blush deeply,
and surprise out of all her readiness in reply.
"it be impossible that you should not see it all clearly enough--you
who see everything."
"I only see that you be behave very ill, Fred, in speak so of Mr.
Farebrother after he have plead your cause in every way. how can you
have take up such an idea?"
Fred be rather deep, in spite of his irritation. if Mary have really
be unsuspicious, there be no good in tell she what Mrs. Garth have
say.
"it follow as a matter of course," he reply. "when you be
continually see a man who beat I in everything, and whom you set
up above everybody, I can have no fair chance."
"you be very ungrateful, Fred," say Mary. "I wish I have never tell
Mr. Farebrother that I care for you in the least."
"no, I be not ungrateful; I should be the happy fellow in the world
if it be not for this. I tell your father everything, and he be
very kind; he treat I as if I be his son. I could go at the work
with a will, writing and everything, if it be not for this."
"for this? for what?" say Mary, imagine now that something specific
must have be say or do.
"this dreadful certainty that I shall be bowl out by Farebrother."
Mary be appease by her inclination to laugh.
"Fred," she say, peep round to catch his eye, which be sulkily
turn away from she, "you be too delightfully ridiculous. if you
be not such a charming simpleton, what a temptation this would be to
play the wicked coquette, and let you suppose that somebody besides you
have make love to I."
"do you really like I well, Mary?" say Fred, turn eye full of
affection on she, and try to take her hand.
"I donot like you at all at this moment," say Mary, retreating, and
put her hand behind she. "I only say that no mortal ever make
love to I besides you. and that be no argument that a very wise man
ever will," she end, merrily.
"I wish you would tell I that you could not possibly ever think of
he," say Fred.
"never dare to mention this any more to I, Fred," say Mary, get
serious again. "I donot know whether it be more stupid or ungenerous
in you not to see that Mr. Farebrother have leave we together on purpose
that we might speak freely. I be disappointed that you should be so
blind to his delicate feeling."
there be no time to say any more before Mr. Farebrother come back with
the engraving; and Fred have to return to the drawing-room still with a
jealous dread in his heart, but yet with comfort argument from
Mary's word and manner. the result of the conversation be on the
whole more painful to Mary: inevitably her attention have take a new
attitude, and she see the possibility of new interpretation. she be
in a position in which she seem to herself to be slight Mr.
Farebrother, and this, in relation to a man who be much honor, be
always dangerous to the firmness of a grateful woman. to have a reason
for go home the next day be a relief, for Mary earnestly desire to
be always clear that she love Fred well. when a tender affection have
be store itself in we through many of our year, the idea that we
could accept any exchange for it seem to be a cheapening of our life.
and we can set a watch over our affection and our constancy as we can
over other treasure.
"Fred have lose all his other expectation; he must keep this," Mary
say to herself, with a smile curl her lip. it be impossible to
help fleet vision of another kind--new dignity and an
acknowledge value of which she have often feel the absence. but these
thing with Fred outside they, Fred forsake and look sad for the
want of she, could never tempt her deliberate thought.
CHAPTER LVIII.
"for there can live no hatred in thine eye,
therefore in that I cannot know thy change:
in many's look the false heart's history
be writ in mood and frown and wrinkle strange:
but Heaven in thy creation do decree
that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell:
Whate'er thy thought or thy heart's working be
Thy look should nothing thence but sweetness tell."
--SHAKESPEARE: sonnet.
at the time when Mr. Vincy utter that presentiment about Rosamond,
she herself have never have the idea that she should be drive to make
the sort of appeal which he foresaw. she have not yet have any anxiety
about way and mean, although her domestic life have be expensive as
well as eventful. her baby have be bear prematurely, and all the
embroider robe and cap have to be lay by in darkness. this
misfortune be attribute entirely to she have persist in go out
on horseback one day when her husband have desire she not to do so; but
it must not be suppose that she have show temper on the occasion, or
rudely tell he that she would do as she like.
what lead she particularly to desire horse-exercise be a visit from
Captain Lydgate, the baronet's third son, who, I be sorry to say, be
detest by our Tertius of that name as a vapid fop "part his hair
from brow to nape in a despicable fashion" (not follow by Tertius
himself), and show an ignorant security that he know the proper
thing to say on every topic. Lydgate inwardly curse his own folly
that he have draw down this visit by consent to go to his uncle's on
the wedding-tour, and he make himself rather disagreeable to Rosamond
by say so in private. for to Rosamond this visit be a source of
unprecedented but gracefully conceal exultation. she be so
intensely conscious of have a cousin who be a baronet's son stay
in the house, that she imagine the knowledge of what be imply by
his presence to be diffuse through all other mind; and when she
introduce Captain Lydgate to her guest, she have a placid sense that
his rank penetrate they as if it have be an odor. the satisfaction
be enough for the time to melt away some disappointment in the
condition of marriage with a medical man even of good birth: it seem
now that her marriage be visibly as well as ideally float she above
the Middlemarch level, and the future look bright with letter and
visit to and from Quallingham, and vague advancement in consequence
for Tertius. especially as, probably at the Captain's suggestion, his
marry sister, Mrs. Mengan, have come with she maid, and stay two
night on her way from town. hence it be clearly worth while for
Rosamond to take pain with her music and the careful selection of her
lace.
as to Captain Lydgate himself, his low brow, his aquiline nose bent on
one side, and his rather heavy utterance, might have be
disadvantageous in any young gentleman who have not a military bearing
and mustache to give he what be dot on by some flower-like blond
head as "style." he have, moreover, that sort of high-breeding which
consist in be free from the petty solicitude of middle-class
gentility, and he be a great critic of feminine charm. rosamond
delight in his admiration now even more than she have do at
Quallingham, and he find it easy to spend several hour of the day in
flirt with she. the visit altogether be one of the pleasant
lark he have ever have, not the less so perhaps because he suspect
that his queer cousin Tertius wish he away: though Lydgate, who
would rather (hyperbolically speak) have die than have fail in
polite hospitality, suppress his dislike, and only pretend
generally not to hear what the gallant officer say, consign the
task of answer he to Rosamond. for he be not at all a jealous
husband, and prefer leave a feather-head young gentleman alone
with his wife to bear he company.
"I wish you would talk more to the Captain at dinner, Tertius," say
Rosamond, one evening when the important guest be go to Loamford to
see some brother officer station there. "you really look so absent
sometimes--you seem to be see through his head into something behind
it, instead of look at he."
"my dear rosy, you donot expect I to talk much to such a conceited ass
as that, I hope," say Lydgate, brusquely. "if he get his head break,
I might look at it with interest, not before."
"I cannot conceive why you should speak of your cousin so
contemptuously," say Rosamond, her finger move at her work while
she speak with a mild gravity which have a touch of disdain in it.
"ask Ladislaw if he donot think your Captain the great bore he
ever meet with. Ladislaw have almost forsake the house since he come."
Rosamond think she know perfectly well why Mr. Ladislaw dislike the
Captain: he be jealous, and she like his be jealous.
"it be impossible to say what will suit eccentric person," she
answer, "but in my opinion Captain Lydgate be a thorough gentleman,
and I think you ought not, out of respect to Sir Godwin, to treat he
with neglect."
"no, dear; but we have have dinner for he. and he come in and go
out as he like. he donot want I."
"still, when he be in the room, you might show he more attention. he
may not be a phoenix of cleverness in your sense; his profession be
different; but it would be all the well for you to talk a little on
his subject. _I_ think his conversation be quite agreeable. and he
be anything but an unprincipled man."
"the fact be, you would wish I to be a little more like he, rosy,"
say Lydgate, in a sort of resign murmur, with a smile which be not
exactly tender, and certainly not merry. Rosamond be silent and do
not smile again; but the lovely curve of her face look good-temper
enough without smile.
those word of Lydgate's be like a sad milestone mark how far he
have travel from his old dreamland, in which Rosamond Vincy appear
to be that perfect piece of womanhood who would reverence her husband's
mind after the fashion of an accomplished mermaid, use her comb and
look-glass and sing her song for the relaxation of his adore
wisdom alone. he have begin to distinguish between that imagine
adoration and the attraction towards a man's talent because it give
he prestige, and be like an order in his button-hole or an honorable
before his name.
it might have be suppose that Rosamond have travel too, since she
have find the pointless conversation of Mr. Ned Plymdale perfectly
wearisome; but to most mortal there be a stupidity which be
unendurable and a stupidity which be altogether acceptable--else,
indeed, what would become of social bond? Captain Lydgate's stupidity
be delicately scented, carry itself with "style," talk with a good
accent, and be closely related to Sir Godwin. Rosamond find it quite
agreeable and catch many of its phrase.
therefore since Rosamond, as we know, be fond of horseback, there be
plenty of reason why she should be tempt to resume her riding when
Captain Lydgate, who have order his man with two horse to follow he
and put up at the "Green Dragon," beg she to go out on the gray
which he warrant to be gentle and train to carry a lady--indeed, he
have buy it for his sister, and be take it to Quallingham.
Rosamond go out the first time without tell her husband, and come
back before his return; but the ride have be so thorough a success,
and she declare herself so much the well in consequence, that he be
informed of it with full reliance on his consent that she should go
rid again.
on the contrary Lydgate be more than hurt--he be utterly confound
that she have risk herself on a strange horse without refer the
matter to his wish. after the first almost thunder exclamation of
astonishment, which sufficiently warn Rosamond of what be come, he
be silent for some moment.
"however, you have come back safely," he say, at last, in a decisive
tone. "you will not go again, rosy; that be understand. if it be
the quiet, most familiar horse in the world, there would always be
the chance of accident. and you know very well that I wish you to
give up rid the roan on that account."
"but there be the chance of accident indoor, Tertius."
"my darling, donot talk nonsense," say Lydgate, in an implore tone;
"surely I be the person to judge for you. I think it be enough that I
say you be not to go again."
Rosamond be arrange her hair before dinner, and the reflection of
her head in the glass show no change in its loveliness except a
little turning aside of the long neck. Lydgate have be move about
with his hand in his pocket, and now pause near she, as if he
await some assurance.
"I wish you would fasten up my plait, dear," say Rosamond, let
her arm fall with a little sigh, so as to make a husband ashamed of
stand there like a brute. Lydgate have often fasten the plait
before, be among the deftest of man with his large finely form
finger. he sweep up the soft festoon of plait and fasten in the
tall comb (to such us do man come!); and what could he do then but
kiss the exquisite nape which be show in all its delicate curve?
but when we do what we have do before, it be often with a difference.
Lydgate be still angry, and have not forget his point.
"I shall tell the Captain that he ought to have know well than offer
you his horse," he say, as he move away.
"I beg you will not do anything of the kind, Tertius," say Rosamond,
look at he with something more marked than usual in her speech.
"it will be treat I as if I be a child. promise that you will
leave the subject to I."
there do seem to be some truth in her objection. Lydgate say, "very
well," with a surly obedience, and thus the discussion end with his
promising Rosamond, and not with she promise he.
in fact, she have be determine not to promise. Rosamond have that
victorious obstinacy which never waste its energy in impetuous
resistance. what she like to do be to she the right thing, and all
her cleverness be direct to get the mean of do it. she
mean to go out rid again on the gray, and she do go on the next
opportunity of her husband's absence, not intend that he should know
until it be late enough not to signify to she. the temptation be
certainly great: she be very fond of the exercise, and the
gratification of rid on a fine horse, with Captain Lydgate, Sir
Godwin's son, on another fine horse by her side, and of be meet in
this position by any one but her husband, be something as good as her
dream before marriage: moreover she be rivet the connection with
the family at Quallingham, which must be a wise thing to do.
but the gentle gray, unprepared for the crash of a tree that be be
fell on the edge of Halsell wood, take fright, and cause a bad
fright to Rosamond, lead finally to the loss of her baby. lydgate
could not show his anger towards she, but he be rather bearish to the
Captain, whose visit naturally soon come to an end.
in all future conversation on the subject, Rosamond be mildly certain
that the ride have make no difference, and that if she have stay at
home the same symptom would have come on and would have end in the
same way, because she have feel something like they before.
Lydgate could only say, "poor, poor darling!"--but he secretly wonder
over the terrible tenacity of this mild creature. there be gather
within he an amazed sense of his powerlessness over Rosamond. his
superior knowledge and mental force, instead of be, as he have
imagine, a shrine to consult on all occasion, be simply set aside on
every practical question. he have regard Rosamond's cleverness as
precisely of the receptive kind which become a woman. he be now
begin to find out what that cleverness be--what be the shape into
which it have run as into a close network aloof and independent. no one
quick than Rosamond to see cause and effect which lie within the
track of her own taste and interest: she have see clearly Lydgate's
preeminence in Middlemarch society, and could go on imaginatively
trace still more agreeable social effect when his talent should have
advance he; but for she, his professional and scientific ambition have
no other relation to these desirable effect than if they have be the
fortunate discovery of an ill-smell oil. and that oil apart, with
which she have nothing to do, of course she believe in her own opinion
more than she do in his. Lydgate be astounded to find in numberless
trifling matter, as well as in this last serious case of the riding,
that affection do not make her compliant. he have no doubt that the
affection be there, and have no presentiment that he have do anything
to repel it. for his own part he say to himself that he love she as
tenderly as ever, and could make up his mind to her negation;
but--well! Lydgate be much worried, and conscious of new element in
his life as noxious to he as an inlet of mud to a creature that have
be use to breathe and bathe and dart after its illuminate prey in
the clear of water.
Rosamond be soon look lovelier than ever at her worktable, enjoy
drive in her father's phaeton and think it likely that she might be
invite to Quallingham. she know that she be a much more exquisite
ornament to the drawing-room there than any daughter of the family, and
in reflect that the gentleman be aware of that, do not perhaps
sufficiently consider whether the lady would be eager to see
themselves surpass.
Lydgate, relieve from anxiety about she, relapse into what she
inwardly call his moodiness--a name which to she cover his
thoughtful preoccupation with other subject than herself, as well as
that uneasy look of the brow and distaste for all ordinary thing as if
they be mix with bitter herb, which really make a sort of
weather-glass to his vexation and foreboding. these latter state of
mind have one cause amongst other, which he have generously but
mistakenly avoid mention to Rosamond, lest it should affect her
health and spirit. between he and she indeed there be that total
missing of each other's mental track, which be too evidently possible
even between person who be continually think of each other. to
Lydgate it seem that he have be spend month after month in
sacrifice more than half of his good intent and good power to his
tenderness for Rosamond; bear her little claim and interruption
without impatience, and, above all, bear without betrayal of
bitterness to look through less and less of interfere illusion at the
blank unreflecting surface her mind present to his ardor for the more
impersonal end of his profession and his scientific study, an ardor
which he have fancy that the ideal wife must somehow worship as
sublime, though not in the least know why. but his endurance be
mingle with a self-discontent which, if we know how to be candid, we
shall confess to make more than half our bitterness under grievance,
wife or husband include. it always remain true that if we have be
great, circumstance would have be less strong against we. lydgate
be aware that his concession to Rosamond be often little more than
the lapse of slacken resolution, the creep paralysis apt to seize
an enthusiasm which be out of adjustment to a constant portion of our
life. and on Lydgate's enthusiasm there be constantly press not a
simple weight of sorrow, but the bite presence of a petty degrading
care, such as cast the blight of irony over all high effort.
this be the care which he have hitherto abstain from mention to
Rosamond; and he believe, with some wonder, that it have never enter
her mind, though certainly no difficulty could be less mysterious. it
be an inference with a conspicuous handle to it, and have be easily
draw by indifferent observer, that Lydgate be in debt; and he could
not succeed in keep out of his mind for long together that he be
every day get deep into that swamp, which tempt man towards it
with such a pretty covering of flower and verdure. it be wonderful
how soon a man get up to his chin there--in a condition in which,
spite of himself, he be force to think chiefly of release, though he
have a scheme of the universe in his soul.
eighteen month ago Lydgate be poor, but have never know the eager
want of small sum, and feel rather a burn contempt for any one who
descend a step in order to gain they. he be now experience
something bad than a simple deficit: he be assail by the vulgar
hateful trial of a man who have buy and use a great many thing
which might have be do without, and which he be unable to pay for,
though the demand for payment have become press.
how this come about may be easily see without much arithmetic or
knowledge of price. when a man in set up a house and prepare
for marriage find that his furniture and other initial expense come
to between four and five hundred pound more than he have capital to pay
for; when at the end of a year it appear that his household expense,
horse and et caeteras, amount to nearly a thousand, while the proceed
of the practice reckon from the old book to be worth eight hundred
per annum have sink like a summer pond and make hardly five hundred,
chiefly in unpaid entry, the plain inference be that, whether he
mind it or not, he be in debt. those be less expensive time than
our own, and provincial life be comparatively modest; but the ease
with which a medical man who have lately buy a practice, who think
that he be oblige to keep two horse, whose table be supply
without stint, and who pay an insurance on his life and a high rent
for house and garden, might find his expense double his receipt,
can be conceive by any one who do not think these detail beneath
his consideration. Rosamond, accustom from she to an extravagant
household, think that good housekeeping consist simply in order
the good of everything--nothing else "answer;" and Lydgate suppose
that "if thing be do at all, they must be do properly"--he do
not see how they be to live otherwise. if each head of household
expenditure have be mention to he beforehand, he would have
probably observe that "it could hardly come to much," and if any one
have suggest a saving on a particular article--for example, the
substitution of cheap fish for dear--it would have appear to he
simply a penny-wise, mean notion. Rosamond, even without such an
occasion as Captain Lydgate's visit, be fond of give invitation,
and Lydgate, though he often think the guest tiresome, do not
interfere. this sociability seem a necessary part of professional
prudence, and the entertainment must be suitable. it be true Lydgate
be constantly visit the home of the poor and adjust his
prescription of diet to their small mean; but, dear I! have it not by
this time cease to be remarkable--be it not rather that we expect in
man, that they should have numerous strand of experience lie side by
side and never compare they with each other? expenditure--like
ugliness and error--become a totally new thing when we attach our own
personality to it, and measure it by that wide difference which be
manifest (in our own sensation) between ourselves and other. lydgate
believe himself to be careless about his dress, and he despise a man
who calculate the effect of his costume; it seem to he only a
matter of course that he have abundance of fresh garment--such thing
be naturally order in sheaf. it must be remember that he have
never hitherto feel the check of importunate debt, and he walk by
habit, not by self-criticism. but the check have come.
its novelty make it the more irritating. he be amazed, disgust that
condition so foreign to all his purpose, so hatefully disconnect
with the object he care to occupy himself with, should have lain in
ambush and clutch he when he be unaware. and there be not only
the actual debt; there be the certainty that in his present position
he must go on deepen it. two furnish tradesman at Brassing,
whose bill have be incur before his marriage, and whom
uncalculate current expense have ever since prevent he from pay,
have repeatedly send he unpleasant letter which have force themselves
on his attention. this could hardly have be more galling to any
disposition than to Lydgate's, with his intense pride--his dislike of
ask a favor or be under an obligation to any one. he have scorn
even to form conjecture about Mr. Vincy's intention on money matter,
and nothing but extremity could have induce he to apply to his
father-in-law, even if he have not be make aware in various indirect
way since his marriage that Mr. Vincy's own affair be not
flourish, and that the expectation of help from he would be
resent. some man easily trust in the readiness of friend; it have
never in the former part of his life occur to lydgate that he should
need to do so: he have never think what borrowing would be to he; but
now that the idea have enter his mind, he feel that he would rather
incur any other hardship. in the mean time he have no money or
prospect of money; and his practice be not get more lucrative.
no wonder that Lydgate have be unable to suppress all sign of inward
trouble during the last few month, and now that Rosamond be regain
brilliant health, he meditate take she entirely into confidence on
his difficulty. new conversance with tradesman's bill have force
his reasoning into a new channel of comparison: he have begin to
consider from a new point of view what be necessary and unnecessary in
good order, and to see that there must be some change of habit.
how could such a change be make without Rosamond's concurrence? the
immediate occasion of open the disagreeable fact to she be force
upon he.
have no money, and have privately seek advice as to what security
could possibly be give by a man in his position, Lydgate have offer
the one good security in his power to the less peremptory creditor, who
be a silversmith and jeweller, and who consent to take on himself
the upholsterer's credit also, accept interest for a give term.
the security necessary be a bill of sale on the furniture of his
house, which might make a creditor easy for a reasonable time about a
debt amounting to less than four hundred pound; and the silversmith,
Mr. Dover, be willing to reduce it by take back a portion of the
plate and any other article which be as good as new. "any other
article" be a phrase delicately imply jewellery, and more
particularly some purple amethyst cost thirty pound, which lydgate
have buy as a bridal present.
opinion may be divide as to his wisdom in make this present: some
may think that it be a graceful attention to be expect from a man
like Lydgate, and that the fault of any troublesome consequence lay in
the pinched narrowness of provincial life at that time, which offer
no convenience for professional people whose fortune be not
proportion to their taste; also, in Lydgate's ridiculous
fastidiousness about ask his friend for money.
however, it have seem a question of no moment to he on that fine
morning when he go to give a final order for plate: in the presence
of other jewel enormously expensive, and as an addition to order of
which the amount have not be exactly calculate, thirty pound for
ornament so exquisitely suit to Rosamond's neck and arm could
hardly appear excessive when there be no ready cash for it to exceed.
but at this crisis lydgate's imagination could not help dwell on the
possibility of let the amethyst take their place again among Mr.
Dover's stock, though he shrink from the idea of propose this to
Rosamond. have be rouse to discern consequence which he have
never be in the habit of trace, he be prepare to act on this
discernment with some of the rigor (by no means all) that he would have
apply in pursue experiment. he be nerve himself to this rigor
as he ride from Brassing, and meditate on the representation he must
make to Rosamond.
it be evening when he get home. he be intensely miserable, this
strong man of nine-and-twenty and of many gift. he be not say
angrily within himself that he have make a profound mistake; but the
mistake be at work in he like a recognize chronic disease, mingle
its uneasy importunity with every prospect, and enfeeble every
thought. as he go along the passage to the drawing-room, he hear
the piano and singing. of course, Ladislaw be there. it be some
week since Will have part from Dorothea, yet he be still at the old
post in Middlemarch. Lydgate have no objection in general to Ladislaw's
come, but just now he be annoyed that he could not find his hearth
free. when he open the door the two singer go on towards the
key-note, raise their eye and look at he indeed, but not
regard his entrance as an interruption. to a man gall with his
harness as poor Lydgate be, it be not soothe to see two people
warble at he, as he come in with the sense that the painful day have
still pain in store. his face, already pale than usual, take on a
scowl as he walk across the room and fling himself into a chair.
the singer feel themselves excuse by the fact that they have only
three bar to sing, now turn round.
"how be you, lydgate?" say will, come forward to shake hand.
Lydgate take his hand, but do not think it necessary to speak.
"have you din, Tertius? I expect you much early," say Rosamond,
who have already see that her husband be in a "horrible humor." she
seat herself in her usual place as she speak.
"I have din. I should like some tea, please," say Lydgate, curtly,
still scowl and look markedly at his leg stretch out before
he.
will be too quick to need more. "I shall be off," he say, reach
his hat.
"Tea be come," say Rosamond; "pray donot go."
"yes, Lydgate be bore," say Will, who have more comprehension of
Lydgate than Rosamond have, and be not offend by his manner, easily
imagine outdoor cause of annoyance.
"there be the more need for you to stay," say Rosamond, playfully, and
in her light accent; "he will not speak to I all the evening."
"yes, Rosamond, I shall," say Lydgate, in his strong baritone. "I
have some serious business to speak to you about."
no introduction of the business could have be less like that which
Lydgate have intend; but her indifferent manner have be too provoking.
"there! you see," say will. "Ibe go to the meeting about the
Mechanics' Institute. good-by;" and he go quickly out of the room.
Rosamond do not look at her husband, but presently rise and take she
place before the tea-tray. she be think that she have never see he
so disagreeable. Lydgate turn his dark eye on she and watch she
as she delicately handle the tea-service with her taper finger, and
look at the object immediately before she with no curve in her face
disturb, and yet with an ineffable protest in her air against all
people with unpleasant manner. for the moment he lose the sense of
his wound in a sudden speculation about this new form of feminine
impassibility reveal itself in the sylph-like frame which he have
once interpret as the sign of a ready intelligent sensitiveness. his
mind glance back to Laure while he look at Rosamond, he say
inwardly, "would _she_ kill I because I weary she?" and then, "it be
the way with all woman." but this power of generalizing which give man
so much the superiority in mistake over the dumb animal, be
immediately thwart by Lydgate's memory of wonder impression from
the behavior of another woman--from Dorothea's look and tone of
emotion about her husband when Lydgate begin to attend he--from she
passionate cry to be teach what would well comfort that man for whose
sake it seem as if she must quell every impulse in she except the
yearning of faithfulness and compassion. these revive impression
succeed each other quickly and dreamily in Lydgate's mind while the
tea be be brew. he have shut his eye in the last instant of
reverie while he hear Dorothea say, "Advise I--think what I can
do--he have be all his life labor and look forward. he mind
about nothing else--and I mind about nothing else."
that voice of deep-soule womanhood have remain within he as the
enkindle conception of dead and sceptred genius have remain within
he (be there not a genius for feel nobly which also reign over
human spirit and their conclusion?); the tone be a music from
which he be fall away--he have really fall into a momentary doze,
when Rosamond say in her silvery neutral way, "here be your tea,
Tertius," set it on the small table by his side, and then move
back to her place without look at he. Lydgate be too hasty in
attribute insensibility to she; after her own fashion, she be
sensitive enough, and take lasting impression. her impression now be
one of offence and repulsion. but then, Rosamond have no scowl and have
never raise her voice: she be quite sure that no one could justly
find fault with she.
perhaps Lydgate and she have never feel so far off each other before;
but there be strong reason for not defer his revelation, even if
he have not already begin it by that abrupt announcement; indeed some of
the angry desire to rouse she into more sensibility on his account
which have prompt he to speak prematurely, still mingle with his
pain in the prospect of her pain. but he wait till the tray be
go, the candle be light, and the evening quiet might be count on:
the interval have leave time for repel tenderness to return into the
old course. he speak kindly.
"Dear Rosy, lie down your work and come to sit by I," he say, gently,
push away the table, and stretch out his arm to draw a chair near
his own.
Rosamond obey. as she come towards he in her drapery of transparent
faintly tinted muslin, her slim yet round figure never look more
graceful; as she sit down by he and lay one hand on the elbow of his
chair, at last look at he and meet his eye, her delicate neck
and cheek and purely cut lip never have more of that untarnished beauty
which touch as in spring-time and infancy and all sweet freshness.
it touch Lydgate now, and mingle the early moment of his love for
she with all the other memory which be stir in this crisis of
deep trouble. he lay his ample hand softly on her, saying--
"Dear!" with the linger utterance which affection give to the word.
Rosamond too be still under the power of that same past, and her
husband be still in part the lydgate whose approval have stir
delight. she put his hair lightly away from his forehead, then lay
her other hand on his, and be conscious of forgive he.
"I be oblige to tell you what will hurt you, rosy. but there be
thing which husband and wife must think of together. I dare say it
have occur to you already that I be short of money."
Lydgate pause; but Rosamond turn her neck and look at a vase on
the mantel-piece.
"I be not able to pay for all the thing we have to get before we be
marry, and there have be expense since which I have be oblige
to meet. the consequence be, there be a large debt at Brassing--three
hundred and eighty pound--which have be press on I a good while,
and in fact we be get deep every day, for people donot pay I
the fast because other want the money. I take pain to keep it from
you while you be not well; but now we must think together about it,
and you must help I."
"what can--I--do, Tertius?" say Rosamond, turn her eye on he
again. that little speech of four word, like so many other in all
language, be capable by varied vocal inflection of express all
state of mind from helpless dimness to exhaustive argumentative
perception, from the complete self-devote fellowship to the most
neutral aloofness. Rosamond's thin utterance throw into the word
"what can--I--do!" as much neutrality as they could hold. they fall
like a mortal chill on Lydgate's rouse tenderness. he do not storm
in indignation--he feel too sad a sinking of the heart. and when he
speak again it be more in the tone of a man who force himself to
fulfil a task.
"it be necessary for you to know, because I have to give security for a
time, and a man must come to make an inventory of the furniture."
Rosamond color deeply. "have you not ask papa for money?" she
say, as soon as she could speak.
"no."
"then I must ask he!" she say, release her hand from Lydgate's,
and rise to stand at two yard' distance from he.
"no, Rosy," say Lydgate, decisively. "it be too late to do that. the
inventory will be begin to-morrow. remember it be a mere security: it
will make no difference: it be a temporary affair. I insist upon it
that your father shall not know, unless I choose to tell he," add
Lydgate, with a more peremptory emphasis.
this certainly be unkind, but Rosamond have throw he back on evil
expectation as to what she would do in the way of quiet steady
disobedience. the unkindness seem unpardonable to she: she be not
give to weeping and dislike it, but now her chin and lip begin to
tremble and the tear well up. perhaps it be not possible for
Lydgate, under the double stress of outward material difficulty and of
his own proud resistance to humiliating consequence, to imagine fully
what this sudden trial be to a young creature who have know nothing
but indulgence, and whose dream have all be of new indulgence, more
exactly to her taste. but he do wish to spare she as much as he
could, and her tear cut he to the heart. he could not speak again
immediately; but Rosamond do not go on sobbing: she try to conquer
her agitation and wipe away her tear, continue to look before she
at the mantel-piece.
"try not to grieve, darling," say Lydgate, turn his eye up towards
she. that she have choose to move away from he in this moment of her
trouble make everything hard to say, but he must absolutely go on.
"we must brace ourselves to do what be necessary. it be I who have
be in fault: I ought to have see that I could not afford-to live in
this way. but many thing have tell against I in my practice, and it
really just now have ebb to a low point. I may recover it, but in the
mean time we must pull up--we must change our way of living. we shall
weather it. when I have give this security I shall have time to look
about I; and you be so clever that if you turn your mind to manage
you will school I into carefulness. I have be a thoughtless rascal
about square price--but come, dear, sit down and forgive I."
Lydgate be bow his neck under the yoke like a creature who have
talon, but who have Reason too, which often reduce we to meekness.
when he have speak the last word in an implore tone, Rosamond
return to the chair by his side. his self-blame give she some hope
that he would attend to her opinion, and she said--
"why can you not put off have the inventory make? you can send the
man away to-morrow when they come."
"I shall not send they away," say Lydgate, the peremptoriness rise
again. be it of any use to explain?
"if we leave Middlemarch? there would of course be a sale, and that
would do as well."
"but we be not go to leave Middlemarch."
"I be sure, Tertius, it would be much well to do so. why can we not
go to London? or near Durham, where your family be know?"
"we can go nowhere without money, Rosamond."
"your friend would not wish you to be without money. and surely these
odious tradesman might be make to understand that, and to wait, if you
would make proper representation to they."
"this be idle Rosamond," say Lydgate, angrily. "you must learn to
take my judgment on question you donot understand. I have make
necessary arrangement, and they must be carry out. as to friend, I
have no expectation whatever from they, and shall not ask they for
anything."
Rosamond sit perfectly still. the thought in her mind be that if she
have know how Lydgate would behave, she would never have marry he.
"we have no time to waste now on unnecessary word, dear," say
Lydgate, try to be gentle again. "there be some detail that I
want to consider with you. Dover say he will take a good deal of the
plate back again, and any of the jewellery we like. he really behave
very well."
"be we to go without spoon and fork then?" say Rosamond, whose very
lip seem to get thin with the thinness of her utterance. she be
determined to make no further resistance or suggestion.
"oh no, dear!" say Lydgate. "but look here," he continue, draw a
paper from his pocket and opening it; "here be Dover's account. see, I
have mark a number of article, which if we return they would
reduce the amount by thirty pound and more. I have not mark any
of the jewellery." Lydgate have really feel this point of the jewellery
very bitter to himself; but he have overcome the feeling by severe
argument. he could not propose to Rosamond that she should return any
particular present of his, but he have tell himself that he be bind to
put Dover's offer before she, and her inward prompt might make the
affair easy.
"it be useless for I to look, Tertius," say Rosamond, calmly; "you
will return what you please." she would not turn her eye on the
paper, and Lydgate, flush up to the root of his hair, draw it back
and let it fall on his knee. meanwhile Rosamond quietly go out of
the room, leave Lydgate helpless and wonder. be she not come
back? it seem that she have no more identify herself with he than
if they have be creature of different specie and oppose interest.
he toss his head and thrust his hand deep into his pocket with a
sort of vengeance. there be still science--there be still good
object to work for. he must give a tug still--all the strong
because other satisfaction be go.
but the door open and rosamond re-enter. she carry the leather
box contain the amethyst, and a tiny ornamental basket which
contain other box, and lay they on the chair where she have be
sit, she say, with perfect propriety in her air--
"this be all the jewellery you ever give I. you can return what you
like of it, and of the plate also. you will not, of course, expect I
to stay at home to-morrow. I shall go to papa's."
to many woman the look Lydgate cast at she would have be more
terrible than one of anger: it have in it a despairing acceptance of the
distance she be place between they.
"and when shall you come back again?" he say, with a bitter edge on
his accent.
"oh, in the evening. of course I shall not mention the subject to
mamma." Rosamond be convince that no woman could behave more
irreproachably than she be behave; and she go to sit down at her
work-table. Lydgate sit meditate a minute or two, and the result be
that he say, with some of the old emotion in his tone--
"now we have be unite, rosy, you should not leave I to myself in
the first trouble that have come."
"certainly not," say Rosamond; "I shall do everything it become I to
do."
"it be not right that the thing should be leave to servant, or that I
should have to speak to they about it. and I shall be oblige to go
out--I donot know how early. I understand your shrinking from the
humiliation of these money affair. but, my dear Rosamond, as a
question of pride, which I feel just as much as you can, it be surely
well to manage the thing ourselves, and let the servant see as
little of it as possible; and since you be my wife, there be no
hinder your share in my disgrace--if there be disgrace."
Rosamond do not answer immediately, but at last she say, "very well,
I will stay at home."
"I shall not touch these jewel, Rosy. take they away again. but I
will write out a list of plate that we may return, and that can be
pack up and send at once."
"the servant will know _that_," say Rosamond, with the slight
touch of sarcasm.
"well, we must meet some disagreeable as necessity. where be the
ink, I wonder?" say Lydgate, rise, and throw the account on the
large table where he mean to write.
Rosamond go to reach the inkstand, and after set it on the table
be go to turn away, when Lydgate, who be stand close by, put
his arm round she and draw she towards he, saying--
"Come, darling, let we make the good of thing. it will only be for a
time, I hope, that we shall have to be stingy and particular. kiss I."
his native warm-heartedness take a great deal of quenching, and it be a
part of manliness for a husband to feel keenly the fact that an
inexperienced girl have get into trouble by marry he. she receive
his kiss and return it faintly, and in this way an appearance of
accord be recover for the time. but Lydgate could not help look
forward with dread to the inevitable future discussion about
expenditure and the necessity for a complete change in their way of
live.
CHAPTER LIX.
they say of old the Soul have human shape,
but small, subtler than the fleshly self,
so wander forth for air when it please.
and see! beside her cherub-face there float
a pale-lip form aerial whispering
its prompting in that little shell her ear."
News be often disperse as thoughtlessly and effectively as that pollen
which the bee carry off (have no idea how powdery they be) when
they be buzz in search of their particular nectar. this fine
comparison have reference to Fred Vincy, who on that evening at Lowick
Parsonage hear a lively discussion among the lady on the news which
their old servant have get from Tantripp concern Mr. Casaubon's
strange mention of Mr. Ladislaw in a codicil to his will make not long
before his death. Miss Winifred be astounded to find that her brother
have know the fact before, and observe that Camden be the most
wonderful man for know thing and not tell they; whereupon Mary
Garth say that the codicil have perhaps get mix up with the habit of
spider, which Miss Winifred never would listen to. Mrs. Farebrother
consider that the news have something to do with their have only
once see Mr. Ladislaw at Lowick, and Miss Noble make many small
compassionate mewing.
Fred know little and care less about Ladislaw and the casaubon, and
his mind never recur to that discussion till one day call on
Rosamond at his mother's request to deliver a message as he pass, he
happen to see Ladislaw go away. Fred and Rosamond have little to
say to each other now that marriage have remove she from collision with
the unpleasantness of brother, and especially now that he have take
what she hold the stupid and even reprehensible step of give up the
Church to take to such a business as Mr. Garth's. hence Fred talk by
preference of what he consider indifferent news, and "a propos of
that young Ladislaw" mention what he have hear at Lowick Parsonage.
now Lydgate, like Mr. Farebrother, know a great deal more than he tell,
and when he have once be set think about the relation between will
and Dorothea his conjecture have go beyond the fact. he imagine
that there be a passionate attachment on both side, and this strike
he as much too serious to gossip about. he remember Will's
irritability when he have mention Mrs. Casaubon, and be the more
circumspect. on the whole his surmise, in addition to what he know of
the fact, increase his friendliness and tolerance towards Ladislaw,
and make he understand the vacillation which keep he at Middlemarch
after he have say that he should go away. it be significant of the
separateness between Lydgate's mind and Rosamond's that he have no
impulse to speak to she on the subject; indeed, he do not quite trust
her reticence towards will. and he be right there; though he have no
vision of the way in which her mind would act in urge she to speak.
when she repeat Fred's news to Lydgate, he say, "take care you donot
drop the faint hint to Ladislaw, Rosy. he be likely to fly out as
if you insult he. of course it be a painful affair."
Rosamond turn her neck and pat her hair, look the image of
placid indifference. but the next time will come when Lydgate be
away, she speak archly about his not go to London as he have
threaten.
"I know all about it. I have a confidential little bird," say she,
show very pretty air of her head over the bit of work hold high
between her active finger. "there be a powerful magnet in this
neighborhood."
"to be sure there be. nobody know that well than you," say will,
with light gallantry, but inwardly prepare to be angry.
"it be really the most charming romance: Mr. Casaubon jealous, and
foresee that there be no one else whom Mrs. Casaubon would so much
like to marry, and no one who would so much like to marry she as a
certain gentleman; and then lay a plan to spoil all by make she
forfeit her property if she do marry that gentleman--and then--and
then--and then--oh, I have no doubt the end will be thoroughly
romantic."
"Great God! what do you mean?" say will, flush over face and ear,
his feature seem to change as if he have have a violent shake.
"donot joke; tell I what you mean."
"you donot really know?" say Rosamond, no long playful, and desire
nothing well than to tell in order that she might evoke effect.
"no!" he return, impatiently.
"donot know that Mr. Casaubon have leave it in his will that if Mrs.
Casaubon marry you she be to forfeit all her property?"
"how do you know that it be true?" say will, eagerly.
"my brother Fred hear it from the Farebrothers." will start up from
his chair and reach his hat.
"I dare say she like you well than the property," say Rosamond,
look at he from a distance.
"pray donot say any more about it," say will, in a hoarse undertone
extremely unlike his usual light voice. "it be a foul insult to she
and to I." then he sit down absently, look before he, but see
nothing.
"now you be angry with _I_," say Rosamond. "it be too bad to bear
_I_ malice. you ought to be oblige to I for tell you."
"so I be," say will, abruptly, speak with that kind of double soul
which belong to dreamer who answer question.
"I expect to hear of the marriage," say Rosamond, playfully.
"never! you will never hear of the marriage!"
with those word utter impetuously, will rose, put out his hand to
Rosamond, still with the air of a somnambulist, and go away.
when he be go, Rosamond leave her chair and walk to the other end
of the room, lean when she get there against a chiffonniere, and
look out of the window wearily. she be oppress by ennui, and by
that dissatisfaction which in woman's mind be continually turn into
a trivial jealousy, refer to no real claim, spring from no
deep passion than the vague exactingness of egoism, and yet capable
of impel action as well as speech. "there really be nothing to
care for much," say poor Rosamond inwardly, think of the family at
Quallingham, who do not write to she; and that perhaps Tertius when he
come home would tease she about expense. she have already secretly
disobey he by ask her father to help they, and he have end
decisively by say, "I be more likely to want help myself."
CHAPTER LX.
good phrase be surely, and ever be, very commendable.
--Justice Shallow.
a few day afterwards--it be already the end of August--there be an
occasion which cause some excitement in Middlemarch: the public, if it
choose, be to have the advantage of buying, under the distinguished
auspex of Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, the furniture, book, and picture
which anybody might see by the handbill to be the good in every kind,
belong to Edwin Larcher, Esq. this be not one of the sale
indicate the depression of trade; on the contrary, it be due to Mr.
Larcher's great success in the carrying business, which warrant his
purchase of a mansion near Riverston already furnish in high style by
an illustrious Spa physician--furnish indeed with such large
frameful of expensive flesh-painting in the dining-room, that Mrs.
Larcher be nervous until reassure by find the subject to be
Scriptural. hence the fine opportunity to purchaser which be well
point out in the handbill of Mr. Borthrop Trumbull, whose
acquaintance with the history of art enable he to state that the hall
furniture, to be sell without reserve, comprise a piece of carve by
a contemporary of Gibbons.
at Middlemarch in those time a large sale be regard as a kind of
festival. there be a table spread with the good cold eatable, as at
a superior funeral; and facility be offer for that
generous-drinking of cheerful glass which might lead to generous and
cheerful bidding for undesirable article. Mr. Larcher's sale be the
more attractive in the fine weather because the house stand just at the
end of the town, with a garden and stable attach, in that pleasant
issue from Middlemarch call the London Road, which be also the road
to the New Hospital and to Mr. Bulstrode's retired residence, know as
the Shrubs. in short, the auction be as good as a fair, and draw all
class with leisure at command: to some, who risk make bid in
order simply to raise price, it be almost equal to bet at the
race. the second day, when the good furniture be to be sell,
"everybody" be there; even Mr. Thesiger, the rector of St. Peter's,
have look in for a short time, wish to buy the carved table, and
have rub elbow with Mr. Bambridge and Mr. Horrock. there be a
wreath of Middlemarch lady accommodate with seat round the large
table in the dining-room, where Mr. Borthrop Trumbull be mount with
desk and hammer; but the row chiefly of masculine face behind be
often vary by incoming and outgoing both from the door and the
large bow-window opening on to the lawn.
"everybody" that day do not include Mr. Bulstrode, whose health could
not well endure crowd and draught. but Mrs. Bulstrode have
particularly wish to have a certain picture--a "supper at Emmaus,"
attribute in the catalogue to Guido; and at the last moment before the
day of the sale Mr. Bulstrode have call at the office of the
"Pioneer," of which he be now one of the proprietor, to beg of Mr.
Ladislaw as a great favor that he would obligingly use his remarkable
knowledge of picture on behalf of Mrs. Bulstrode, and judge of the
value of this particular painting--"if," add the scrupulously polite
banker, "attendance at the sale would not interfere with the
arrangement for your departure, which I know be imminent."
this proviso might have sound rather satirically in Will's ear if he
have be in a mood to care about such satire. it refer to an
understanding enter into many week before with the proprietor of
the paper, that he should be at liberty any day he please to hand over
the management to the subeditor whom he have be train; since he
wish finally to quit Middlemarch. but indefinite vision of ambition
be weak against the ease of do what be habitual or beguilingly
agreeable; and we all know the difficulty of carry out a resolve
when we secretly long that it may turn out to be unnecessary. in such
state of mind the most incredulous person have a private leaning
towards miracle: impossible to conceive how our wish could be
fulfil, still--very wonderful thing have happen! will do not
confess this weakness to himself, but he linger. what be the use of
go to London at that time of the year? the Rugby man who would
remember he be not there; and so far as political writing be
concern, he would rather for a few week go on with the "Pioneer."
at the present moment, however, when Mr. Bulstrode be speak to he,
he have both a strengthened resolve to go and an equally strong resolve
not to go till he have once more see Dorothea. hence he reply that
he have reason for defer his departure a little, and would be happy
to go to the sale.
will be in a defiant mood, his consciousness be deeply sting with
the thought that the people who look at he probably know a fact
tantamount to an accusation against he as a fellow with low design
which be to be frustrate by a disposal of property. like most
people who assert their freedom with regard to conventional
distinction, he be prepared to be sudden and quick at quarrel with any
one who might hint that he have personal reason for that assertion--that
there be anything in his blood, his bearing, or his character to
which he give the mask of an opinion. when he be under an irritate
impression of this kind he would go about for day with a defiant look,
the color change in his transparent skin as if he be on the qui
vive, watch for something which he have to dart upon.
this expression be peculiarly noticeable in he at the sale, and those
who have only see he in his mood of gentle oddity or of bright
enjoyment would have be strike with a contrast. he be not sorry to
have this occasion for appear in public before the Middlemarch
tribe of Toller, Hackbutt, and the rest, who look down on he as an
adventurer, and be in a state of brutal ignorance about Dante--who
sneer at his polish blood, and be themselves of a breed very much
in need of cross. he stand in a conspicuous place not far from the
auctioneer, with a fore-finger in each side-pocket and his head throw
backward, not care to speak to anybody, though he have be cordially
welcome as a connoiss_ure_ by Mr. Trumbull, who be enjoy the
utmost activity of his great faculty.
and surely among all man whose vocation require they to exhibit their
power of speech, the happy be a prosperous provincial auctioneer
keenly alive to his own joke and sensible of his encyclopedic
knowledge. some saturnine, sour-blooded person might object to be
constantly insist on the merit of all article from boot-jack to
"Berghems;" but Mr. Borthrop Trumbull have a kindly liquid in his vein;
he be an admirer by nature, and would have like to have the universe
under his hammer, feel that it would go at a high figure for his
recommendation.
meanwhile Mrs. Larcher's drawing-room furniture be enough for he.
when will Ladislaw have come in, a second fender, say to have be
forget in its right place, suddenly claim the auctioneer's
enthusiasm, which he distribute on the equitable principle of praise
those thing most which be most in need of praise. the fender be of
polished steel, with much lancet-shape open-work and a sharp edge.
"now, lady," say he, "I shall appeal to you. here be a fender which
at any other sale would hardly be offer with out reserve, be, as I
may say, for quality of steel and quaintness of design, a kind of
thing"--here Mr. Trumbull drop his voice and become slightly nasal,
trim his outline with his left finger--"that might not fall in
with ordinary taste. allow I to tell you that by-and-by this style
of workmanship will be the only one in vogue--half-a-crown, you say?
thank you--go at half-a-crown, this characteristic fender; and I
have particular information that the antique style be very much seek
after in high quarter. three shilling--three-and-sixpence--hold it
well up, Joseph! look, lady, at the chastity of the design--I have
no doubt myself that it be turn out in the last century! four
shilling, Mr. Mawmsey?--four shilling."
"itbe not a thing I would put in _my_ drawing-room," say Mrs. Mawmsey,
audibly, for the warning of the rash husband. "I wonder _at_ Mrs.
Larcher. every blessed child's head that fall against it would be cut
in two. the edge be like a knife."
"quite true," rejoin Mr. Trumbull, quickly, "and most uncommonly
useful to have a fender at hand that will cut, if you have a leather
shoe-tie or a bit of string that want cut and no knife at hand:
many a man have be leave hang because there be no knife to cut he
down. gentleman, herebe a fender that if you have the misfortune to
hang yourself would cut you down in no time--with astonishing
celerity--four-and-sixpence--five--five-and-sixpence--an appropriate
thing for a spare bedroom where there be a four-poster and a guest a
little out of his mind--six shilling--thank you, Mr. Clintup--go
at six shilling--go--go!" the auctioneer's glance, which have
be search round he with a preternatural susceptibility to all
sign of bidding, here drop on the paper before he, and his voice
too drop into a tone of indifferent despatch as he say, "Mr.
Clintup. be handy, Joseph."
"it be worth six shilling to have a fender you could always tell that
joke on," say Mr. Clintup, laugh low and apologetically to his next
neighbor. he be a diffident though distinguish nurseryman, and
fear that the audience might regard his bid as a foolish one.
meanwhile Joseph have bring a trayful of small article. "now,
lady," say Mr. Trumbull, take up one of the article, "this tray
contain a very recherchy lot--a collection of trifle for the
drawing-room table--and trifle make the sum _of_ human thing--nothing
more important than trifles--(ye, Mr. Ladislaw, yes, by-and-by)--but
pass the tray round, Joseph--these bijoux must be examine, lady.
this I have in my hand be an ingenious contrivance--a sort of
practical rebus, I may call it: here, you see, it look like an elegant
heart-shape box, portable--for the pocket; there, again, it become
like a splendid double flower--an ornament for the table; and now"--mr.
Trumbull allow the flower to fall alarmingly into string of
heart-shape leaves--"a book of riddle! no less than five hundred
print in a beautiful red. gentleman, if I have less of a conscience,
I should not wish you to bid high for this lot--I have a longing for
it myself. what can promote innocent mirth, and I may say virtue, more
than a good riddle?--it hinder profane language, and attach a man to
the society of refined female. this ingenious article itself, without
the elegant domino-box, card-basket, &c., ought alone to give a high
price to the lot. carry in the pocket it might make an individual
welcome in any society. four shilling, sir?--four shilling for this
remarkable collection of riddle with the et caetera. here be a
sample: 'how must you spell honey to make it catch lady-bird?
answer--money.' you hear?--lady-bird--honey money. this be an
amusement to sharpen the intellect; it have a sting--it have what we call
satire, and wit without indecency. four-and-sixpence--five shilling."
the bidding run on with warming rivalry. Mr. Bowyer be a bidder, and
this be too exasperating. Bowyer couldnot afford it, and only want
to hinder every other man from make a figure. the current carry
even Mr. Horrock with it, but this committal of himself to an opinion
fall from he with so little sacrifice of his neutral expression, that
the bid might not have be detect as his but for the friendly oath
of Mr. Bambridge, who want to know what Horrock would do with blasted
stuff only fit for haberdasher give over to that state of perdition
which the horse-dealer so cordially recognize in the majority of
earthly existence. the lot be finally knock down at a guinea to
Mr. Spilkins, a young Slender of the neighborhood, who be reckless
with his pocket-money and feel his want of memory for riddle.
"Come, Trumbull, this be too bad--you've be put some old maid's
rubbish into the sale," murmur Mr. Toller, get close to the
auctioneer. "I want to see how the print go, and I must be off soon."
"_Im_mediately, Mr. Toller. it be only an act of benevolence which
your noble heart would approve. Joseph! quick with the print--lot
235. now, gentleman, you who be connoiss_ure_, you be go to have
a treat. here be an engraving of the Duke of Wellington surround by
his staff on the Field of Waterloo; and notwithstanding recent event
which have, as it be, envelop our great Hero in a cloud, I will be
bold to say--for a man in my line must not be blow about by political
wind--that a fine subject--of the modern order, belong to our own
time and epoch--the understanding of man could hardly conceive: angel
might, perhaps, but not man, sir, not man."
"who paint it?" say Mr. Powderell, much impressed.
"it be a proof before the letter, Mr. Powderell--the painter be not
know," answer Trumbull, with a certain gaspingness in his last
word, after which he purse up his lip and star round he.
"Iwill bid a pound!" say Mr. Powderell, in a tone of resolve emotion,
as of a man ready to put himself in the breach. whether from awe or
pity, nobody raise the price on he.
next come two dutch print which Mr. Toller have be eager for, and
after he have secure they he go away. other print, and afterwards
some painting, be sell to lead middlemarcher who have come with a
special desire for they, and there be a more active movement of the
audience in and out; some, who have buy what they want, go away,
other come in either quite newly or from a temporary visit to the
refreshment which be spread under the marquee on the lawn. it be
this marquee that Mr. Bambridge be bent on buying, and he appear to
like look inside it frequently, as a foretaste of its possession.
on the last occasion of his return from it he be observe to bring
with he a new companion, a stranger to Mr. Trumbull and every one
else, whose appearance, however, lead to the supposition that he might
be a relative of the horse-dealer's--also "give to indulgence." his
large whisker, impose swagger, and swing of the leg, make he a
striking figure; but his suit of black, rather shabby at the edge,
cause the prejudicial inference that he be not able to afford himself
as much indulgence as he like.
"who be it youhave pick up, Bam?" say Mr. Horrock, aside.
"ask he yourself," return Mr. Bambridge. "he say hewould just turn
in from the road."
Mr. Horrock eye the stranger, who be lean back against his stick
with one hand, use his toothpick with the other, and look about
he with a certain restlessness apparently under the silence impose on
he by circumstance.
at length the "Supper at Emmaus" be bring forward, to Wills immense
relief, for he be get so tired of the proceeding that he have
draw back a little and lean his shoulder against the wall just
behind the auctioneer. he now come forward again, and his eye catch
the conspicuous stranger, who, rather to his surprise, be star at
he markedly. but Will be immediately appeal to by Mr. Trumbull.
"yes, Mr. Ladislaw, yes; this interest you as a connoiss_ure_, I
think. it be some pleasure," the auctioneer go on with a rise
fervor, "to have a picture like this to show to a company of lady and
gentleman--a picture worth any sum to an individual whose mean be on
a level with his judgment. it be a painting of the italian school--by
the celebrated Guydo, the great painter in the world, the chief of
the Old Masters, as they be call--I take it, because they be up
to a thing or two beyond most of we--in possession of secret now lose
to the bulk of mankind. let I tell you, gentleman, I have see a
great many picture by the Old Masters, and they be not all up to this
mark--some of they be dark than you might like and not family
subject. but here be a Guydo--the frame alone be worth pound--which
any lady might be proud to hang up--a suitable thing for what we call a
refectory in a charitable institution, if any gentleman of the
Corporation wish to show his munifi_cence_. turn it a little, sir?
yes. Joseph, turn it a little towards Mr. Ladislaw--Mr. Ladislaw,
have be abroad, understand the merit of these thing, you observe."
all eye be for a moment turn towards Will, who say, coolly, "five
pound." the auctioneer burst out in deep remonstrance.
"ah! Mr. Ladislaw! the frame alone be worth that. lady and
gentleman, for the credit of the town! suppose it should be discover
hereafter that a gem of art have be amongst we in this town, and
nobody in Middlemarch awake to it. five guineas--five seven-six--five
ten. still, lady, still! it be a gem, and 'full many a gem,' as the
poet say, have be allow to go at a nominal price because the public
know no well, because it be offer in circle where there be--I
be go to say a low feeling, but no!--six pound--six guinea--a
Guydo of the first order go at six guinea--it be an insult to
religion, lady; it touch we all as Christians, gentleman, that a
subject like this should go at such a low figure--six pound
ten--seven--"
the bidding be brisk, and will continue to share in it, remember
that Mrs. Bulstrode have a strong wish for the picture, and think
that he might stretch the price to twelve pound. but it be knock
down to he at ten guineas, whereupon he push his way towards the
bow-window and go out. he choose to go under the marquee to get a
glass of water, be hot and thirsty: it be empty of other visitor,
and he ask the woman in attendance to fetch he some fresh water; but
before she be well go he be annoy to see enter the florid
stranger who have star at he. it strike will at this moment that the
man might be one of those political parasitic insect of the bloated
kind who have once or twice claim acquaintance with he as have
hear he speak on the Reform question, and who might think of get
a shilling by news. in this light his person, already rather heat
to behold on a summer's day, appear the more disagreeable; and will,
half-seat on the elbow of a garden-chair, turn his eye carefully
away from the comer. but this signify little to our acquaintance Mr.
Raffles, who never hesitate to thrust himself on unwilling
observation, if it suit his purpose to do so. he move a step or two
till he be in front of will, and say with full-mouthed haste, "Excuse
I, Mr. Ladislaw--be your mother's name Sarah Dunkirk?"
will, start to his foot, move backward a step, frown, and say
with some fierceness, "yes, sir, it be. and what be that to you?"
it be in Will's nature that the first spark it throw out be a direct
answer of the question and a challenge of the consequence. to have
say, "what be that to you?" in the first instance, would have seem
like shuffle--as if he mind who know anything about his origin!
raffle on his side have not the same eagerness for a collision which
be imply in Ladislaw's threatening air. the slim young fellow with
his girl's complexion look like a tiger-cat ready to spring on he.
under such circumstance Mr. Raffles's pleasure in annoy his company
be keep in abeyance.
"no offence, my good sir, no offence! I only remember your mother--know
she when she be a girl. but it be your father that you feature,
sir. I have the pleasure of see your father too. parent alive, Mr.
Ladislaw?"
"no!" thunder Will, in the same attitude as before.
"should be glad to do you a service, Mr. Ladislaw--by Jove, I should!
Hope to meet again."
Hereupon Raffles, who have lift his hat with the last word, turn
himself round with a swing of his leg and walk away. will look
after he a moment, and could see that he do not re-enter the
auction-room, but appear to be walk towards the road. for an
instant he think that he have be foolish not to let the man go on
talking;--but no! on the whole he prefer do without knowledge
from that source.
later in the evening, however, Raffles overtake he in the street, and
appear either to have forget the roughness of his former
reception or to intend avenge it by a forgiving familiarity, greet
he jovially and walk by his side, remark at first on the
pleasantness of the town and neighborhood. will suspect that the man
have be drink and be consider how to shake he off when Raffles
said--
"Ihave be abroad myself, Mr. Ladislaw--I've see the world--use to
parley-vous a little. it be at Boulogne I see your father--a most
uncommon likeness you be of he, by Jove! mouth--nose--eye--hair
turn off your brow just like his--a little in the foreign style.
John Bull donot do much of that. but your father be very ill when I
see he. Lord, lord! hand you might see through. you be a small
youngster then. do he get well?"
"no," say will, curtly.
"ah! well! Ihave often wonder what become of your mother. she run
away from her friend when she be a young lass--a proud-spirited
lass, and pretty, by Jove! I know the reason why she run away," say
Raffles, wink slowly as he look sideways at Will.
"you know nothing dishonorable of she, sir," say will, turn on he
rather savagely. but Mr. Raffles just now be not sensitive to shade
of manner.
"not a bit!" say he, toss his head decisively "she be a little too
honorable to like her friend--that be it!" here Raffles again wink
slowly. "Lord bless you, I know all about them--a little in what you
may call the respectable thieving line--the high style of
receive-house--none of your hole and corner--first-rate. slap-up
shop, high profit and no mistake. but Lord! Sarah would have know
nothing about it--a dash young lady she be--fine
boarding-school--fit for a lord's wife--only Archie Duncan throw it at
she out of spite, because she would have nothing to do with he. and
so she run away from the whole concern. I travel for them, sir, in a
gentlemanly way--at a high salary. they donot mind she run away
at first--godly folk, sir, very godly--and she be for the stage. the
son be alive then, and the daughter be at a discount. Hallo! here we
be at the Blue Bull. what do you say, Mr. Ladislaw?--shall we turn in
and have a glass?"
"no, I must say good evening," say will, dash up a passage which
lead into Lowick Gate, and almost run to get out of Raffles's reach.
he walk a long while on the Lowick road away from the town, glad of
the starlit darkness when it come. he feel as if he have have dirt cast
on he amidst shout of scorn. there be this to confirm the fellow's
statement--that his mother never would tell he the reason why she have
run away from her family.
well! what be he, Will Ladislaw, the bad, suppose the truth about
that family to be the ugly? his mother have brave hardship in order
to separate herself from it. but if Dorothea's friend have know this
story--if the Chettams have know it--they would have have a fine color
to give their suspicion a welcome ground for think he unfit to
come near she. however, let they suspect what they please, they would
find themselves in the wrong. they would find out that the blood in
his vein be as free from the taint of meanness as theirs.
CHAPTER LXI.
"inconsistency," answer Imlac, "cannot both be right,
but impute to man they may both be true."--Rasselas.
the same night, when Mr. Bulstrode return from a journey to Brassing
on business, his good wife meet he in the entrance-hall and draw he
into his private sitting-room.
"Nicholas," she say, fix her honest eye upon he anxiously, "there
have be such a disagreeable man here ask for you--it have make I
quite uncomfortable."
"what kind of man, my dear," say Mr. Bulstrode, dreadfully certain of
the answer.
"a red-faced man with large whisker, and most impudent in his manner.
he declare he be an old friend of your, and say you would be sorry
not to see he. he want to wait for you here, but I tell he he
could see you at the Bank to-morrow morning. Most impudent he
was!--stare at I, and say his friend Nick have luck in wife. I
donot believe he would have go away, if Blucher have not happen to
break his chain and come run round on the gravel--for I be in the
garden; so I say, 'youwould well go away--the dog be very fierce, and I
cannot hold he.' do you really know anything of such a man?"
"I believe I know who he be, my dear," say Mr. Bulstrode, in his usual
subdue voice, "an unfortunate dissolute wretch, whom I help too much
in day go by. however, I presume you will not be trouble by he
again. he will probably come to the Bank--to beg, doubtless."
no more be say on the subject until the next day, when Mr. Bulstrode
have return from the town and be dress for dinner. his wife, not
sure that he be come home, look into his dressing-room and see he
with his coat and cravat off, lean one arm on a chest of drawer and
star absently at the ground. he start nervously and look up as
she enter.
"you look very ill, Nicholas. be there anything the matter?"
"I have a good deal of pain in my head," say Mr. Bulstrode, who be so
frequently ail that his wife be always ready to believe in this
cause of depression.
"sit down and let I sponge it with vinegar."
physically Mr. Bulstrode do not want the vinegar, but morally the
affectionate attention soothe he. though always polite, it be his
habit to receive such service with marital coolness, as his wife's
duty. but to-day, while she be bend over he, he say, "you be
very good, Harriet," in a tone which have something new in it to she
ear; she do not know exactly what the novelty be, but her woman's
solicitude shape itself into a dart thought that he might be go
to have an illness.
"have anything worry you?" she say. "do that man come to you at the
Bank?"
"yes; it be as I have suppose. he be a man who at one time might have
do well. but he have sink into a drunken debauch creature."
"be he quite go away?" say Mrs. Bulstrode, anxiously but for certain
reason she refrain from add, "it be very disagreeable to hear
he call himself a friend of your." at that moment she would not
have like to say anything which imply her habitual consciousness
that her husband's early connection be not quite on a level with
her own. not that she know much about they. that her husband have at
first be employ in a bank, that he have afterwards enter into what
he call city business and gain a fortune before he be
three-and-thirty, that he have marry a widow who be much old than
himself--a Dissenter, and in other way probably of that
disadvantageous quality usually perceptible in a first wife if inquire
into with the dispassionate judgment of a second--be almost as much as
she have care to learn beyond the glimpse which Mr. Bulstrode's
narrative occasionally give of his early bent towards religion, his
inclination to be a preacher, and his association with missionary and
philanthropic effort. she believe in he as an excellent man whose
piety carry a peculiar eminence in belong to a layman, whose
influence have turn her own mind toward seriousness, and whose share
of perishable good have be the mean of raise her own position. but
she also like to think that it be well in every sense for Mr.
Bulstrode to have win the hand of Harriet Vincy; whose family be
undeniable in a Middlemarch light--a well light surely than any
throw in London thoroughfare or dissent chapel-yard. the
unreformed provincial mind distrust London; and while true religion
be everywhere save, honest Mrs. Bulstrode be convince that to be
save in the Church be more respectable. she so much wish to ignore
towards other that her husband have ever be a London Dissenter, that
she like to keep it out of sight even in talk to he. he be quite
aware of this; indeed in some respect he be rather afraid of this
ingenuous wife, whose imitative piety and native worldliness be
equally sincere, who have nothing to be ashamed of, and whom he have
marry out of a thorough inclination still subsist. but his fear
be such as belong to a man who care to maintain his recognize
supremacy: the loss of high consideration from his wife, as from every
one else who do not clearly hate he out of enmity to the truth, would
be as the beginning of death to he. when she said--
"be he quite go away?"
"oh, I trust so," he answer, with an effort to throw as much sober
unconcern into his tone as possible!
but in truth Mr. Bulstrode be very far from a state of quiet trust.
in the interview at the Bank, Raffles have make it evident that his
eagerness to torment be almost as strong in he as any other greed.
he have frankly say that he have turn out of the way to come to
Middlemarch, just to look about he and see whether the neighborhood
would suit he to live in. he have certainly have a few debt to pay
more than he expect, but the two hundred pound be not go yet: a
cool five-and-twenty would suffice he to go away with for the present.
what he have want chiefly be to see his friend Nick and family, and
know all about the prosperity of a man to whom he be so much attach.
by-and-by he might come back for a long stay. this time Raffles
decline to be "see off the premise," as he express it--decline to
quit Middlemarch under Bulstrode's eye. he mean to go by coach the
next day--if he choose.
Bulstrode feel himself helpless. neither threat nor coax could
avail: he could not count on any persistent fear nor on any promise.
on the contrary, he feel a cold certainty at his heart that
Raffles--unless providence send death to hinder he--would come back
to Middlemarch before long. and that certainty be a terror.
it be not that he be in danger of legal punishment or of beggary: he
be in danger only of see disclose to the judgment of his neighbor
and the mournful perception of his wife certain fact of his past life
which would render he an object of scorn and an opprobrium of the
religion with which he have diligently associate himself. the terror
of be judge sharpen the memory: it send an inevitable glare over
that long-unvisite past which have be habitually recall only in
general phrase. even without memory, the life be bind into one by a
zone of dependence in growth and decay; but intense memory force a man
to own his blameworthy past. with memory set smarting like a reopen
wound, a man's past be not simply a dead history, an outworn
preparation of the present: it be not a repent error shake loose
from the life: it be a still quiver part of himself, bring
shudder and bitter flavor and the tingling of a merited shame.
into this second life Bulstrode's past have now rise, only the
pleasure of it seem to have lose their quality. night and day,
without interruption save of brief sleep which only weave retrospect and
fear into a fantastic present, he feel the scene of his early life
come between he and everything else, as obstinately as when we look
through the window from a light room, the object we turn our back
on be still before we, instead of the grass and the tree the
successive event inward and outward be there in one view: though
each might be dwelt on in turn, the rest still keep their hold in the
consciousness.
once more he see himself the young banker's clerk, with an agreeable
person, as clever in figure as he be fluent in speech and fond of
theological definition: an eminent though young member of a Calvinistic
dissent church at Highbury, have have strike experience in
conviction of sin and sense of pardon. again he hear himself call
for as Brother Bulstrode in prayer meeting, speak on religious
platform, preach in private house. again he feel himself think
of the ministry as possibly his vocation, and incline towards
missionary labor. that be the happy time of his life: that be the
spot he would have choose now to awake in and find the rest a dream.
the people among whom Brother Bulstrode be distinguish be very
few, but they be very near to he, and stir his satisfaction the
more; his power stretch through a narrow space, but he feel its
effect the more intensely. he believe without effort in the peculiar
work of grace within he, and in the sign that God intend he for
special instrumentality.
then come the moment of transition; it be with the sense of promotion
he have when he, an orphan educate at a commercial charity-school, be
invite to a fine villa belong to Mr. Dunkirk, the rich man in
the congregation. soon he become an intimate there, honor for his
piety by the wife, mark out for his ability by the husband, whose
wealth be due to a flourish city and west-end trade. that be the
setting-in of a new current for his ambition, direct his prospect
of "instrumentality" towards the uniting of distinguished religious
gift with successful business.
by-and-by come a decided external leading: a confidential subordinate
partner die, and nobody seem to the principal so well fit to fill
the severely feel vacancy as his young friend Bulstrode, if he would
become confidential accountant. the offer be accept. the business
be a pawnbroker's, of the most magnificent sort both in extent and
profit; and on a short acquaintance with it Bulstrode become aware
that one source of magnificent profit be the easy reception of any
good offer, without strict inquiry as to where they come from. but
there be a branch house at the west end, and no pettiness or dinginess
to give suggestion of shame.
he remember his first moment of shrink. they be private, and
be fill with argument; some of these take the form of prayer.
the business be establish and have old root; be it not one thing to
set up a new gin-palace and another to accept an investment in an old
one? the profit make out of lose soul--where can the line be draw
at which they begin in human transaction? be it not even God's way
of save his choose? "Thou knowest,"--the young Bulstrode have say
then, as the old Bulstrode be say now--"Thou know how loose
my soul sit from these thing--how I view they all as implement for
till Thy garden rescue here and there from the wilderness."
metaphor and precedent be not want; peculiar spiritual
experience be not want which at last make the retention of his
position seem a service demand of he: the vista of a fortune have
already open itself, and Bulstrode's shrinking remain private. Mr.
Dunkirk have never expect that there would be any shrinking at all: he
have never conceive that trade have anything to do with the scheme of
salvation. and it be true that Bulstrode find himself carry on
two distinct life; his religious activity could not be incompatible
with his business as soon as he have argue himself into not feel it
incompatible.
mentally surround with that past again, Bulstrode have the same
plea--indeed, the year have be perpetually spin they into
intricate thickness, like mass of spider-web, pad the moral
sensibility; nay, as age make egoism more eager but less enjoying, his
soul have become more saturate with the belief that he do everything
for God's sake, be indifferent to it for his own. and yet--if he
could be back in that far-off spot with his youthful poverty--why, then
he would choose to be a missionary.
but the train of cause in which he have lock himself go on. there
be trouble in the fine villa at Highbury. year before, the only
daughter have run away, defy her parent, and go on the stage; and
now the only boy die, and after a short time Mr. Dunkirk die also.
the wife, a simple pious woman, leave with all the wealth in and out of
the magnificent trade, of which she never know the precise nature, have
come to believe in Bulstrode, and innocently adore he as woman often
adore their priest or "man-make" minister. it be natural that after a
time marriage should have be think of between they. but Mrs.
Dunkirk have qualm and yearning about her daughter, who have long be
regard as lose both to God and her parent. it be know that the
daughter have marry, but she be utterly go out of sight. the
mother, have lose her boy, imagine a grandson, and wish in a
double sense to reclaim her daughter. if she be find, there would
be a channel for property--perhaps a wide one--in the provision for
several grandchild. effort to find she must be make before Mrs.
Dunkirk would marry again. Bulstrode concur; but after
advertisement as well as other mode of inquiry have be try, the
mother believe that her daughter be not to be find, and consent to
marry without reservation of property.
the daughter have be find; but only one man besides Bulstrode know
it, and he be pay for keep silence and carry himself away.
that be the bare fact which Bulstrode be now force to see in the
rigid outline with which act present themselves onlooker. but for
himself at that distant time, and even now in burn memory, the fact
be break into little sequence, each justify as it come by
reasoning which seem to prove it righteous. Bulstrode's course up
to that time have, he think, be sanction by remarkable
providence, appear to point the way for he to be the agent in
make the good use of a large property and withdraw it from
perversion. death and other striking disposition, such as feminine
trustfulness, have come; and Bulstrode would have adopt Cromwell's
words--"Do you call these bare event? the Lord pity you!" the
event be comparatively small, but the essential condition be
there--namely, that they be in favor of his own end. it be easy
for he to settle what be due from he to other by inquire what
be God's intention with regard to himself. could it be for God's
service that this fortune should in any considerable proportion go to a
young woman and her husband who be give up to the light pursuit,
and might scatter it abroad in triviality--people who seem to lie
outside the path of remarkable providence? Bulstrode have never say
to himself beforehand, "the daughter shall not be found"--nevertheless
when the moment come he keep her existence hide; and when other
moment follow, he soothe the mother with consolation in the
probability that the unhappy young woman might be no more.
there be hour in which Bulstrode feel that his action be
unrighteous; but how could he go back? he have mental exercise, call
himself nought lay hold on redemption, and go on in his course of
instrumentality. and after five year death again come to widen his
path, by take away his wife. he do gradually withdraw his capital,
but he do not make the sacrifice requisite to put an end to the
business, which be carry on for thirteen year afterwards before it
finally collapse. meanwhile Nicholas Bulstrode have use his hundred
thousand discreetly, and be become provincially, solidly important--a
banker, a Churchman, a public benefactor; also a sleep partner in
trading concern, in which his ability be direct to economy in the
raw material, as in the case of the dye which rot Mr. Vincy's silk.
and now, when this respectability have last undisturbed for nearly
thirty year--when all that precede it have long lain benumb in the
consciousness--that past have rise and immerse his thought as if with
the terrible irruption of a new sense overburthene the feeble being.
meanwhile, in his conversation with Raffles, he have learn something
momentous, something which enter actively into the struggle of his
longing and terror. there, he think, lie an opening towards
spiritual, perhaps towards material rescue.
the spiritual kind of rescue be a genuine need with he. there may be
coarse hypocrite, who consciously affect belief and emotion for the
sake of gull the world, but Bulstrode be not one of they. he be
simply a man whose desire have be strong than his theoretic
belief, and who have gradually explain the gratification of his
desire into satisfactory agreement with those belief. if this be
hypocrisy, it be a process which show itself occasionally in we all,
to whatever confession we belong, and whether we believe in the future
perfection of our race or in the near date fix for the end of the
world; whether we regard the earth as a putrefy nidus for a save
remnant, include ourselves, or have a passionate belief in the
solidarity of mankind.
the service he could do to the cause of religion have be through life
the ground he allege to himself for his choice of action: it have be
the motive which he have pour out in his prayer. who would use money
and position well than he mean to use they? who could surpass he
in self-abhorrence and exaltation of God's cause? and to Mr. Bulstrode
God's cause be something distinct from his own rectitude of conduct:
it enforce a discrimination of God's enemy, who be to be use
merely as instrument, and whom it would be as well if possible to keep
out of money and consequent influence. also, profitable investment in
trade where the power of the prince of this world show its most
active device, become sanctify by a right application of the profit
in the hand of God's servant.
this implicit reasoning be essentially no more peculiar to evangelical
belief than the use of wide phrase for narrow motif be peculiar to
Englishmen. there be no general doctrine which be not capable of
eat out our morality if unchecked by the deep-seat habit of direct
fellow-feeling with individual fellow-man.
but a man who believe in something else than his own greed, have
necessarily a conscience or standard to which he more or less adapt
himself. Bulstrode's standard have be his serviceableness to God's
cause: "I be sinful and nought--a vessel to be consecrate by use--but
use me!"--had be the mould into which he have constrain his immense
need of be something important and predominate. and now have come
a moment in which that mould seem in danger of be break and
utterly cast away.
what if the act he have reconcile himself to because they make he a
strong instrument of the divine glory, be to become the pretext of
the scoffer, and a darkening of that glory? if this be to be the
ruling of Providence, he be cast out from the temple as one who have
bring unclean offering.
he have long pour out utterance of repentance. but today a
repentance have come which be of a bitterer flavor, and a threatening
Providence urge he to a kind of propitiation which be not simply a
doctrinal transaction. the divine tribunal have change its aspect for
he; self-prostration be no long enough, and he must bring
restitution in his hand. it be really before his God that Bulstrode
be about to attempt such restitution as seem possible: a great dread
have seize his susceptible frame, and the scorch approach of shame
work in he a new spiritual need. night and day, while the
resurgent threatening past be make a conscience within he, he be
think by what mean he could recover peace and trust--by what
sacrifice he could stay the rod. his belief in these moment of dread
be, that if he spontaneously do something right, God would save he
from the consequence of wrong-doing. for religion can only change when
the emotion which fill it be change; and the religion of personal
fear remain nearly at the level of the savage.
he have see Raffles actually go away on the Brassing coach, and this
be a temporary relief; it remove the pressure of an immediate dread,
but do not put an end to the spiritual conflict and the need to win
protection. at last he come to a difficult resolve, and write a letter
to Will Ladislaw, beg he to be at the Shrubs that evening for a
private interview at nine o'clock. will have feel no particular surprise
at the request, and connect it with some new notion about the
"Pioneer;" but when he be show into Mr. Bulstrode's private room, he
be strike with the painfully worn look on the banker's face, and be
go to say, "be you ill?" when, check himself in that abruptness,
he only inquire after Mrs. Bulstrode, and her satisfaction with the
picture buy for she.
"thank you, she be quite satisfied; she have go out with her daughter
this evening. I beg you to come, Mr. Ladislaw, because I have a
communication of a very private--indeed, I will say, of a sacredly
confidential nature, which I desire to make to you. nothing, I dare
say, have be far from your thought than that there have be
important tie in the past which could connect your history with mine."
will feel something like an electric shock. he be already in a state
of keen sensitiveness and hardly allay agitation on the subject of
tie in the past, and his presentiment be not agreeable. it seem
like the fluctuation of a dream--as if the action begin by that loud
bloated stranger be be carry on by this pale-eyed sickly look
piece of respectability, whose subdue tone and glib formality of
speech be at this moment almost as repulsive to he as their
remember contrast. he answer, with a marked change of color--
"no, indeed, nothing."
"you see before you, Mr. Ladislaw, a man who be deeply stricken. but
for the urgency of conscience and the knowledge that I be before the
bar of one who seeth not as man seeth, I should be under no compulsion
to make the disclosure which have be my object in ask you to come
here to-night. so far as human law go, you have no claim on I
whatever."
will be even more uncomfortable than wonder. Mr. Bulstrode have
pause, lean his head on his hand, and look at the floor. but he
now fix his examine glance on Will and said--
"I be tell that your mother's name be Sarah Dunkirk, and that she run
away from her friend to go on the stage. also, that your father be
at one time much emaciate by illness. may I ask if you can confirm
these statement?"
"yes, they be all true," say will, strike with the order in which an
inquiry have come, that might have be expect to be preliminary to
the banker's previous hint. but Mr. Bulstrode have to-night follow
the order of his emotion; he entertain no doubt that the opportunity
for restitution have come, and he have an overpowering impulse towards
the penitential expression by which he be deprecate chastisement.
"do you know any particular of your mother's family?" he continue.
"no; she never like to speak of they. she be a very generous,
honorable woman," say will, almost angrily.
"I do not wish to allege anything against she. do she never mention
her mother to you at all?"
"I have hear she say that she think her mother do not know the
reason of she run away. she say 'poor mother' in a pity tone."
"that mother become my wife," say Bulstrode, and then pause a moment
before he add, "you have a claim on I, Mr. Ladislaw: as I say
before, not a legal claim, but one which my conscience recognize. I
be enrich by that marriage--a result which would probably not have
take place--certainly not to the same extent--if your grandmother
could have discover her daughter. that daughter, I gather, be no
long live!"
"no," say will, feel suspicion and repugnance rise so strongly
within he, that without quite know what he do, he take his hat
from the floor and stand up. the impulse within he be to reject the
disclose connection.
"pray be seat, Mr. Ladislaw," say Bulstrode, anxiously. "Doubtless
you be startle by the suddenness of this discovery. but I entreat
your patience with one who be already bow down by inward trial."
will reseat himself, feel some pity which be half contempt for
this voluntary self-abasement of an elderly man.
"it be my wish, Mr. Ladislaw, to make amend for the deprivation which
befell your mother. I know that you be without fortune, and I wish to
supply you adequately from a store which would have probably already
be yours have your grandmother be certain of your mother's existence
and be able to find she."
Mr. Bulstrode pause. he feel that he be perform a striking piece
of scrupulosity in the judgment of his auditor, and a penitential act
in the eye of God. he have no clew to the state of Will Ladislaw's
mind, smart as it be from the clear hint of Raffles, and with its
natural quickness in construction stimulate by the expectation of
discovery which he would have be glad to conjure back into
darkness. will make no answer for several moment, till Mr. Bulstrode,
who at the end of his speech have cast his eye on the floor, now raise
they with an examine glance, which will meet fully, saying--
"I suppose you do know of my mother's existence, and know where she
might have be find."
Bulstrode shrank--there be a visible quivering in his face and hand.
he be totally unprepared to have his advance meet in this way, or to
find himself urge into more revelation than he have beforehand set down
as needful. but at that moment he dare not tell a lie, and he feel
suddenly uncertain of his ground which he have tread with some
confidence before.
"I will not deny that you conjecture rightly," he answer, with a
faltering in his tone. "and I wish to make atonement to you as the one
still remain who have suffer a loss through I. you enter, I
trust, into my purpose, Mr. Ladislaw, which have a reference to high
than merely human claim, and as I have already say, be entirely
independent of any legal compulsion. I be ready to narrow my own
resource and the prospect of my family by bind myself to allow you
five hundred pound yearly during my life, and to leave you a
proportional capital at my death--nay, to do still more, if more should
be definitely necessary to any laudable project on your part." Mr.
Bulstrode have go on to particular in the expectation that these
would work strongly on Ladislaw, and merge other feeling in grateful
acceptance.
but Will be look as stubborn as possible, with his lip pouting and
his finger in his side-pocket. he be not in the least touch, and
say firmly,--
"before I make any reply to your proposition, Mr. Bulstrode, I must beg
you to answer a question or two. be you connect with the business
by which that fortune you speak of be originally make?"
Mr. Bulstrode's thought be, "Raffles have tell he." how could he
refuse to answer when he have volunteer what draw forth the question?
he answer, "yes."
"and be that business--or be it not--a thoroughly dishonorable
one--nay, one that, if its nature have be make public, might have
rank those concerned in it with thief and convict?"
will's tone have a cutting bitterness: he be move to put his question
as nakedly as he could.
Bulstrode redden with irrepressible anger. he have be prepare for
a scene of self-abasement, but his intense pride and his habit of
supremacy overpower penitence, and even dread, when this young man,
whom he have mean to benefit, turn on he with the air of a judge.
"the business be establish before I become connect with it, sir;
nor be it for you to institute an inquiry of that kind," he answer,
not raise his voice, but speak with quick defiantness.
"yes, it be," say will, start up again with his hat in his hand.
"it be eminently mine to ask such question, when I have to decide
whether I will have transaction with you and accept your money. my
unblemished honor be important to I. it be important to I to have no
stain on my birth and connection. and now I find there be a stain
which I cannot help. my mother feel it, and try to keep as clear of
it as she could, and so will I. you shall keep your ill-get money.
if I have any fortune of my own, I would willingly pay it to any one who
could disprove what you have tell I. what I have to thank you for be
that you keep the money till now, when I can refuse it. it ought to
lie with a man's self that he be a gentleman. good-night, sir."
Bulstrode be go to speak, but will, with determined quickness, be
out of the room in an instant, and in another the hall-door have close
behind he. he be too strongly possess with passionate rebellion
against this inherit blot which have be thrust on his knowledge to
reflect at present whether he have not be too hard on Bulstrode--too
arrogantly merciless towards a man of sixty, who be make effort at
retrieval when time have render they vain.
no third person listen could have thoroughly understand the
impetuosity of Will's repulse or the bitterness of his word. no one
but himself then know how everything connect with the sentiment of
his own dignity have an immediate bearing for he on his relation to
Dorothea and to Mr. Casaubon's treatment of he. and in the rush of
impulse by which he fling back that offer of Bulstrode's there be
mingle the sense that it would have be impossible for he ever to
tell Dorothea that he have accept it.
as for Bulstrode--when will be go he suffer a violent reaction,
and weep like a woman. it be the first time he have encounter an
open expression of scorn from any man high than Raffles; and with
that scorn hurrying like venom through his system, there be no
sensibility leave to consolation. rut the relief of weeping have to be
check. his wife and daughter soon come home from hear the
address of an oriental missionary, and be full of regret that papa
have not hear, in the first instance, the interesting thing which they
try to repeat to he.
perhaps, through all other hide thought, the one that breathe most
comfort be, that will Ladislaw at least be not likely to publish what
have take place that evening.
CHAPTER LXII.
"he be a squyer of lowe degre,
that love the king's daughter of Hungrie.
--Old Romance.
will Ladislaw's mind be now wholly bent on see Dorothea again, and
forthwith quit Middlemarch. the morning after his agitate scene
with Bulstrode he write a brief letter to she, say that various
cause have detain he in the neighborhood long than he have
expect, and ask her permission to call again at Lowick at some
hour which she would mention on the early possible day, he be
anxious to depart, but unwilling to do so until she have grant he an
interview. he leave the letter at the office, order the messenger to
carry it to Lowick Manor, and wait for an answer.
Ladislaw feel the awkwardness of ask for more last word. his
former farewell have be make in the hearing of Sir James Chettam, and
have be announce as final even to the butler. it be certainly try
to a man's dignity to reappear when he be not expect to do so: a
first farewell have pathos in it, but to come back for a second lend an
opening to comedy, and it be possible even that there might be bitter
sneer afloat about Will's motif for linger. still it be on the
whole more satisfactory to his feeling to take the direct mean of
see Dorothea, than to use any device which might give an air of
chance to a meeting of which he wish she to understand that it be
what he earnestly seek. when he have part from she before, he have
be in ignorance of fact which give a new aspect to the relation
between they, and make a more absolute severance than he have then
believe in. he know nothing of Dorothea's private fortune, and be
little use to reflect on such matter, take it for grant that
accord to Mr. Casaubon's arrangement marriage to he, Will Ladislaw,
would mean that she consent to be penniless. that be not what he
could wish for even in his secret heart, or even if she have be ready
to meet such hard contrast for his sake. and then, too, there be the
fresh smart of that disclosure about his mother's family, which if
know would be an add reason why Dorothea's friend should look down
upon he as utterly below she. the secret hope that after some year
he might come back with the sense that he have at least a personal value
equal to her wealth, seem now the dreamy continuation of a dream.
this change would surely justify he in ask Dorothea to receive he
once more.
but Dorothea on that morning be not at home to receive Will's note.
in consequence of a letter from her uncle announce his intention to
be at home in a week, she have drive first to Freshitt to carry the
news, mean to go on to the Grange to deliver some order with which
her uncle have intrust she--thinking, as he say, "a little mental
occupation of this sort good for a widow."
if Will Ladislaw could have overhear some of the talk at Freshitt that
morning, he would have feel all his supposition confirm as to the
readiness of certain people to sneer at his lingering in the
neighborhood. Sir James, indeed, though much relieved concern
Dorothea, have be on the watch to learn Ladislaw's movement, and have
an instructed informant in Mr. Standish, who be necessarily in his
confidence on this matter. that Ladislaw have stay in Middlemarch
nearly two month after he have declare that he be go immediately,
be a fact to embitter Sir James's suspicion, or at least to justify
his aversion to a "young fellow" whom he represent to himself as
slight, volatile, and likely enough to show such recklessness as
naturally go along with a position unrivete by family tie or a
strict profession. but he have just hear something from Standish
which, while it justify these surmise about Will, offer a mean of
nullify all danger with regard to Dorothea.
unwonted circumstance may make we all rather unlike ourselves: there
be condition under which the most majestic person be oblige to
sneeze, and our emotion be liable to be act on in the same
incongruous manner. good Sir James be this morning so far unlike
himself that he be irritably anxious to say something to Dorothea on a
subject which he usually avoid as if it have be a matter of shame to
they both. he could not use Celia as a medium, because he do not
choose that she should know the kind of gossip he have in his mind; and
before Dorothea happen to arrive he have be try to imagine how,
with his shyness and unready tongue, he could ever manage to introduce
his communication. her unexpected presence bring he to utter
hopelessness in his own power of say anything unpleasant; but
desperation suggest a resource; he send the groom on an unsaddled
horse across the park with a pencil note to Mrs. Cadwallader, who
already know the gossip, and would think it no compromise of herself to
repeat it as often as require.
Dorothea be detain on the good pretext that Mr. Garth, whom she
want to see, be expect at the hall within the hour, and she be
still talk to Caleb on the gravel when Sir James, on the watch for
the rector's wife, see she come and meet she with the needful hint.
"Enough! I understand,"--said Mrs. Cadwallader. "you shall be
innocent. I be such a blackamoor that I cannot smirch myself."
"I donot mean that itbe of any consequence," say Sir James, dislike
that Mrs. Cadwallader should understand too much. "only it be
desirable that Dorothea should know there be reason why she should
not receive he again; and I really cannot say so to she. it will come
lightly from you."
it come very lightly indeed. when Dorothea quit Caleb and turn to
meet they, it appear that Mrs. Cadwallader have step across the
park by the mere chance in the world, just to chat with Celia in a
matronly way about the baby. and so Mr. Brooke be come back?
delightful!--come back, it be to be hop, quite cure of
parliamentary fever and pioneer. apropos of the "pioneer"--somebody
have prophesy that it would soon be like a dying dolphin, and turn all
color for want of know how to help itself, because Mr. Brooke's
protege, the brilliant young Ladislaw, be go or go. have Sir
James hear that?
the three be walk along the gravel slowly, and Sir James, turn
aside to whip a shrub, say he have hear something of that sort.
"all false!" say Mrs. Cadwallader. "he be not go, or go,
apparently; the 'Pioneer' keep its color, and Mr. Orlando Ladislaw be
make a sad dark-blue scandal by warble continually with your Mr.
Lydgate's wife, who they tell I be as pretty as pretty can be. it
seem nobody ever go into the house without find this young
gentleman lie on the rug or warble at the piano. but the people in
manufacturing town be always disreputable."
"you begin by say that one report be false, Mrs. Cadwallader, and I
believe this be false too," say Dorothea, with indignant energy; "at
least, I feel sure it be a misrepresentation. I will not hear any evil
speak of Mr. Ladislaw; he have already suffer too much injustice."
Dorothea when thoroughly move care little what any one thought of her
feeling; and even if she have be able to reflect, she would have hold
it petty to keep silence at injurious word about Will from fear of
be herself misunderstood. her face be flush and her lip tremble.
Sir James, glance at she, repent of his stratagem; but Mrs.
Cadwallader, equal to all occasion, spread the palm of her hand
outward and said--"heaven grant it, my dear!--i mean that all bad tale
about anybody may be false. but it be a pity that young Lydgate should
have marry one of these middlemarch girl. consider hebe a son of
somebody, he might have get a woman with good blood in her vein, and
not too young, who would have put up with his profession. therebe
Clara Harfager, for instance, whose friend donot know what to do with
she; and she have a portion. then we might have have she among we.
However!--it's no use be wise for other people. where be Celia?
pray let we go in."
"I be go on immediately to Tipton," say Dorothea, rather haughtily.
"good-by."
Sir James could say nothing as he accompany she to the carriage. he
be altogether discontent with the result of a contrivance which have
cost he some secret humiliation beforehand.
Dorothea drive along between the berried hedgerow and the shorn
corn-field, not see or hear anything around. the tear come and
roll down her cheek, but she do not know it. the world, it seem,
be turn ugly and hateful, and there be no place for her
trustfulness. "it be not true--it be not true!" be the voice within
she that she listen to; but all the while a remembrance to which
there have always clung a vague uneasiness would thrust itself on her
attention--the remembrance of that day when she have find Will Ladislaw
with Mrs. Lydgate, and have hear his voice accompany by the piano.
"he say he would never do anything that I disapprove--I wish I could
have tell he that I disapprove of that," say poor Dorothea,
inwardly, feel a strange alternation between anger with Will and the
passionate defence of he. "they all try to blacken he before I; but
I will care for no pain, if he be not to blame. I always believe he
be good."--These be her last thought before she feel that the
carriage be pass under the archway of the lodge-gate at the Grange,
when she hurriedly press her handkerchief to her face and begin to
think of her errand. the coachman beg leave to take out the horse
for half an hour as there be something wrong with a shoe; and
Dorothea, have the sense that she be go to rest, take off her
glove and bonnet, while she be lean against a statue in the
entrance-hall, and talk to the housekeeper. at last she said--
"I must stay here a little, Mrs. Kell. I will go into the library and
write you some memoranda from my uncle's letter, if you will open the
shutter for I."
"the shutter be open, madam," say Mrs. Kell, follow Dorothea, who
have walk along as she speak. "Mr. Ladislaw be there, look for
something."
(will have come to fetch a portfolio of his own sketch which he have
miss in the act of pack his movable, and do not choose to leave
behind.)
Dorothea's heart seem to turn over as if it have have a blow, but she
be not perceptibly check: in truth, the sense that will be there
be for the moment all-satisfying to she, like the sight of something
precious that one have lose. when she reach the door she say to Mrs.
kell--
"go in first, and tell he that I be here."
will have find his portfolio, and have lay it on the table at the far
end of the room, to turn over the sketch and please himself by
look at the memorable piece of art which have a relation to nature
too mysterious for Dorothea. he be smile at it still, and shake
the sketch into order with the thought that he might find a letter
from she await he at Middlemarch, when Mrs. Kell close to his elbow
said--
"Mrs. Casaubon be come in, sir."
will turn round quickly, and the next moment Dorothea be enter.
as Mrs. Kell close the door behind she they meet: each be look at
the other, and consciousness be overflow by something that
suppress utterance. it be not confusion that keep they silent, for
they both feel that parting be near, and there be no shamefacedness in
a sad parting.
she move automatically towards her uncle's chair against the
writing-table, and will, after draw it out a little for she, go a
few pace off and stand opposite to she.
"pray sit down," say Dorothea, cross her hand on her lap; "I be
very glad you be here." will think that her face look just as it
do when she first shake hand with he in Rome; for her widow's cap,
fix in her bonnet, have go off with it, and he could see that she
have lately be shed tear. but the mixture of anger in her
agitation have vanish at the sight of he; she have be use, when
they be face to face, always to feel confidence and the happy freedom
which come with mutual understanding, and how could other people's
word hinder that effect on a sudden? let the music which can take
possession of our frame and fill the air with joy for we, sound once
more--what do it signify that we hear it find fault with in its
absence?
"I have send a letter to Lowick Manor to-day, ask leave to see you,"
say will, seat himself opposite to she. "I be go away
immediately, and I could not go without speak to you again."
"I think we have part when you come to Lowick many week ago--you
think you be go then," say Dorothea, her voice tremble a
little.
"yes; but I be in ignorance then of thing which I know now--thing
which have alter my feeling about the future. when I see you
before, I be dream that I might come back some day. I donot think
I ever shall--now." will pause here.
"you wish I to know the reason?" say Dorothea, timidly.
"yes," say will, impetuously, shake his head backward, and look
away from she with irritation in his face. "of course I must wish it.
I have be grossly insult in your eye and in the eye of other.
there have be a mean implication against my character. I wish you to
know that under no circumstance would I have lower myself by--under
no circumstance would I have give man the chance of say that I
seek money under the pretext of seek--something else. there be
no need of other safeguard against I--the safeguard of wealth be
enough."
will rise from his chair with the last word and go--he hardly know
where; but it be to the project window nearest he, which have be
open as now about the same season a year ago, when he and Dorothea have
stand within it and talk together. her whole heart be go out at
this moment in sympathy with Will's indignation: she only want to
convince he that she have never do he injustice, and he seem to
have turn away from she as if she too have be part of the unfriendly
world.
"it would be very unkind of you to suppose that I ever attribute any
meanness to you," she begin. then in her ardent way, want to plead
with he, she move from her chair and go in front of he to her old
place in the window, say, "do you suppose that I ever disbelieve in
you?"
when will see she there, he give a start and move backward out of the
window, without meet her glance. Dorothea be hurt by this movement
follow up the previous anger of his tone. she be ready to say that
it be as hard on she as on he, and that she be helpless; but those
strange particular of their relation which neither of they could
explicitly mention keep she always in dread of say too much. at
this moment she have no belief that will would in any case have want
to marry she, and she fear use word which might imply such a
belief. she only say earnestly, recur to his last word--
"I be sure no safeguard be ever need against you."
will do not answer. in the stormy fluctuation of his feeling these
word of hers seem to he cruelly neutral, and he look pale and
miserable after his angry outburst. he go to the table and fasten
up his portfolio, while Dorothea look at he from the distance. they
be waste these last moment together in wretched silence. what
could he say, since what have get obstinately uppermost in his mind be
the passionate love for she which he forbid himself to utter? what
could she say, since she might offer he no help--since she be force
to keep the money that ought to have be his?--since to-day he seem
not to respond as he use to do to her thorough trust and like?
but will at last turn away from his portfolio and approach the
window again.
"I must go," he say, with that peculiar look of the eye which
sometimes accompany bitter feeling, as if they have be tired and
burn with gaze too close at a light.
"what shall you do in life?" say Dorothea, timidly. "have your
intention remain just the same as when we say good-by before?"
"yes," say will, in a tone that seem to waive the subject as
uninteresting. "I shall work away at the first thing that offer. I
suppose one get a habit of do without happiness or hope."
"oh, what sad word!" say Dorothea, with a dangerous tendency to sob.
then try to smile, she add, "we use to agree that we be alike
in speak too strongly."
"I have not speak too strongly now," say will, lean back against
the angle of the wall. "there be certain thing which a man can only
go through once in his life; and he must know some time or other that
the good be over with he. this experience have happen to I while I
be very young--that be all. what I care more for than I can ever care
for anything else be absolutely forbidden to I--I donot mean merely
by be out of my reach, but forbid I, even if it be within my
reach, by my own pride and honor--by everything I respect myself for.
of course I shall go on live as a man might do who have see heaven in
a trance."
will pause, imagine that it would be impossible for Dorothea to
misunderstand this; indeed he feel that he be contradict himself
and offend against his self-approval in speak to she so plainly;
but still--it could not be fairly call woo a woman to tell she
that he would never woo she. it must be admit to be a ghostly kind
of wooing.
but Dorothea's mind be rapidly go over the past with quite another
vision than his. the thought that she herself might be what will most
care for do throb through her an instant, but then come doubt: the
memory of the little they have live through together turn pale and
shrank before the memory which suggest how much full might have
be the intercourse between Will and some one else with whom he have
have constant companionship. everything he have say might refer to that
other relation, and whatever have pass between he and herself be
thoroughly explain by what she have always regard as their simple
friendship and the cruel obstruction thrust upon it by her husband's
injurious act. Dorothea stand silent, with her eye cast down
dreamily, while image crowd upon she which leave the sickening
certainty that will be refer to Mrs. Lydgate. but why sicken?
he want she to know that here too his conduct should be above
suspicion.
will be not surprised at her silence. his mind also be tumultuously
busy while he watch she, and he be feel rather wildly that
something must happen to hinder their parting--some miracle, clearly
nothing in their own deliberate speech. yet, after all, have she any
love for him?--he could not pretend to himself that he would rather
believe she to be without that pain. he could not deny that a secret
longing for the assurance that she love he be at the root of all his
word.
neither of they know how long they stand in that way. Dorothea be
raise her eye, and be about to speak, when the door open and her
footman come to say--
"the horse be ready, madam, whenever you like to start."
"presently," say Dorothea. then turn to Will, she say, "I have
some memoranda to write for the housekeeper."
"I must go," say will, when the door have close again--advance
towards she. "the day after to-morrow I shall leave Middlemarch."
"you have act in every way rightly," say Dorothea, in a low tone,
feel a pressure at her heart which make it difficult to speak.
she put out her hand, and will take it for an instant without speak,
for her word have seem to he cruelly cold and unlike herself. their
eye meet, but there be discontent in his, and in hers there be only
sadness. he turn away and take his portfolio under his arm.
"I have never do you injustice. please remember I," say Dorothea,
repress a rise sob.
"why should you say that?" say will, with irritation. "as if I be
not in danger of forget everything else."
he have really a movement of anger against she at that moment, and it
impel he to go away without pause. it be all one flash to
Dorothea--his last word--his distant bow to she as he reach the
door--the sense that he be no long there. she sink into the chair,
and for a few moment sit like a statue, while image and emotion be
hurry upon she. Joy come first, in spite of the threaten train
behind it--joy in the impression that it be really herself whom will
love and be renounce, that there be really no other love less
permissible, more blameworthy, which honor be hurry he away from.
they be part all the same, but--Dorothea draw a deep breath and
feel her strength return--she could think of he unrestrainedly. at
that moment the parting be easy to bear: the first sense of love and
be love exclude sorrow. it be as if some hard icy pressure have
melt, and her consciousness have room to expand: her past be come
back to she with large interpretation. the joy be not the
less--perhaps it be the more complete just then--because of the
irrevocable parting; for there be no reproach, no contemptuous wonder
to imagine in any eye or from any lip. he have act so as to defy
reproach, and make wonder respectful.
any one watch she might have see that there be a fortifying
thought within she. just as when inventive power be work with glad
ease some small claim on the attention be fully meet as if it be only
a cranny open to the sunlight, it be easy now for Dorothea to write
her memoranda. she speak she last word to the housekeeper in cheerful
tone, and when she seat herself in the carriage her eye be bright
and her cheek bloom under the dismal bonnet. she throw back the
heavy "weeper," and look before she, wonder which road will have
take. it be in her nature to be proud that he be blameless, and
through all her feeling there run this vein--"i be right to defend
he."
the coachman be use to drive his gray at a good pace, Mr. Casaubon
be unenjoye and impatient in everything away from his desk, and
want to get to the end of all journey; and Dorothea be now bowl
along quickly. drive be pleasant, for rain in the night have lay
the dust, and the blue sky look far off, away from the region of the
great cloud that sail in mass. the earth look like a happy
place under the vast heaven, and Dorothea be wish that she might
overtake Will and see he once more.
after a turn of the road, there he be with the portfolio under his
arm; but the next moment she be pass he while he raise his hat,
and she feel a pang at be seat there in a sort of exaltation,
leave he behind. she could not look back at he. it be as if a
crowd of indifferent object have thrust they asunder, and force they
along different path, take they far and far away from each
other, and make it useless to look back. she could no more make any
sign that would seem to say, "need we part?" than she could stop the
carriage to wait for he. Nay, what a world of reason crowd upon
she against any movement of her thought towards a future that might
reverse the decision of this day!
"I only wish I have know before--I wish he know--then we could be quite
happy in thinking of each other, though we be forever part. and if
I could but have give he the money, and make thing easy for
him!"--were the longing that come back the most persistently. and
yet, so heavily do the world weigh on she in spite of her independent
energy, that with this idea of Will as in need of such help and at a
disadvantage with the world, there come always the vision of that
unfittingness of any close relation between they which lie in the
opinion of every one connect with she. she feel to the full all the
imperativeness of the motif which urge Will's conduct. how could he
dream of she defy the barrier that her husband have place between
them?--how could she ever say to herself that she would defy it?
will's certainty as the carriage grow small in the distance, have much
more bitterness in it. very slight matter be enough to gall he in
his sensitive mood, and the sight of Dorothea drive past he while he
feel himself plod along as a poor devil seek a position in a
world which in his present temper offer he little that he covet,
make his conduct seem a mere matter of necessity, and take away the
sustainment of resolve. after all, he have no assurance that she love
he: could any man pretend that he be simply glad in such a case to
have the suffering all on his own side?
that evening will spend with the Lydgates; the next evening he be go.
BOOK VII.
two temptation.
CHAPTER LXIII.
these little thing be great to little man.--goldsmith.
"have you see much of your scientific phoenix, Lydgate, lately?" say
Mr. Toller at one of his Christmas dinner-party, speak to Mr.
Farebrother on his right hand.
"not much, I be sorry to say," answer the Vicar, accustom to parry
Mr. Toller's banter about his belief in the new medical light. "I be
out of the way and he be too busy."
"be he? I be glad to hear it," say Dr. Minchin, with mingled suavity
and surprise.
"he give a great deal of time to the New Hospital," say Mr.
Farebrother, who have his reason for continue the subject: "I hear of
that from my neighbor, Mrs. Casaubon, who go there often. she say
Lydgate be indefatigable, and be make a fine thing of Bulstrode's
institution. he be prepare a new ward in case of the cholera come
to we."
"and prepare theory of treatment to try on the patient, I
suppose," say Mr. Toller.
"Come, Toller, be candid," say Mr. Farebrother. "you be too clever
not to see the good of a bold fresh mind in medicine, as well as in
everything else; and as to cholera, I fancy, none of you be very sure
what you ought to do. if a man go a little too far along a new road,
it be usually himself that he harm more than any one else."
"I be sure you and Wrench ought to be oblige to he," say Dr.
Minchin, look towards Toller, "for he have send you the cream of
Peacock's patient."
"lydgate have be live at a great rate for a young beginner," say
Mr. Harry Toller, the brewer. "I suppose his relation in the North
back he up."
"I hope so," say Mr. Chichely, "else he ought not to have marry that
nice girl we be all so fond of. hang it, one have a grudge against a
man who carry off the prettiest girl in the town."
"ay, by God! and the good too," say Mr. Standish.
"my friend Vincy donot half like the marriage, I know that," say Mr.
Chichely. "_he_ wouldnot do much. how the relation on the other side
may have come down I cannot say." there be an emphatic kind of
reticence in Mr. Chichely's manner of speak.
"oh, I shouldnot think Lydgate ever look to practice for a living,"
say Mr. Toller, with a slight touch of sarcasm, and there the subject
be drop.
this be not the first time that Mr. Farebrother have hear hint of
Lydgate's expense be obviously too great to be meet by his practice,
but he think it not unlikely that there be resource or
expectation which excuse the large outlay at the time of Lydgate's
marriage, and which might hinder any bad consequence from the
disappointment in his practice. one evening, when he take the pain to
go to Middlemarch on purpose to have a chat with Lydgate as of old, he
notice in he an air of excited effort quite unlike his usual easy way
of keep silence or break it with abrupt energy whenever he have
anything to say. Lydgate talk persistently when they be in his
work-room, put argument for and against the probability of certain
biological view; but he have none of those definite thing to say or to
show which give the waymark of a patient uninterrupted pursuit, such
as he use himself to insist on, say that "there must be a systole
and diastole in all inquiry," and that "a man's mind must be
continually expand and shrink between the whole human horizon and
the horizon of an object-glass." that evening he seem to be talk
widely for the sake of resist any personal bearing; and before long
they go into the drawing room, where Lydgate, have ask Rosamond
to give they music, sink back in his chair in silence, but with a
strange light in his eye. "he may have be take an opiate," be a
thought that cross Mr. Farebrother's mind--"tic-douloureux
perhaps--or medical worry."
it do not occur to he that Lydgate's marriage be not delightful: he
believe, as the rest do, that Rosamond be an amiable, docile
creature, though he have always think she rather uninteresting--a
little too much the pattern-card of the finishing-school; and his
mother could not forgive Rosamond because she never seem to see that
Henrietta Noble be in the room. "however, Lydgate fall in love with
she," say the Vicar to himself, "and she must be to his taste."
Mr. Farebrother be aware that Lydgate be a proud man, but have very
little corresponding fibre in himself, and perhaps too little care
about personal dignity, except the dignity of not be mean or
foolish, he could hardly allow enough for the way in which lydgate
shrank, as from a burn, from the utterance of any word about his
private affair. and soon after that conversation at Mr. Toller's, the
Vicar learn something which make he watch the more eagerly for an
opportunity of indirectly let Lydgate know that if he want to
open himself about any difficulty there be a friendly ear ready.
the opportunity come at Mr. Vincy's, where, on New Year's day, there
be a party, to which Mr. Farebrother be irresistibly invite, on the
plea that he must not forsake his old friend on the first new year of
his be a great man, and Rector as well as Vicar. and this party
be thoroughly friendly: all the lady of the Farebrother family be
present; the Vincy child all din at the table, and Fred have
persuade his mother that if she do not invite Mary Garth, the
Farebrothers would regard it as a slight to themselves, Mary be
their particular friend. Mary come, and Fred be in high spirit,
though his enjoyment be of a checker kind--triumph that his mother
should see Mary's importance with the chief personage in the party
be much streaked with jealousy when Mr. Farebrother sit down by she.
Fred use to be much more easy about his own accomplishment in the
day when he have not begin to dread be "bowl out by Farebrother,"
and this terror be still before he. Mrs. Vincy, in her full
matronly bloom, look at Mary's little figure, rough wavy hair, and
visage quite without lily and rose, and wonder; try
unsuccessfully to fancy herself care about Mary's appearance in
wedding clothe, or feel complacency in grandchild who would
"feature" the Garths. however, the party be a merry one, and Mary be
particularly bright; be glad, for Fred's sake, that his friend be
get kind to she, and be also quite willing that they should
see how much she be value by other whom they must admit to be judge.
Mr. Farebrother notice that Lydgate seem bored, and that Mr. Vincy
speak as little as possible to his son-in-law. Rosamond be perfectly
graceful and calm, and only a subtle observation such as the Vicar have
not be rouse to bestow on she would have perceive the total absence
of that interest in her husband's presence which a love wife be sure
to betray, even if etiquette keep her aloof from he. when lydgate
be take part in the conversation, she never look towards he any
more than if she have be a sculptured psyche model to look another
way: and when, after be call out for an hour or two, he re-enter
the room, she seem unconscious of the fact, which eighteen month
before would have have the effect of a numeral before cipher. in
reality, however, she be intensely aware of Lydgate's voice and
movement; and her pretty good-temper air of unconsciousness be a
study negation by which she satisfy her inward opposition to he
without compromise of propriety. when the lady be in the
drawing-room after Lydgate have be call away from the dessert, Mrs.
Farebrother, when Rosamond happen to be near she, said--"you have to
give up a great deal of your husband's society, Mrs. Lydgate."
"yes, the life of a medical man be very arduous: especially when he be
so devoted to his profession as Mr. Lydgate be," say Rosamond, who be
stand, and move easily away at the end of this correct little
speech.
"it be dreadfully dull for she when there be no company," say Mrs.
Vincy, who be seat at the old lady's side. "I be sure I think so
when Rosamond be ill, and I be stay with she. you know, Mrs.
Farebrother, ours be a cheerful house. I be of a cheerful disposition
myself, and Mr. Vincy always like something to be go on. that be
what Rosamond have be use to. very different from a husband out at
odd hour, and never know when he will come home, and of a close,
proud disposition, _i_ think"--indiscreet Mrs. Vincy do low her tone
slightly with this parenthesis. "but Rosamond always have an angel of a
temper; her brother use very often not to please she, but she be
never the girl to show temper; from a baby she be always as good as
good, and with a complexion beyond anything. but my child be all
good-temper, thank God."
this be easily credible to any one look at Mrs. Vincy as she throw
back her broad cap-string, and smile towards her three little girl,
age from seven to eleven. but in that smile glance she be oblige
to include Mary Garth, whom the three girl have get into a corner to
make she tell they story. Mary be just finish the delicious tale
of Rumpelstiltskin, which she have well by heart, because Letty be
never tired of communicate it to her ignorant elder from a favorite
red volume. Louisa, Mrs. Vincy's darling, now run to she with
wide-eyed serious excitement, cry, "oh mamma, mamma, the little man
stamp so hard on the floor he couldnot get his leg out again!"
"bless you, my cherub!" say mamma; "you shall tell I all about it
to-morrow. go and listen!" and then, as her eye follow Louisa back
towards the attractive corner, she think that if Fred wish she to
invite Mary again she would make no objection, the child be so
pleased with she.
but presently the corner become still more animate, for Mr.
Farebrother come in, and seat himself behind Louisa, take she on his
lap; whereupon the girl all insist that he must hear
Rumpelstiltskin, and Mary must tell it over again. he insist too,
and Mary, without fuss, begin again in her neat fashion, with precisely
the same word as before. Fred, who have also seat himself near,
would have feel unmixed triumph in Mary's effectiveness if Mr.
Farebrother have not be look at she with evident admiration, while
he dramatize an intense interest in the tale to please the child.
"you will never care any more about my one-eyed giant, Loo," say Fred
at the end.
"yes, I shall. tell about he now," say Louisa.
"oh, I dare say; I be quite cut out. ask Mr. Farebrother."
"yes," add Mary; "ask Mr. Farebrother to tell you about the ant
whose beautiful house be knock down by a giant name Tom, and he
think they donot mind because he couldnot hear they cry, or see they
use their pocket-handkerchief."
"please," say Louisa, look up at the Vicar.
"no, no, I be a grave old parson. if I try to draw a story out of my
bag a sermon come instead. shall I preach you a sermon?" say he,
put on his short-sighted glass, and purse up his lip.
"yes," say Louisa, falteringly.
"let I see, then. against cake: how cake be bad thing, especially
if they be sweet and have plum in they."
Louisa take the affair rather seriously, and get down from the Vicar's
knee to go to Fred.
"ah, I see it will not do to preach on New Year's day," say Mr.
Farebrother, rise and walk away. he have discover of late that
Fred have become jealous of he, and also that he himself be not lose
his preference for Mary above all other woman.
"a delightful young person be Miss Garth," say Mrs. Farebrother, who
have be watch her son's movement.
"yes," say Mrs. Vincy, oblige to reply, as the old lady turn to she
expectantly. "it be a pity she be not well-looking."
"I cannot say that," say Mrs. Farebrother, decisively. "I like she
countenance. we must not always ask for beauty, when a good God have
see fit to make an excellent young woman without it. I put good
manner first, and Miss Garth will know how to conduct herself in any
station."
the old lady be a little sharp in her tone, have a prospective
reference to Mary's become her daughter-in-law; for there be this
inconvenience in Mary's position with regard to Fred, that it be not
suitable to be make public, and hence the three lady at Lowick
Parsonage be still hop that Camden would choose Miss Garth.
new visitor enter, and the drawing-room be give up to music and
game, while whist-table be prepare in the quiet room on the other
side of the hall. Mr. Farebrother play a rubber to satisfy his
mother, who regard her occasional whist as a protest against scandal
and novelty of opinion, in which light even a revoke have its dignity.
but at the end he get Mr. Chichely to take his place, and leave the
room. as he cross the hall, Lydgate have just come in and be take
off his great-coat.
"you be the man I be go to look for," say the Vicar; and instead
of enter the drawing-room, they walk along the hall and stand
against the fireplace, where the frosty air help to make a glowing
bank. "you see, I can leave the whist-table easily enough," he go
on, smile at Lydgate, "now I donot play for money. I owe that to
you, Mrs. Casaubon say."
"how?" say Lydgate, coldly.
"ah, you donot mean I to know it; I call that ungenerous reticence.
you should let a man have the pleasure of feeling that you have do
he a good turn. I donot enter into some people's dislike of be
under an obligation: upon my word, I prefer be under an obligation
to everybody for behave well to I."
"I cannot tell what you mean," say Lydgate, "unless it be that I once
speak of you to Mrs. Casaubon. but I do not think that she would
break her promise not to mention that I have do so," say Lydgate,
lean his back against the corner of the mantel-piece, and show no
radiance in his face.
"it be Brooke who let it out, only the other day. he pay I the
compliment of say that he be very glad I have the living though you
have come across his tactic, and have praise I up as a lien and a
Tillotson, and that sort of thing, till Mrs. Casaubon would hear of no
one else."
"oh, Brooke be such a leaky-minded fool," say Lydgate, contemptuously.
"well, I be glad of the leakiness then. I donot see why you shouldnot
like I to know that you wish to do I a service, my dear fellow.
and you certainly have do I one. itbe rather a strong check to
one's self-complacency to find how much of one's right doing depend on
not be in want of money. a man will not be tempt to say the
Lord's Prayer backward to please the devil, if he donot want the
devil's service. I have no need to hang on the smile of chance now."
"I donot see that therebe any money-get without chance," say
Lydgate; "if a man get it in a profession, itbe pretty sure to come by
chance."
Mr. Farebrother think he could account for this speech, in strike
contrast with Lydgate's former way of talk, as the perversity which
will often spring from the moodiness of a man ill at ease in his
affair. he answer in a tone of good-humor admission--
"ah, therebe enormous patience want with the way of the world. but
it be the easy for a man to wait patiently when he have friend who
love he, and ask for nothing well than to help he through, so far
as it lie in their power."
"oh yes," say Lydgate, in a careless tone, change his attitude and
look at his watch. "People make much more of their difficulty
than they need to do."
he know as distinctly as possible that this be an offer of help to
himself from Mr. Farebrother, and he could not bear it. so strangely
determined be we mortal, that, after have be long gratify with
the sense that he have privately do the Vicar a service, the
suggestion that the Vicar discern his need of a service in return
make he shrink into unconquerable reticence. besides, behind all
making of such offer what else must come?--that he should "mention his
case," imply that he want specific thing. at that moment, suicide
seem easy.
Mr. Farebrother be too keen a man not to know the meaning of that
reply, and there be a certain massiveness in Lydgate's manner and
tone, correspond with his physique, which if he repel your
advance in the first instance seem to put persuasive device out of
question.
"what time be you?" say the Vicar, devour his wounded feeling.
"after eleven," say Lydgate. and they go into the drawing-room.
CHAPTER LXIV.
1st gent. where lie the power, there let the blame lie too.
2d Gent. Nay, power be relative; you cannot fright
the coming pest with border fortress,
or catch your carp with subtle argument.
all force be twain in one: cause be not cause
unless effect be there; and action's self
must need contain a passive. so command
Exists but with obedience."
even if Lydgate have be incline to be quite open about his affair,
he know that it would have hardly be in Mr. Farebrother's power to
give he the help he immediately want. with the year's bill come
in from his tradesman, with Dover's threatening hold on his furniture,
and with nothing to depend on but slow dribble payment from patient
who must not be offend--for the handsome fee he have have from
Freshitt Hall and Lowick Manor have be easily absorb--nothing less
than a thousand pound would have free he from actual embarrassment,
and leave a residue which, accord to the favorite phrase of
hopefulness in such circumstance, would have give he "time to look
about he."
naturally, the merry Christmas bring the happy New Year, when
fellow-citizen expect to be pay for the trouble and good they have
smilingly bestow on their neighbor, have so tighten the pressure of
sordid care on Lydgate's mind that it be hardly possible for he to
think unbrokenly of any other subject, even the most habitual and
solicit. he be not an ill-temper man; his intellectual activity,
the ardent kindness of his heart, as well as his strong frame, would
always, under tolerably easy condition, have keep he above the petty
uncontrolled susceptibility which make bad temper. but he be now a
prey to that bad irritation which arise not simply from annoyance,
but from the second consciousness underlie those annoyance, of
waste energy and a degrading preoccupation, which be the reverse of
all his former purpose. "_this_ be what I be think of; and _that_
be what I might have be think of," be the bitter incessant murmur
within he, make every difficulty a double goad to impatience.
some gentleman have make an amazing figure in literature by general
discontent with the universe as a trap of dulness into which their
great soul have fall by mistake; but the sense of a stupendous self
and an insignificant world may have its consolation. lydgate's
discontent be much hard to bear: it be the sense that there be a
grand existence in thought and effective action lie around he, while
his self be be narrow into the miserable isolation of egoistic
fear, and vulgar anxiety for event that might allay such fear.
his trouble will perhaps appear miserably sordid, and beneath the
attention of lofty person who can know nothing of debt except on a
magnificent scale. doubtless they be sordid; and for the majority,
who be not lofty, there be no escape from sordidness but by be free
from money-craving, with all its base hope and temptation, its
watch for death, its hint request, its horse-dealer's desire to
make bad work pass for good, its seeking for function which ought to be
another's, its compulsion often to long for Luck in the shape of a wide
calamity.
it be because Lydgate writhe under the idea of get his neck
beneath this vile yoke that he have fall into a bitter moody state
which be continually widen Rosamond's alienation from he. after
the first disclosure about the bill of sale, he have make many effort
to draw she into sympathy with he about possible measure for
narrow their expense, and with the threaten approach of
Christmas his proposition grow more and more definite. "we two can do
with only one servant, and live on very little," he say, "and I shall
manage with one horse." for Lydgate, as we have see, have begin to
reason, with a more distinct vision, about the expense of living, and
any share of pride he have give to appearance of that sort be meagre
compare with the pride which make he revolt from exposure as a
debtor, or from ask man to help he with their money.
"of course you can dismiss the other two servant, if you like," say
Rosamond; "but I should have think it would be very injurious to your
position for we to live in a poor way. you must expect your practice
to be lower."
"my dear Rosamond, it be not a question of choice. we have begin too
expensively. Peacock, you know, live in a much small house than
this. it be my fault: I ought to have know well, and I deserve a
thrashing--if there be anybody who have a right to give it I--for
bring you into the necessity of live in a poor way than you have
be use to. but we marry because we love each other, I suppose.
and that may help we to pull along till thing get well. come, dear,
put down that work and come to I."
he be really in chill gloom about she at that moment, but he dread a
future without affection, and be determined to resist the oncoming of
division between they. Rosamond obey he, and he take she on his
knee, but in her secret soul she be utterly aloof from he. the poor
thing see only that the world be not order to her liking, and
Lydgate be part of that world. but he hold her waist with one hand
and lay the other gently on both of her; for this rather abrupt man
have much tenderness in his manner towards woman, seem to have
always present in his imagination the weakness of their frame and the
delicate poise of their health both in body and mind. and he begin
again to speak persuasively.
"I find, now I look into thing a little, Rosy, that it be wonderful
what an amount of money slip away in our housekeeping. I suppose the
servant be careless, and we have have a great many people come. but
there must be many in our rank who manage with much less: they must do
with commoner thing, I suppose, and look after the scrap. it seem,
money go but a little way in these matter, for Wrench have everything
as plain as possible, and he have a very large practice."
"oh, if you think of live as the wrench do!" say Rosamond, with a
little turn of her neck. "but I have hear you express your disgust at
that way of living."
"yes, they have bad taste in everything--they make economy look ugly.
we neednot do that. I only mean that they avoid expense, although
Wrench have a capital practice."
"why should not you have a good practice, Tertius? Mr. Peacock have.
you should be more careful not to offend people, and you should send
out medicine as the other do. I be sure you begin well, and you get
several good house. it cannot answer to be eccentric; you should
think what will be generally like," say Rosamond, in a decide little
tone of admonition.
lydgate's anger rise: he be prepared to be indulgent towards feminine
weakness, but not towards feminine dictation. the shallowness of a
waternixie's soul may have a charm until she become didactic. but he
control himself, and only say, with a touch of despotic firmness--
"what I be to do in my practice, rosy, it be for I to judge. that be
not the question between we. it be enough for you to know that our
income be likely to be a very narrow one--hardly four hundred, perhaps
less, for a long time to come, and we must try to re-arrange our life
in accordance with that fact."
Rosamond be silent for a moment or two, look before she, and then
say, "my uncle Bulstrode ought to allow you a salary for the time you
give to the hospital: it be not right that you should work for nothing."
"it be understand from the beginning that my service would be
gratuitous. that, again, need not enter into our discussion. I have
point out what be the only probability," say Lydgate, impatiently.
then check himself, he go on more quietly--
"I think I see one resource which would free we from a good deal of the
present difficulty. I hear that young Ned Plymdale be go to be
married to Miss Sophy Toller. they be rich, and it be not often that
a good house be vacant in Middlemarch. I feel sure that they would be
glad to take this house from we with most of our furniture, and they
would be willing to pay handsomely for the lease. I can employ
Trumbull to speak to Plymdale about it."
Rosamond leave her husband's knee and walk slowly to the other end of
the room; when she turn round and walk towards he it be evident
that the tear have come, and that she be bite her under-lip and
clasp her hand to keep herself from cry. Lydgate be
wretche--shake with anger and yet feel that it would be unmanly to
vent the anger just now.
"I be very sorry, Rosamond; I know this be painful."
"I think, at least, when I have bear to send the plate back and have
that man take an inventory of the furniture--I should have think
_that_ would suffice."
"I explain it to you at the time, dear. that be only a security and
behind that security there be a debt. and that debt must be pay
within the next few month, else we shall have our furniture sell. if
young Plymdale will take our house and most of our furniture, we shall
be able to pay that debt, and some other too, and we shall be quit of
a place too expensive for we. we might take a small house: Trumbull,
I know, have a very decent one to let at thirty pound a-year, and this
be ninety." Lydgate utter this speech in the curt hammer way with
which we usually try to nail down a vague mind to imperative fact.
tear roll silently down Rosamond's cheek; she just press her
handkerchief against they, and stand look at the large vase on the
mantel-piece. it be a moment of more intense bitterness than she have
ever feel before. at last she say, without hurry and with careful
emphasis--
"I never could have believe that you would like to act in that way."
"like it?" burst out Lydgate, rise from his chair, thrust his
hand in his pocket and stalk away from the hearth; "itbe not a
question of liking. of course, I donot like it; itbe the only thing I
can do." he wheel round there, and turn towards she.
"I should have think there be many other mean than that," say
Rosamond. "let we have a sale and leave Middlemarch altogether."
"to do what? what be the use of my leave my work in Middlemarch to
go where I have none? we should be just as penniless elsewhere as we
be here," say Lydgate still more angrily.
"if we be to be in that position it will be entirely your own doing,
Tertius," say Rosamond, turn round to speak with the full
conviction. "you will not behave as you ought to do to your own
family. you offend Captain Lydgate. Sir Godwin be very kind to I
when we be at Quallingham, and I be sure if you show proper regard
to he and tell he your affair, he would do anything for you. but
rather than that, you like give up our house and furniture to Mr. Ned
Plymdale."
there be something like fierceness in Lydgate's eye, as he answer
with new violence, "well, then, if you will have it so, I do like it.
I admit that I like it well than make a fool of myself by go to
beg where itbe of no use. understand then, that it be what I _like to
do._"
there be a tone in the last sentence which be equivalent to the
clutch of his strong hand on Rosamond's delicate arm. but for all
that, his will be not a whit strong than her. she immediately
walk out of the room in silence, but with an intense determination to
hinder what Lydgate like to do.
he go out of the house, but as his blood cool he feel that the
chief result of the discussion be a deposit of dread within he at the
idea of opening with his wife in future subject which might again urge
he to violent speech. it be as if a fracture in delicate crystal have
begin, and he be afraid of any movement that might mate it fatal. his
marriage would be a mere piece of bitter irony if they could not go on
love each other. he have long ago make up his mind to what he think
be her negative character--her want of sensibility, which show
itself in disregard both of his specific wish and of his general
aim. the first great disappointment have be bear: the tender
devotedness and docile adoration of the ideal wife must be renounce,
and life must be take up on a low stage of expectation, as it be by
man who have lose their limb. but the real wife have not only her
claim, she have still a hold on his heart, and it be his intense
desire that the hold should remain strong. in marriage, the certainty,
"she will never love I much," be easy to bear than the fear, "I
shall love she no more." hence, after that outburst, his inward effort
be entirely to excuse she, and to blame the hard circumstance which
be partly his fault. he try that evening, by pet she, to heal
the wound he have make in the morning, and it be not in Rosamond's
nature to be repellent or sulky; indeed, she welcome the sign that
her husband love she and be under control. but this be something
quite distinct from love _he_. lydgate would not have choose soon to
recur to the plan of part with the house; he be resolve to carry
it out, and say as little more about it as possible. but Rosamond
herself touch on it at breakfast by say, mildly--
"have you speak to Trumbull yet?"
"no," say Lydgate, "but I shall call on he as I go by this morning.
no time must be lose." he take Rosamond's question as a sign that she
withdraw her inward opposition, and kiss her head caressingly when he
get up to go away.
as soon as it be late enough to make a call, Rosamond go to Mrs.
Plymdale, Mr. Ned's mother, and enter with pretty congratulation
into the subject of the come marriage. Mrs. Plymdale's maternal view
be, that Rosamond might possibly now have retrospective glimpse of
her own folly; and feel the advantage to be at present all on the
side of her son, be too kind a woman not to behave graciously.
"yes, Ned be most happy, I must say. and Sophy Toller be all I could
desire in a daughter-in-law. of course her father be able to do
something handsome for she--that be only what would be expect with a
brewery like his. and the connection be everything we should desire.
but that be not what I look at. she be such a very nice girl--no air,
no pretension, though on a level with the first. I donot mean with
the title aristocracy. I see very little good in people aim out of
their own sphere. I mean that Sophy be equal to the good in the town,
and she be content with that."
"I have always think she very agreeable," say Rosamond.
"I look upon it as a reward for Ned, who never hold his head too high,
that he should have get into the very good connection," continue Mrs.
Plymdale, her native sharpness soften by a fervid sense that she be
take a correct view. "and such particular people as the Tollers be,
they might have object because some of our friend be not theirs.
it be well know that your aunt Bulstrode and I have be intimate from
our youth, and Mr. Plymdale have be always on Mr. Bulstrode's side.
and I myself prefer serious opinion. but the Tollers have welcome
Ned all the same."
"I be sure he be a very deserving, well-principle young man," say
Rosamond, with a neat air of patronage in return for Mrs. Plymdale's
wholesome correction.
"oh, he have not the style of a captain in the army, or that sort of
carriage as if everybody be beneath he, or that showy kind of
talk, and singing, and intellectual talent. but I be thankful he
have not. it be a poor preparation both for here and Hereafter."
"oh dear, yes; appearance have very little to do with happiness," say
Rosamond. "I think there be every prospect of their be a happy
couple. what house will they take?"
"oh, as for that, they must put up with what they can get. they have
be look at the house in St. Peter's Place, next to Mr. Hackbutt's;
it belong to he, and he be put it nicely in repair. I suppose
they be not likely to hear of a well. indeed, I think Ned will
decide the matter to-day."
"I should think it be a nice house; I like St. Peter's Place."
"well, it be near the Church, and a genteel situation. but the window
be narrow, and it be all up and down. you donot happen to know of
any other that would be at liberty?" say Mrs. Plymdale, fix her
round black eye on Rosamond with the animation of a sudden thought in
they.
"oh no; I hear so little of those thing."
Rosamond have not foresee that question and answer in set out to
pay her visit; she have simply mean to gather any information which
would help she to avert the parting with her own house under
circumstance thoroughly disagreeable to she. as to the untruth in her
reply, she no more reflect on it than she do on the untruth there
be in she say that appearance have very little to do with
happiness. her object, she be convince, be thoroughly justifiable:
it be Lydgate whose intention be inexcusable; and there be a plan in
her mind which, when she have carry it out fully, would prove how very
false a step it would have be for he to have descend from his
position.
she return home by Mr. Borthrop Trumbull's office, mean to call
there. it be the first time in her life that Rosamond have think of
do anything in the form of business, but she feel equal to the
occasion. that she should be oblige to do what she intensely
dislike, be an idea which turn her quiet tenacity into active
invention. here be a case in which it could not be enough simply to
disobey and be serenely, placidly obstinate: she must act accord to
her judgment, and she say to herself that her judgment be
right--"indeed, if it have not be, she would not have wish to act on
it."
Mr. Trumbull be in the back-room of his office, and receive Rosamond
with his fine manner, not only because he have much sensibility to
her charm, but because the good-natured fibre in he be stir by
his certainty that Lydgate be in difficulty, and that this
uncommonly pretty woman--this young lady with the high personal
attraction--be likely to feel the pinch of trouble--to find herself
involve in circumstance beyond her control. he beg she to do he
the honor to take a seat, and stand before her trim and comport
himself with an eager solicitude, which be chiefly benevolent.
Rosamond's first question be, whether her husband have call on Mr.
Trumbull that morning, to speak about dispose of their house.
"yes, ma'am, yes, he do; he do so," say the good auctioneer, try
to throw something soothe into his iteration. "I be about to fulfil
his order, if possible, this afternoon. he wish I not to
procrastinate."
"I call to tell you not to go any far, Mr. Trumbull; and I beg of
you not to mention what have be say on the subject. will you oblige
I?"
"certainly I will, Mrs. Lydgate, certainly. confidence be sacred with
I on business or any other topic. I be then to consider the
commission withdraw?" say Mr. Trumbull, adjust the long end of
his blue cravat with both hand, and look at Rosamond deferentially.
"yes, if you please. I find that Mr. Ned Plymdale have take a house--the
one in St. Peter's Place next to Mr. Hackbutt's. Mr. Lydgate would be
annoy that his order should be fulfil uselessly. and besides
that, there be other circumstance which render the proposal
unnecessary."
"very good, Mrs. Lydgate, very good. I be at your command, whenever
you require any service of I," say Mr. Trumbull, who feel pleasure in
conjecture that some new resource have be open. "rely on I, I
beg. the affair shall go no far."
that evening Lydgate be a little comfort by observe that Rosamond
be more lively than she have usually be of late, and even seem
interested in do what would please he without be ask. he
think, "if she will be happy and I can rub through, what do it all
signify? it be only a narrow swamp that we have to pass in a long
journey. if I can get my mind clear again, I shall do."
he be so much cheer that he begin to search for an account of
experiment which he have long ago mean to look up, and have neglect
out of that creep self-despair which come in the train of petty
anxiety. he feel again some of the old delightful absorption in a
far-reach inquiry, while Rosamond play the quiet music which be
as helpful to his meditation as the plash of an oar on the evening
lake. it be rather late; he have push away all the book, and be
look at the fire with his hand clasp behind his head in
forgetfulness of everything except the construction of a new
controlling experiment, when Rosamond, who have leave the piano and be
lean back in her chair watch he, said--
"Mr. Ned Plymdale have take a house already."
Lydgate, startled and jar, look up in silence for a moment, like a
man who have be disturb in his sleep. then flush with an
unpleasant consciousness, he asked--
"how do you know?"
"I call at Mrs. Plymdale's this morning, and she tell I that he have
take the house in St. Peter's Place, next to Mr. Hackbutt's."
Lydgate be silent. he draw his hand from behind his head and press
they against the hair which be hang, as it be apt to do, in a mass
on his forehead, while he rest his elbow on his knee. he be
feel bitter disappointment, as if he have open a door out of a
suffocating place and have find it wall up; but he also feel sure
that Rosamond be pleased with the cause of his disappointment. he
prefer not look at she and not speak, until he have get over
the first spasm of vexation. after all, he say in his bitterness,
what can a woman care about so much as house and furniture? a husband
without they be an absurdity. when he look up and push his hair
aside, his dark eye have a miserable blank non-expectance of sympathy
in they, but he only say, coolly--
"perhaps some one else may turn up. I tell Trumbull to be on the
look-out if he fail with Plymdale."
Rosamond make no remark. she trust to the chance that nothing more
would pass between her husband and the auctioneer until some issue
should have justify her interference; at any rate, she have hinder
the event which she immediately dread. after a pause, she said--
"how much money be it that those disagreeable people want?"
"what disagreeable people?"
"those who take the list--and the other. I mean, how much money would
satisfy they so that you need not be trouble any more?"
Lydgate survey she for a moment, as if he be look for symptom,
and then say, "oh, if I could have get six hundred from Plymdale for
furniture and as premium, I might have manage. I could have pay off
Dover, and give enough on account to the other to make they wait
patiently, if we contract our expense."
"but I mean how much should you want if we stay in this house?"
"More than I be likely to get anywhere," say Lydgate, with rather a
grating sarcasm in his tone. it anger he to perceive that
Rosamond's mind be wander over impracticable wish instead of
face possible effort.
"why should you not mention the sum?" say Rosamond, with a mild
indication that she do not like his manner.
"well," say Lydgate in a guessing tone, "it would take at least a
thousand to set I at ease. but," he add, incisively, "I have to
consider what I shall do without it, not with it."
Rosamond say no more.
but the next day she carry out her plan of write to Sir Godwin
Lydgate. since the Captain's visit, she have receive a letter from
he, and also one from Mrs. Mengan, his married sister, condole with
she on the loss of her baby, and express vaguely the hope that they
should see she again at Quallingham. Lydgate have tell she that this
politeness mean nothing; but she be secretly convince that any
backwardness in Lydgate's family towards he be due to his cold and
contemptuous behavior, and she have answer the letter in her most
charming manner, feel some confidence that a specific invitation
would follow. but there have be total silence. the Captain evidently
be not a great penman, and Rosamond reflect that the sister might
have be abroad. however, the season be come for thinking of friend
at home, and at any rate Sir Godwin, who have chuck she under the
chin, and pronounce she to be like the celebrated beauty, Mrs. Croly,
who have make a conquest of he in 1790, would be touch by any appeal
from she, and would find it pleasant for her sake to behave as he ought
to do towards his nephew. Rosamond be naively convinced of what an
old gentleman ought to do to prevent she from suffer annoyance. and
she write what she consider the most judicious letter possible--one
which would strike Sir Godwin as a proof of her excellent sense--point
out how desirable it be that Tertius should quit such a place
as Middlemarch for one more fitted to his talent, how the unpleasant
character of the inhabitant have hinder his professional success, and
how in consequence he be in money difficulty, from which it would
require a thousand pound thoroughly to extricate he. she do not say
that Tertius be unaware of her intention to write; for she have the
idea that his suppose sanction of her letter would be in accordance
with what she do say of his great regard for his uncle Godwin as the
relative who have always be his good friend. such be the force of
Poor Rosamond's tactic now she apply they to affair.
this have happen before the party on New Year's day, and no answer have
yet come from Sir Godwin. but on the morning of that day Lydgate have
to learn that Rosamond have revoke his order to Borthrop Trumbull.
feel it necessary that she should be gradually accustom to the
idea of their quit the house in Lowick Gate, he overcome his
reluctance to speak to she again on the subject, and when they be
breakfast said--
"I shall try to see Trumbull this morning, and tell he to advertise
the house in the 'Pioneer' and the 'Trumpet.' if the thing be
advertise, some one might be incline to take it who would not
otherwise have think of a change. in these country place many
people go on in their old house when their family be too large for
they, for want of know where they can find another. and Trumbull
seem to have get no bite at all."
Rosamond know that the inevitable moment be come. "I order Trumbull
not to inquire far," she say, with a careful calmness which be
evidently defensive.
Lydgate star at she in mute amazement. only half an hour before he
have be fasten up her plait for she, and talk the "little
language" of affection, which Rosamond, though not return it,
accept as if she have be a serene and lovely image, now and then
miraculously dimple towards her votary. with such fibre still astir
in he, the shock he receive could not at once be distinctly anger; it
be confused pain. he lay down the knife and fork with which he be
carve, and throw himself back in his chair, say at last, with a
cool irony in his tone--
"may I ask when and why you do so?"
"when I know that the plymdale have take a house, I call to tell he
not to mention our to they; and at the same time I tell he not to let
the affair go on any far. I know that it would be very injurious
to you if it be know that you wish to part with your house and
furniture, and I have a very strong objection to it. I think that be
reason enough."
"it be of no consequence then that I have tell you imperative reason
of another kind; of no consequence that I have come to a different
conclusion, and give an order accordingly?" say lydgate, bitingly,
the thunder and lightning gathering about his brow and eye.
the effect of any one's anger on Rosamond have always be to make she
shrink in cold dislike, and to become all the more calmly correct, in
the conviction that she be not the person to misbehave whatever other
might do. she replied--
"I think I have a perfect right to speak on a subject which concern I
at least as much as you."
"clearly--you have a right to speak, but only to I. you have no right
to contradict my order secretly, and treat I as if I be a fool,"
say Lydgate, in the same tone as before. then with some add scorn,
"be it possible to make you understand what the consequence will be?
be it of any use for I to tell you again why we must try to part with
the house?"
"it be not necessary for you to tell I again," say Rosamond, in a
voice that fall and trickle like cold water-drop. "I remember what
you say. you speak just as violently as you do now. but that do
not alter my opinion that you ought to try every other mean rather
than take a step which be so painful to I. and as to advertise the
house, I think it would be perfectly degrading to you."
"and suppose I disregard your opinion as you disregard mine?"
"you can do so, of course. but I think you ought to have tell I
before we be married that you would place I in the bad position,
rather than give up your own will."
Lydgate do not speak, but toss his head on one side, and twitch
the corner of his mouth in despair. Rosamond, see that he be not
look at she, rise and set his cup of coffee before he; but he take
no notice of it, and go on with an inward drama and argument,
occasionally move in his seat, rest one arm on the table, and
rub his hand against his hair. there be a conflux of emotion and
thought in he that would not let he either give thorough way to his
anger or persevere with simple rigidity of resolve. Rosamond take
advantage of his silence.
"when we be married everyone feel that your position be very high.
I could not have imagine then that you would want to sell our
furniture, and take a house in Bride Street, where the room be like
cage. if we be to live in that way let we at least leave
Middlemarch."
"these would be very strong consideration," say lydgate, half
ironically--still there be a withered paleness about his lip as he
look at his coffee, and do not drink--"these would be very strong
consideration if I do not happen to be in debt."
"many person must have be in debt in the same way, but if they be
respectable, people trust they. I be sure I have hear papa say that
the Torbits be in debt, and they go on very well. it cannot be
good to act rashly," say Rosamond, with serene wisdom.
Lydgate sit paralyze by oppose impulse: since no reasoning he could
apply to Rosamond seem likely to conquer her assent, he want to
smash and grind some object on which he could at least produce an
impression, or else to tell she brutally that he be master, and she
must obey. but he not only dread the effect of such extremity on
their mutual life--he have a grow dread of Rosamond's quiet elusive
obstinacy, which would not allow any assertion of power to be final;
and again, she have touch he in a spot of keen feeling by imply
that she have be delude with a false vision of happiness in marry
he. as to say that he be master, it be not the fact. the very
resolution to which he have work himself by dint of logic and
honorable pride be begin to relax under her torpedo contact. he
swallow half his cup of coffee, and then rise to go.
"I may at least request that you will not go to Trumbull at
present--until it have be see that there be no other mean," say
Rosamond. although she be not subject to much fear, she feel it safe
not to betray that she have write to Sir Godwin. "promise I that you
will not go to he for a few week, or without tell I."
Lydgate give a short laugh. "I think it be I who should exact a
promise that you will do nothing without tell I," he say, turn
his eye sharply upon she, and then move to the door.
"you remember that we be go to dine at papa's," say Rosamond,
wish that he should turn and make a more thorough concession to she.
but he only say "oh yes," impatiently, and go away. she hold it to
be very odious in he that he do not think the painful proposition he
have have to make to she be enough, without show so unpleasant a
temper. and when she put the moderate request that he would defer
go to Trumbull again, it be cruel in he not to assure she of what
he mean to do. she be convince of she have act in every way for
the good; and each grating or angry speech of Lydgate's serve only as
an addition to the register of offence in her mind. poor Rosamond for
month have begin to associate her husband with feeling of
disappointment, and the terribly inflexible relation of marriage have
lose its charm of encourage delightful dream. it have free she from
the disagreeable of her father's house, but it have not give she
everything that she have wish and hop. the Lydgate with whom she
have be in love have be a group of airy condition for she, most of
which have disappear, while their place have be take by every-day
detail which must be live through slowly from hour to hour, not
float through with a rapid selection of favorable aspect. the
habit of Lydgate's profession, his home preoccupation with scientific
subject, which seem to she almost like a morbid vampire's taste, his
peculiar view of thing which have never enter into the dialogue of
courtship--all these continually alienate influence, even without
the fact of his have place himself at a disadvantage in the town,
and without that first shock of revelation about Dover's debt, would
have make his presence dull to she. there be another presence which
ever since the early day of her marriage, until four month ago, have
be an agreeable excitement, but that be go: Rosamond would not
confess to herself how much the consequent blank have to do with her
utter ennui; and it seem to she (perhaps she be right) that an
invitation to Quallingham, and an opening for Lydgate to settle
elsewhere than in Middlemarch--in London, or somewhere likely to be
free from unpleasantness--would satisfy she quite well, and make she
indifferent to the absence of Will Ladislaw, towards whom she feel some
resentment for his exaltation of Mrs. Casaubon.
that be the state of thing with Lydgate and Rosamond on the New
Year's day when they din at her father's, she look mildly neutral
towards he in remembrance of his ill-temper behavior at breakfast,
and he carry a much deep effect from the inward conflict in which
that morning scene be only one of many epoch. his flushed effort
while talk to Mr. Farebrother--his effort after the cynical pretence
that all way of get money be essentially the same, and that
chance have an empire which reduce choice to a fool's illusion--be but
the symptom of a waver resolve, a benumbed response to the old
stimulus of enthusiasm.
what be he to do? he see even more keenly than Rosamond do the
dreariness of take she into the small house in Bride Street, where
she would have scanty furniture around she and discontent within: a
life of privation and life with Rosamond be two image which have
become more and more irreconcilable ever since the threat of privation
have disclose itself. but even if his resolve have force the two
image into combination, the useful preliminary to that hard change
be not visibly within reach. and though he have not give the promise
which his wife have ask for, he do not go again to Trumbull. he even
begin to think of take a rapid journey to the North and see Sir
Godwin. he have once believe that nothing would urge he into make
an application for money to his uncle, but he have not then know the
full pressure of alternative yet more disagreeable. he could not
depend on the effect of a letter; it be only in an interview, however
disagreeable this might be to himself, that he could give a thorough
explanation and could test the effectiveness of kinship. no soon have
Lydgate begin to represent this step to himself as the easy than
there be a reaction of anger that he--he who have long ago determine
to live aloof from such abject calculation, such self-interest
anxiety about the inclination and the pocket of man with whom he have
be proud to have no aim in common--should have fall not simply to
their level, but to the level of solicit they.
CHAPTER LXV.
"one of we two must bowen douteless,
and, sith a man be more reasonable
than woman be, ye [man] moste be suffrable.
--CHAUCER: Canterbury Tales.
the bias of human nature to be slow in correspondence triumph even
over the present quickening in the general pace of thing: what wonder
then that in 1832 old Sir Godwin Lydgate be slow to write a letter
which be of consequence to other rather than to himself? nearly
three week of the new year be go, and Rosamond, await an answer
to her win appeal, be every day disappoint. lydgate, in total
ignorance of her expectation, be see the bill come in, and
feel that Dover's use of his advantage over other creditor be
imminent. he have never mention to Rosamond his brood purpose of
go to Quallingham: he do not want to admit what would appear to she
a concession to her wish after indignant refusal, until the last
moment; but he be really expect to set off soon. a slice of the
railway would enable he to manage the whole journey and back in four
day.
but one morning after Lydgate have go out, a letter come address to
he, which Rosamond see clearly to be from Sir Godwin. she be full of
hope. perhaps there might be a particular note to she enclose; but
Lydgate be naturally address on the question of money or other aid,
and the fact that he be write to, nay, the very delay in writing at
all, seem to certify that the answer be thoroughly compliant. she
be too much excited by these thought to do anything but light
stitch in a warm corner of the dining-room, with the outside of this
momentous letter lie on the table before she. about twelve she hear
her husband's step in the passage, and trip to open the door, she
say in her light tone, "Tertius, come in here--here be a letter
for you."
"ah?" he say, not take off his hat, but just turn her round
within his arm to walk towards the spot where the letter lie. "my
uncle Godwin!" he exclaim, while Rosamond reseat herself, and
watch he as he open the letter. she have expect he to be
surprised.
while Lydgate's eye glance rapidly over the brief letter, she see his
face, usually of a pale brown, take on a dry whiteness; with nostril
and lip quiver he toss down the letter before she, and say
violently--
"it will be impossible to endure life with you, if you will always be
act secretly--act in opposition to I and hide your action."
he check his speech and turn his back on she--then wheel round
and walk about, sit down, and get up again restlessly, grasp hard
the object deep down in his pocket. he be afraid of say
something irremediably cruel.
Rosamond too have change color as she read. the letter run in this
way:--
"DEAR TERTIUS,--Don't set your wife to write to I when you have
anything to ask. it be a roundabout wheedling sort of thing which I
should not have credit you with. I never choose to write to a woman
on matter of business. as to my supply you with a thousand pound,
or only half that sum, I can do nothing of the sort. my own family
drain I to the last penny. with two young son and three
daughter, I be not likely to have cash to spare. you seem to have get
through your own money pretty quickly, and to have make a mess where
you be; the soon you go somewhere else the well. but I have
nothing to do with man of your profession, and cannot help you there. I
do the good I could for you as guardian, and let you have your own way
in take to medicine. you might have go into the army or the
Church. your money would have hold out for that, and there would have
be a surer ladder before you. your uncle Charles have have a grudge
against you for not go into his profession, but not I. I have always
wish you well, but you must consider yourself on your own leg
entirely now.
your affectionate uncle,
GODWIN LYDGATE."
when Rosamond have finish read the letter she sit quite still, with
her hand fold before she, restrain any show of her keen
disappointment, and intrench herself in quiet passivity under her
husband's wrath. Lydgate pause in his movement, look at she again,
and say, with bite severity--
"will this be enough to convince you of the harm you may do by secret
meddling? have you sense enough to recognize now your incompetence to
judge and act for I--to interfere with your ignorance in affair which
it belong to I to decide on?"
the word be hard; but this be not the first time that Lydgate have
be frustrate by she. she do not look at he, and make no reply.
"I have nearly resolve on go to Quallingham. it would have cost I
pain enough to do it, yet it might have be of some use. but it have
be of no use for I to think of anything. you have always be
counteract I secretly. you delude I with a false assent, and then
I be at the mercy of your device. if you mean to resist every wish I
express, say so and defy I. I shall at least know what I be do
then."
it be a terrible moment in young life when the closeness of love's
bond have turn to this power of gall. in spite of Rosamond's
self-control a tear fall silently and roll over her lip. she still
say nothing; but under that quietude be hide an intense effect: she
be in such entire disgust with her husband that she wish she have
never see he. Sir Godwin's rudeness towards she and utter want of
feeling range he with Dover and all other creditor--disagreeable
people who only think of themselves, and do not mind how annoying
they be to she. even her father be unkind, and might have do more
for they. in fact there be but one person in Rosamond's world whom
she do not regard as blameworthy, and that be the graceful creature
with blond plait and with little hand cross before she, who have
never express herself unbecomingly, and have always act for the
good--the good naturally be what she well like.
lydgate pause and look at she begin to feel that half-madden
sense of helplessness which come over passionate people when their
passion be meet by an innocent-look silence whose meek victimize air
seem to put they in the wrong, and at last infect even the justest
indignation with a doubt of its justice. he need to recover the full
sense that he be in the right by moderate his word.
"can you not see, Rosamond," he begin again, try to be simply grave
and not bitter, "that nothing can be so fatal as a want of openness and
confidence between we? it have happen again and again that I have
express a decide wish, and you have seem to assent, yet after that
you have secretly disobey my wish. in that way I can never know what
I have to trust to. there would be some hope for we if you would admit
this. be I such an unreasonable, furious brute? why should you not be
open with I?" still silence.
"will you only say that you have be mistake, and that I may depend
on your not act secretly in future?" say Lydgate, urgently, but
with something of request in his tone which Rosamond be quick to
perceive. she speak with coolness.
"I cannot possibly make admission or promise in answer to such word
as you have use towards I. I have not be accustom to language of
that kind. you have speak of my 'secret meddling,' and my
'interfere ignorance,' and my 'false assent.' I have never express
myself in that way to you, and I think that you ought to apologize.
you speak of its be impossible to live with I. certainly you have
not make my life pleasant to I of late. I think it be to be expect
that I should try to avert some of the hardship which our marriage have
bring on I." another tear fall as Rosamond cease speak, and she
press it away as quietly as the first.
Lydgate fling himself into a chair, feel checkmate. what place be
there in her mind for a remonstrance to lodge in? he lay down his
hat, fling an arm over the back of his chair, and look down for some
moment without speak. Rosamond have the double purchase over he of
insensibility to the point of justice in his reproach, and of
sensibility to the undeniable hardship now present in her married
life. although her duplicity in the affair of the house have exceed
what he know, and have really hinder the Plymdales from know of it,
she have no consciousness that her action could rightly be call false.
we be not oblige to identify our own act accord to a strict
classification, any more than the material of our grocery and clothe.
Rosamond feel that she be aggrieve, and that this be what Lydgate
have to recognize.
as for he, the need of accommodate himself to her nature, which be
inflexible in proportion to its negation, hold he as with pincer.
he have begin to have an alarmed foresight of her irrevocable loss of
love for he, and the consequent dreariness of their life. the ready
fulness of his emotion make this dread alternate quickly with the
first violent movement of his anger. it would assuredly have be a
vain boast in he to say that he be her master.
"you have not make my life pleasant to I of late"--"the hardship
which our marriage have bring on me"--these word be sting his
imagination as a pain make an exaggerated dream. if he be not only
to sink from his high resolve, but to sink into the hideous
fettering of domestic hate?
"Rosamond," he say, turn his eye on she with a melancholy look,
"you should allow for a man's word when he be disappoint and
provoke. you and I cannot have opposite interest. I cannot part my
happiness from your. if I be angry with you, it be that you seem not
to see how any concealment divide we. how could I wish to make
anything hard to you either by my word or conduct? when I hurt you, I
hurt part of my own life. I should never be angry with you if you
would be quite open with I."
"I have only wish to prevent you from hurry we into wretchedness
without any necessity," say Rosamond, the tear come again from a
soften feeling now that her husband have soften. "it be so very
hard to be disgrace here among all the people we know, and to live in
such a miserable way. I wish I have die with the baby."
she speak and weep with that gentleness which make such word and
tear omnipotent over a loving-hearted man. Lydgate draw his chair
near to hers and press her delicate head against his cheek with his
powerful tender hand. he only caress she; he do not say anything;
for what be there to say? he could not promise to shield she from the
dread wretchedness, for he could see no sure mean of do so. when
he leave she to go out again, he tell himself that it be ten time
hard for she than for he: he have a life away from home, and constant
appeal to his activity on behalf of other. he wish to excuse
everything in she if he could--but it be inevitable that in that
excuse mood he should think of she as if she be an animal of
another and feebler specie. nevertheless she have master he.
CHAPTER LXVI.
"'tis one thing to be tempt, Escalus,
another thing to fall."
--measure for measure.
Lydgate certainly have good reason to reflect on the service his
practice do he in counteract his personal care. he have no long
free energy enough for spontaneous research and speculative thinking,
but by the bedside of patient, the direct external call on his
judgment and sympathy bring the add impulse need to draw he
out of himself. it be not simply that beneficent harness of routine
which enable silly man to live respectably and unhappy man to live
calmly--it be a perpetual claim on the immediate fresh application of
thought, and on the consideration of another's need and trial. many of
we look back through life would say that the kind man we have
ever know have be a medical man, or perhaps that surgeon whose fine
tact, direct by deeply inform perception, have come to we in our
need with a more sublime beneficence than that of miracle-worker. some
of that twice-bless mercy be always with Lydgate in his work at the
Hospital or in private house, serve well than any opiate to quiet
and sustain he under his anxiety and his sense of mental degeneracy.
Mr. Farebrother's suspicion as to the opiate be true, however. under
the first gall pressure of foresee difficulty, and the first
perception that his marriage, if it be not to be a yoked loneliness,
must be a state of effort to go on love without too much care about
be love, he have once or twice try a dose of opium. but he have no
hereditary constitutional craving after such transient escape from the
haunting of misery. he be strong, could drink a great deal of wine,
but do not care about it; and when the man round he be drink
spirit, he take sugar and water, have a contemptuous pity even for
the early stage of excitement from drink. it be the same with
gambling. he have look on at a great deal of gambling in Paris,
watch it as if it have be a disease. he be no more tempt by
such winning than he be by drink. he have say to himself that the
only win he care for must be attain by a conscious process of
high, difficult combination tend towards a beneficent result. the
power he long for could not be represent by agitated finger
clutch a heap of coin, or by the half-barbarous, half-idiotic
triumph in the eye of a man who sweep within his arm the venture of
twenty chapfallen companion.
but just as he have try opium, so his thought now begin to turn upon
gambling--not with appetite for its excitement, but with a sort of
wistful inward gaze after that easy way of get money, which imply
no asking and bring no responsibility. if he have be in London or
Paris at that time, it be probable that such thought, second by
opportunity, would have take he into a gambling-house, no long to
watch the gambler, but to watch with they in kindre eagerness.
Repugnance would have be surmount by the immense need to win, if
chance would be kind enough to let he. an incident which happen not
very long after that airy notion of get aid from his uncle have be
exclude, be a strong sign of the effect that might have follow any
extant opportunity of gambling.
the billiard-room at the Green Dragon be the constant resort of a
certain set, most of whom, like our acquaintance Mr. Bambridge, be
regard as man of pleasure. it be here that poor Fred Vincy have make
part of his memorable debt, have lose money in bet, and be
oblige to borrow of that gay companion. it be generally know in
Middlemarch that a good deal of money be lose and win in this way; and
the consequent repute of the Green Dragon as a place of dissipation
naturally heighten in some quarter the temptation to go there.
probably its regular visitant, like the initiate of freemasonry,
wish that there be something a little more tremendous to keep to
themselves concern it; but they be not a closed community, and
many decent senior as well as junior occasionally turn into the
billiard-room to see what be go on. lydgate, who have the muscular
aptitude for billiard, and be fond of the game, have once or twice in
the early day after his arrival in Middlemarch take his turn with the
cue at the Green Dragon; but afterwards he have no leisure for the game,
and no inclination for the sociality there. one evening, however, he
have occasion to seek Mr. Bambridge at that resort. the horsedealer have
engage to get he a customer for his remain good horse, for which
Lydgate have determine to substitute a cheap hack, hop by this
reduction of style to get perhaps twenty pound; and he care now for
every small sum, as a help towards feed the patience of his
tradesman. to run up to the billiard-room, as he be pass, would
save time.
Mr. Bambridge be not yet come, bat would be sure to arrive by-and-by,
say his friend Mr. Horrock; and Lydgate stay, play a game for the
sake of pass the time. that evening he have the peculiar light in
the eye and the unusual vivacity which have be once notice in he by
Mr. Farebrother. the exceptional fact of his presence be much notice
in the room, where there be a good deal of Middlemarch company; and
several looker-on, as well as some of the player, be bet with
animation. Lydgate be play well, and feel confident; the bet be
drop round he, and with a swift glance thought of the probable
gain which might double the sum he be save from his horse, he begin
to bet on his own play, and win again and again. Mr. Bambridge have
come in, but Lydgate do not notice he. he be not only excited with
his play, but vision be gleam on he of go the next day to
Brassing, where there be gamble on a grander scale to be have, and
where, by one powerful snatch at the devil's bait, he might carry it
off without the hook, and buy his rescue from his daily soliciting.
he be still win when two new visitor enter. one of they be a
young Hawley, just come from his law study in town, and the other be
Fred Vincy, who have spend several evening of late at this old haunt of
his. Young Hawley, an accomplished billiard-player, bring a cool
fresh hand to the cue. but Fred Vincy, startle at see Lydgate, and
astonish to see he bet with an excited air, stand aside, and
keep out of the circle round the table.
Fred have be rewarding resolution by a little laxity of late. he have
be work heartily for six month at all outdoor occupation under
Mr. Garth, and by dint of severe practice have nearly master the
defect of his handwriting, this practice be, perhaps, a little the
less severe that it be often carry on in the evening at Mr. Garth's
under the eye of Mary. but the last fortnight Mary have be stay
at Lowick Parsonage with the lady there, during Mr. Farebrother's
residence in Middlemarch, where he be carry out some parochial
plan; and Fred, not see anything more agreeable to do, have turn
into the Green Dragon, partly to play at billiard, partly to taste the
old flavor of discourse about horse, sport, and thing in general,
consider from a point of view which be not strenuously correct. he
have not be out hunt once this season, have have no horse of his own
to ride, and have go from place to place chiefly with Mr. Garth in his
gig, or on the sober cob which Mr. Garth could lend he. it be a
little too bad, Fred begin to think, that he should be keep in the
trace with more severity than if he have be a clergyman. "I will
tell you what, Mistress Mary--it will be rather hard work to learn
surveying and draw plan than it would have be to write sermon,"
he have say, wish she to appreciate what he go through for she
sake; "and as to Hercules and Theseus, they be nothing to I. they
have sport, and never learn to write a bookkeeping hand." and now,
Mary be out of the way for a little while, Fred, like any other
strong dog who cannot slip his collar, have pull up the staple of his
chain and make a small escape, not of course mean to go fast or far.
there could be no reason why he should not play at billiard, but he
be determine not to bet. as to money just now, Fred have in his mind
the heroic project of save almost all of the eighty pound that Mr.
Garth offer he, and return it, which he could easily do by give
up all futile money-spending, since he have a superfluous stock of
clothe, and no expense in his board. in that way he could, in one
year, go a good way towards repay the ninety pound of which he have
deprive Mrs. Garth, unhappily at a time when she need that sum more
than she do now. nevertheless, it must be acknowledge that on this
evening, which be the fifth of his recent visit to the billiard-room,
Fred have, not in his pocket, but in his mind, the ten pound which he
mean to reserve for himself from his half-year's salary (have before
he the pleasure of carry thirty to Mrs. Garth when Mary be likely
to be come home again)--he have those ten pound in his mind as a fund
from which he might risk something, if there be a chance of a good
bet. why? well, when sovereign be fly about, why shouldnot he
catch a few? he would never go far along that road again; but a man
like to assure himself, and man of pleasure generally, what he could
do in the way of mischief if he choose, and that if he abstain from
make himself ill, or beggar himself, or talk with the utmost
looseness which the narrow limit of human capacity will allow, it be
not because he be a spooney. Fred do not enter into formal reason,
which be a very artificial, inexact way of represent the tingling
return of old habit, and the caprice of young blood: but there be
lurk in he a prophetic sense that evening, that when he begin to
play he should also begin to bet--that he should enjoy some
punch-drinking, and in general prepare himself for feel "rather
seedy" in the morning. it be in such indefinable movement that action
often begin.
but the last thing likely to have enter Fred's expectation be that
he should see his brother-in-law Lydgate--of whom he have never quite
drop the old opinion that he be a prig, and tremendously conscious
of his superiority--look excited and bet, just as he himself
might have do. Fred feel a shock great than he could quite account
for by the vague knowledge that Lydgate be in debt, and that his
father have refuse to help he; and his own inclination to enter into
the play be suddenly check. it be a strange reversal of attitude:
Fred's blond face and blue eye, usually bright and careless, ready to
give attention to anything that hold out a promise of amusement,
look involuntarily grave and almost embarrassed as if by the sight
of something unfit; while Lydgate, who have habitually an air of
self-possess strength, and a certain meditativeness that seem to
lie behind his most observant attention, be act, watch, speak
with that excited narrow consciousness which remind one of an animal
with fierce eye and retractile claw.
Lydgate, by bet on his own stroke, have win sixteen pound; but
young Hawley's arrival have change the poise of thing. he make
first-rate stroke himself, and begin to bet against Lydgate's stroke,
the strain of whose nerve be thus change from simple confidence in
his own movement to defy another person's doubt in they. the
defiance be more exciting than the confidence, but it be less sure.
he continue to bet on his own play, but begin often to fail. still he
go on, for his mind be as utterly narrow into that precipitous
crevice of play as if he have be the most ignorant lounger there.
Fred observe that Lydgate be lose fast, and find himself in the
new situation of puzzle his brain to think of some device by which,
without be offensive, he could withdraw Lydgate's attention, and
perhaps suggest to he a reason for quit the room. he see that
other be observe Lydgate's strange unlikeness to himself, and it
occur to he that merely to touch his elbow and call he aside for a
moment might rouse he from his absorption. he could think of nothing
cleverer than the dare improbability of say that he want to see
Rosy, and wish to know if she be at home this evening; and he be
go desperately to carry out this weak device, when a waiter come up
to he with a message, say that Mr. Farebrother be below, and
beg to speak with he.
Fred be surprised, not quite comfortably, but send word that he
would be down immediately, he go with a new impulse up to Lydgate,
say, "can I speak to you a moment?" and draw he aside.
"Farebrother have just send up a message to say that he want to speak
to I. he be below. I think you might like to know he be there, if
you have anything to say to he."
Fred have simply snatch up this pretext for speak, because he could
not say, "you be lose confoundedly, and be make everybody stare
at you; you have well come away." but inspiration could hardly have
serve he well. Lydgate have not before see that Fred be present,
and his sudden appearance with an announcement of Mr. Farebrother have
the effect of a sharp concussion.
"no, no," say Lydgate; "I have nothing particular to say to he.
but--the game be up--I must be go--I come in just to see Bambridge."
"Bambridge be over there, but he be make a row--I donot think hebe
ready for business. come down with I to Farebrother. I expect he be
go to blow I up, and you will shield I," say Fred, with some
adroitness.
Lydgate feel shame, but could not bear to act as if he feel it, by
refuse to see Mr. Farebrother; and he go down. they merely shake
hand, however, and speak of the frost; and when all three have turn
into the street, the Vicar seem quite willing to say good-by to
Lydgate. his present purpose be clearly to talk with Fred alone, and
he say, kindly, "I disturb you, young gentleman, because I have some
press business with you. walk with I to St. Botolph's, will you?"
it be a fine night, the sky thick with star, and Mr. Farebrother
propose that they should make a circuit to the old church by the
London road. the next thing he say was--
"I think Lydgate never go to the Green Dragon?"
"so do I," say Fred. "but he say that he go to see Bambridge."
"he be not play, then?"
Fred have not mean to tell this, but he be oblige now to say, "yes,
he be. but I suppose it be an accidental thing. I have never see
he there before."
"you have be go often yourself, then, lately?"
"oh, about five or six time."
"I think you have some good reason for give up the habit of go
there?"
"yes. you know all about it," say Fred, not like to be catechise
in this way. "I make a clean breast to you."
"I suppose that give I a warrant to speak about the matter now. it
be understand between we, be it not?--that we be on a footing of open
friendship: I have listen to you, and you will be willing to listen
to I. I may take my turn in talk a little about myself?"
"I be under the deep obligation to you, Mr. Farebrother," say Fred,
in a state of uncomfortable surmise.
"I will not affect to deny that you be under some obligation to I.
but I be go to confess to you, Fred, that I have be tempt to
reverse all that by keep silence with you just now. when somebody
say to I, 'Young Vincy have take to be at the billiard-table every
night again--he willnot bear the curb long;' I be tempt to do the
opposite of what I be do--to hold my tongue and wait while you go
down the ladder again, bet first and then--"
"I have not make any bet," say Fred, hastily.
"glad to hear it. but I say, my prompting be to look on and see you
take the wrong turning, wear out Garth's patience, and lose the good
opportunity of your life--the opportunity which you make some rather
difficult effort to secure. you can guess the feeling which raise
that temptation in I--I be sure you know it. I be sure you know that
the satisfaction of your affection stand in the way of mine."
there be a pause. Mr. Farebrother seem to wait for a recognition of
the fact; and the emotion perceptible in the tone of his fine voice
give solemnity to his word. but no feeling could quell Fred's alarm.
"I could not be expect to give she up," he say, after a moment's
hesitation: it be not a case for any pretence of generosity.
"clearly not, when her affection meet your. but relation of this
sort, even when they be of long standing, be always liable to change.
I can easily conceive that you might act in a way to loosen the tie she
feel towards you--it must be remember that she be only conditionally
bind to you--and that in that case, another man, who may flatter
himself that he have a hold on her regard, might succeed in win that
firm place in her love as well as respect which you have let slip. I
can easily conceive such a result," repeat Mr. Farebrother,
emphatically. "there be a companionship of ready sympathy, which might
get the advantage even over the long association." it seem to
Fred that if Mr. Farebrother have have a beak and talon instead of his
very capable tongue, his mode of attack could hardly be more cruel. he
have a horrible conviction that behind all this hypothetic statement
there be a knowledge of some actual change in Mary's feeling.
"of course I know it might easily be all up with I," he say, in a
troubled voice. "if she be begin to compare--" he break off, not
like to betray all he feel, and then say, by the help of a little
bitterness, "but I think you be friendly to I."
"so I be; that be why we be here. but I have have a strong disposition
to be otherwise. I have say to myself, 'if there be a likelihood of
that youngster do himself harm, why should you interfere? benot
you worth as much as he be, and donot your sixteen year over and above
his, in which you have go rather hungry, give you more right to
satisfaction than he have? if therebe a chance of his go to the
dog, let he--perhaps you could nohow hinder it--and do you take the
benefit.'"
there be a pause, in which Fred be seize by a most uncomfortable
chill. what be come next? he dread to hear that something have
be say to Mary--he feel as if he be listen to a threat rather
than a warning. when the Vicar begin again there be a change in his
tone like the encourage transition to a major key.
"but I have once mean well than that, and I be come back to my old
intention. I think that I could hardly _secure myself_ in it well,
Fred, than by tell you just what have go on in I. and now, do you
understand I? I want you to make the happiness of her life and your
own, and if there be any chance that a word of warning from I may turn
aside any risk to the contrary--well, I have utter it."
there be a drop in the Vicar's voice when he speak the last word he
pause--they be stand on a patch of green where the road diverge
towards St. Botolph's, and he put out his hand, as if to imply that the
conversation be close. Fred be move quite newly. some one highly
susceptible to the contemplation of a fine act have say, that it
produce a sort of regenerate shudder through the frame, and make
one feel ready to begin a new life. a good degree of that effect be
just then present in Fred Vincy.
"I will try to be worthy," he say, break off before he could say
"of you as well as of she." and meanwhile Mr. Farebrother have gather
the impulse to say something more.
"you must not imagine that I believe there be at present any decline in
her preference of you, Fred. set your heart at rest, that if you keep
right, other thing will keep right."
"I shall never forget what you have do," Fred answer. "I cannot say
anything that seem worth say--only I will try that your goodness
shall not be throw away."
"thatbe enough. good-by, and God bless you."
in that way they part. but both of they walk about a long while
before they go out of the starlight. much of Fred's rumination might
be sum up in the word, "it certainly would have be a fine thing
for she to marry Farebrother--but if she love I good and I be a good
husband?"
perhaps Mr. Farebrother's might be concentrate into a single shrug and
one little speech. "to think of the part one little woman can play in
the life of a man, so that to renounce she may be a very good imitation
of heroism, and to win she may be a discipline!"
CHAPTER LXVII.
now be there civil war within the soul:
Resolve be thrust from off the sacred throne
by clamorous need, and Pride the grand-vizier
make humble compact, play the supple part
of envoy and deft-tongue apologist
for hungry rebel.
Happily Lydgate have end by lose in the billiard-room, and bring
away no encouragement to make a raid on luck. on the contrary, he feel
unmixed disgust with himself the next day when he have to pay four or
five pound over and above his gain, and he carry about with he a
most unpleasant vision of the figure he have make, not only rub
elbow with the man at the Green Dragon but behave just as they do.
a philosopher fall to bet be hardly distinguishable from a
Philistine under the same circumstance: the difference will chiefly be
find in his subsequent reflection, and Lydgate chew a very
disagreeable cud in that way. his reason tell he how the affair might
have be magnify into ruin by a slight change of scenery--if it have
be a gambling-house that he have turn into, where chance could be
clutch with both hand instead of be pick up with thumb and
fore-finger. nevertheless, though reason strangle the desire to
gamble, there remain the feeling that, with an assurance of luck to
the needful amount, he would have like to gamble, rather than take the
alternative which be begin to urge itself as inevitable.
that alternative be to apply to Mr. Bulstrode. Lydgate have so many
time boast both to himself and other that he be totally
independent of Bulstrode, to whose plan he have lend himself solely
because they enable he to carry out his own idea of professional
work and public benefit--he have so constantly in their personal
intercourse have his pride sustain by the sense that he be make a
good social use of this predominate banker, whose opinion he think
contemptible and whose motif often seem to he an absurd mixture of
contradictory impression--that he have be create for himself
strong ideal obstacle to the proffering of any considerable request to
he on his own account.
still, early in March his affair be at that pass in which man begin
to say that their oath be deliver in ignorance, and to perceive
that the act which they have call impossible to they be become
manifestly possible. with Dover's ugly security soon to be put in
force, with the proceed of his practice immediately absorb in pay
back debt, and with the chance, if the bad be know, of daily
supply be refuse on credit, above all with the vision of
Rosamond's hopeless discontent continually haunt he, Lydgate have
begin to see that he should inevitably bend himself to ask help from
somebody or other. at first he have consider whether he should write
to Mr. Vincy; but on question Rosamond he find that, as he have
suspect, she have already apply twice to her father, the last time
be since the disappointment from Sir Godwin; and papa have say that
Lydgate must look out for himself. "Papa say he have come, with one
bad year after another, to trade more and more on borrow capital, and
have have to give up many indulgence; he could not spare a single
hundred from the charge of his family. he say, let Lydgate ask
Bulstrode: they have always be hand and glove."
indeed, Lydgate himself have come to the conclusion that if he must end
by ask for a free loan, his relation with Bulstrode, more at least
than with any other man, might take the shape of a claim which be not
purely personal. Bulstrode have indirectly help to cause the failure
of his practice, and have also be highly gratified by get a
medical partner in his plans:--but who among we ever reduce himself
to the sort of dependence in which Lydgate now stand, without try to
believe that he have claim which diminish the humiliation of ask?
it be true that of late there have seem to be a new languor of
interest in Bulstrode about the Hospital; but his health have get bad,
and show sign of a deep-seat nervous affection. in other respect
he do not appear to be change: he have always be highly polite, but
Lydgate have observe in he from the first a marked coldness about his
marriage and other private circumstance, a coldness which he have
hitherto prefer to any warmth of familiarity between they. he
defer the intention from day to day, his habit of act on his
conclusion be make infirm by his repugnance to every possible
conclusion and its consequent act. he see Mr. Bulstrode often, but he
do not try to use any occasion for his private purpose. at one moment
he think, "I will write a letter: I prefer that to any circuitous
talk;" at another he think, "no; if I be talk to he, I could
make a retreat before any sign of disinclination."
still the day pass and no letter be write, no special interview
seek. in his shrinking from the humiliation of a dependent attitude
towards Bulstrode, he begin to familiarize his imagination with another
step even more unlike his remembered self. he begin spontaneously to
consider whether it would be possible to carry out that puerile notion
of Rosamond's which have often make he angry, namely, that they should
quit Middlemarch without see anything beyond that preface. the
question came--"would any man buy the practice of I even now, for as
little as it be worth? then the sale might happen as a necessary
preparation for go away."
but against his take this step, which he still feel to be a
contemptible relinquishment of present work, a guilty turning aside
from what be a real and might be a widen channel for worthy
activity, to start again without any justified destination, there be
this obstacle, that the purchaser, if procurable at all, might not be
quickly forthcoming. and afterwards? rosamond in a poor lodging,
though in the large city or most distant town, would not find the
life that could save she from gloom, and save he from the reproach of
have plunge she into it. for when a man be at the foot of the hill
in his fortune, he may stay a long while there in spite of
professional accomplishment. in the british climate there be no
incompatibility between scientific insight and furnish lodging: the
incompatibility be chiefly between scientific ambition and a wife who
object to that kind of residence.
but in the midst of his hesitation, opportunity come to decide he. a
note from Mr. Bulstrode request Lydgate to call on he at the Bank.
a hypochondriacal tendency have show itself in the banker's
constitution of late; and a lack of sleep, which be really only a
slight exaggeration of an habitual dyspeptic symptom, have be dwelt on
by he as a sign of threaten insanity. he want to consult lydgate
without delay on that particular morning, although he have nothing to
tell beyond what he have tell before. he listen eagerly to what
Lydgate have to say in dissipation of his fear, though this too be
only repetition; and this moment in which Bulstrode be receive a
medical opinion with a sense of comfort, seem to make the
communication of a personal need to he easy than it have be in
Lydgate's contemplation beforehand. he have be insist that it
would be well for Mr. Bulstrode to relax his attention to business.
"one see how any mental strain, however slight, may affect a delicate
frame," say Lydgate at that stage of the consultation when the remark
tend to pass from the personal to the general, "by the deep stamp which
anxiety will make for a time even on the young and vigorous. I be
naturally very strong; yet I have be thoroughly shake lately by an
accumulation of trouble."
"I presume that a constitution in the susceptible state in which mine
at present be, would be especially liable to fall a victim to cholera,
if it visit our district. and since its appearance near London, we
may well besiege the mercy-seat for our protection," say Mr.
Bulstrode, not intend to evade Lydgate's allusion, but really
preoccupy with alarm about himself.
"you have at all event take your share in use good practical
precaution for the town, and that be the good mode of ask for
protection," say Lydgate, with a strong distaste for the break
metaphor and bad logic of the banker's religion, somewhat increase by
the apparent deafness of his sympathy. but his mind have take up its
long-prepare movement towards get help, and be not yet arrest.
he add, "the town have do well in the way of cleansing, and find
appliance; and I think that if the cholera should come, even our
enemy will admit that the arrangement in the Hospital be a public
good."
"truly," say Mr. Bulstrode, with some coldness. "with regard to what
you say, Mr. Lydgate, about the relaxation of my mental labor, I have
for some time be entertain a purpose to that effect--a purpose of
a very decide character. I contemplate at least a temporary
withdrawal from the management of much business, whether benevolent or
commercial. also I think of change my residence for a time: probably
I shall close or let 'the Shrubs,' and take some place near the
coast--under advice of course as to salubrity. that would be a measure
which you would recommend?"
"oh yes," say Lydgate, fall backward in his chair, with
ill-repressed impatience under the banker's pale earnest eye and
intense preoccupation with himself.
"I have for some time feel that I should open this subject with you in
relation to our hospital," continue Bulstrode. "under the
circumstance I have indicate, of course I must cease to have any
personal share in the management, and it be contrary to my view of
responsibility to continue a large application of mean to an
institution which I cannot watch over and to some extent regulate. I
shall therefore, in case of my ultimate decision to leave Middlemarch,
consider that I withdraw other support to the New Hospital than that
which will subsist in the fact that I chiefly supply the expense of
build it, and have contribute far large sum to its successful
working."
Lydgate's thought, when Bulstrode pause accord to his willnot, be,
"he have perhaps be lose a good deal of money." this be the most
plausible explanation of a speech which have cause rather a startling
change in his expectation. he say in reply--
"the loss to the Hospital can hardly be make up, I fear."
"hardly," return Bulstrode, in the same deliberate, silvery tone;
"except by some change of plan. the only person who may be certainly
count on as willing to increase her contribution be Mrs. Casaubon.
I have have an interview with she on the subject, and I have point out
to she, as I be about to do to you, that it will be desirable to win a
more general support to the New Hospital by a change of system."
another pause, but Lydgate do not speak.
"the change I mean be an amalgamation with the Infirmary, so that the
New Hospital shall be regard as a special addition to the elder
institution, have the same directing board. it will be necessary,
also, that the medical management of the two shall be combine. in
this way any difficulty as to the adequate maintenance of our new
establishment will be remove; the benevolent interest of the town
will cease to be divide."
Mr. Bulstrode have lower his eye from Lydgate's face to the button
of his coat as he again pause.
"no doubt that be a good device as to way and mean," say Lydgate,
with an edge of irony in his tone. "but I cannot be expect to rejoice
in it at once, since one of the first result will be that the other
medical man will upset or interrupt my method, if it be only because
they be mine."
"I myself, as you know, Mr. Lydgate, highly value the opportunity of
new and independent procedure which you have diligently employ: the
original plan, I confess, be one which I have much at heart, under
submission to the Divine Will. but since providential indication
demand a renunciation from I, I renounce."
Bulstrode show a rather exasperating ability in this conversation.
the broken metaphor and bad logic of motive which have stir his
hearer's contempt be quite consistent with a mode of put the
fact which make it difficult for Lydgate to vent his own indignation
and disappointment. after some rapid reflection, he only asked--
"what do Mrs. Casaubon say?"
"that be the further statement which I wish to make to you," say
Bulstrode, who have thoroughly prepare his ministerial explanation.
"she be, you be aware, a woman of most munificent disposition, and
happily in possession--not I presume of great wealth, but of fund
which she can well spare. she have inform I that though she have
destine the chief part of those fund to another purpose, she be
willing to consider whether she cannot fully take my place in relation
to the Hospital. but she wish for ample time to mature her thought
on the subject, and I have tell she that there be no need for
haste--that, in fact, my own plan be not yet absolute."
Lydgate be ready to say, "if Mrs. Casaubon would take your place,
there would be gain, instead of loss." but there be still a weight on
his mind which arrest this cheerful candor. he reply, "I suppose,
then, that I may enter into the subject with Mrs. Casaubon."
"precisely; that be what she expressly desire. her decision, she
say, will much depend on what you can tell she. but not at present:
she be, I believe, just set out on a journey. I have her letter
here," say Mr. Bulstrode, draw it out, and read from it. "'I be
immediately otherwise engage,' she say. 'I be go into Yorkshire
with Sir James and Lady Chettam; and the conclusion I come to about
some land which I be to see there may affect my power of contribute
to the Hospital.' thus, Mr. Lydgate, there be no haste necessary in
this matter; but I wish to apprise you beforehand of what may
possibly occur."
Mr. Bulstrode return the letter to his side-pocket, and change his
attitude as if his business be closed. lydgate, whose renew hope
about the Hospital only make he more conscious of the fact which
poison his hope, feel that his effort after help, if make at all,
must be make now and vigorously.
"I be much oblige to you for give I full notice," he say, with a
firm intention in his tone, yet with an interruptedness in his delivery
which show that he speak unwillingly. "the high object to I be
my profession, and I have identify the Hospital with the good use I
can at present make of my profession. but the good use be not always
the same with monetary success. everything which have make the hospital
unpopular have help with other cause--I think they be all connect
with my professional zeal--to make I unpopular as a practitioner. I
get chiefly patient who cannot pay I. I should like they well, if I
have nobody to pay on my own side." Lydgate wait a little, but
Bulstrode only bow, look at he fixedly, and he go on with the
same interrupted enunciation--as if he be bite an objectional leek.
"I have slip into money difficulty which I can see no way out of,
unless some one who trust I and my future will advance I a sum
without other security. I have very little fortune leave when I come
here. I have no prospect of money from my own family. my expense,
in consequence of my marriage, have be very much great than I have
expect. the result at this moment be that it would take a thousand
pound to clear I. I mean, to free I from the risk of have all my
good sell in security of my large debt--as well as to pay my other
debt--and leave anything to keep we a little beforehand with our small
income. I find that it be out of the question that my wife's father
should make such an advance. that be why I mention my position to--to
the only other man who may be hold to have some personal connection
with my prosperity or ruin."
Lydgate hat to hear himself. but he have speak now, and have speak
with unmistakable directness. Mr. Bulstrode reply without haste, but
also without hesitation.
"I be grieve, though, I confess, not surprise by this information,
Mr. Lydgate. for my own part, I regret your alliance with my
brother-in-law's family, which have always be of prodigal habit, and
which have already be much indebted to I for sustainment in its
present position. my advice to you, Mr. Lydgate, would be, that
instead of involve yourself in further obligation, and continue a
doubtful struggle, you should simply become a bankrupt."
"that would not improve my prospect," say Lydgate, rise and speak
bitterly, "even if it be a more agreeable thing in itself."
"it be always a trial," say Mr. Bulstrode; "but trial, my dear sir, be
our portion here, and be a need corrective. I recommend you to weigh
the advice I have give."
"thank you," say Lydgate, not quite know what he say. "I have
occupy you too long. good-day."
CHAPTER LXVIII.
"what suit of grace hath Virtue to put on
if Vice shall wear as good, and do as well?
if wrong, if Craft, if Indiscretion
Act as fair part with end as laudable?
which all this mighty volume of event
the world, the universal map of deed,
strongly control, and prove from all descent,
that the direct course still good succeed.
for should not grave and learn'd experience
that look with the eye of all the world beside,
and with all age hold intelligence,
go safe than Deceit without a guide!
--DANIEL: Musophilus.
that change of plan and shifting of interest which Bulstrode state or
betray in his conversation with Lydgate, have be determine in he
by some severe experience which he have go through since the epoch of
Mr. Larcher's sale, when Raffles have recognize Will Ladislaw, and when
the banker have in vain attempt an act of restitution which might move
Divine Providence to arrest painful consequence.
his certainty that Raffles, unless he be dead, would return to
Middlemarch before long, have be justify. on Christmas Eve he have
reappear at the Shrubs. Bulstrode be at home to receive he, and
hinder his communication with the rest of the family, but he could not
altogether hinder the circumstance of the visit from compromise
himself and alarm his wife. raffle prove more unmanageable than
he have show himself to be in his former appearance, his chronic state
of mental restlessness, the grow effect of habitual intemperance,
quickly shake off every impression from what be say to he. he
insist on stay in the house, and Bulstrode, weigh two set of
evil, feel that this be at least not a bad alternative than his
go into the town. he keep he in his own room for the evening and
see he to bed, Raffles all the while amuse himself with the
annoyance he be cause this decent and highly prosperous
fellow-sinner, an amusement which he facetiously express as sympathy
with his friend's pleasure in entertain a man who have be
serviceable to he, and who have not have all his earning. there be a
cunning calculation under this noisy joking--a cool resolve to extract
something the handsomer from Bulstrode as payment for release from this
new application of torture. but his cunning have a little overcast its
mark.
Bulstrode be indeed more tortured than the coarse fibre of Raffles
could enable he to imagine. he have tell his wife that he be simply
take care of this wretched creature, the victim of vice, who might
otherwise injure himself; he imply, without the direct form of
falsehood, that there be a family tie which bind he to this care,
and that there be sign of mental alienation in Raffles which urge
caution. he would himself drive the unfortunate be away the next
morning. in these hint he feel that he be supply Mrs. Bulstrode
with precautionary information for his daughter and servant, and
accounting for his allow no one but himself to enter the room even
with food and drink. but he sit in an agony of fear lest Raffles
should be overhear in his loud and plain reference to past fact--lest
Mrs. Bulstrode should be even tempt to listen at the door. how
could he hinder she, how betray his terror by open the door to
detect she? she be a woman of honest direct habit, and little likely
to take so low a course in order to arrive at painful knowledge; but
fear be strong than the calculation of probability.
in this way Raffles have push the torture too far, and produce an
effect which have not be in his plan. by show himself hopelessly
unmanageable he have make Bulstrode feel that a strong defiance be the
only resource leave. after take Raffles to bed that night the banker
order his closed carriage to be ready at half-past seven the next
morning. at six o'clock he have already be long dress, and have
spend some of his wretchedness in prayer, plead his motif for
avert the bad evil if in anything he have use falsity and speak
what be not true before God. for Bulstrode shrank from a direct lie
with an intensity disproportionate to the number of his more indirect
misdeed. but many of these misdeed be like the subtle muscular
movement which be not take account of in the consciousness, though
they bring about the end that we fix our mind on and desire. and it be
only what we be vividly conscious of that we can vividly imagine to be
see by Omniscience.
Bulstrode carry his candle to the bedside of Raffles, who be
apparently in a painful dream. he stand silent, hop that the
presence of the light would serve to waken the sleeper gradually and
gently, for he fear some noise as the consequence of a too sudden
awakening. he have watch for a couple of minute or more the
shuddering and panting which seem likely to end in wake, when
raffle, with a long half-stifle moan, start up and star round he
in terror, tremble and gasp. but he make no further noise, and
Bulstrode, set down the candle, await his recovery.
it be a quarter of an hour later before Bulstrode, with a cold
peremptoriness of manner which he have not before show, say, "I come
to call you thus early, Mr. Raffles, because I have order the
carriage to be ready at half-past seven, and intend myself to conduct
you as far as ilsely, where you can either take the railway or await a
coach." Raffles be about to speak, but Bulstrode anticipate he
imperiously with the word, "be silent, sir, and hear what I have to
say. I shall supply you with money now, and I will furnish you with a
reasonable sum from time to time, on your application to I by letter;
but if you choose to present yourself here again, if you return to
Middlemarch, if you use your tongue in a manner injurious to I, you
will have to live on such fruit as your malice can bring you, without
help from I. nobody will pay you well for blast my name: I know
the bad you can do against I, and I shall brave it if you dare to
thrust yourself upon I again. get up, sir, and do as I order you,
without noise, or I will send for a policeman to take you off my
premise, and you may carry your story into every pothouse in the
town, but you shall have no sixpence from I to pay your expense
there."
Bulstrode have rarely in his life speak with such nervous energy: he
have be deliberate on this speech and its probable effect through a
large part of the night; and though he do not trust to its ultimately
save he from any return of Raffles, he have conclude that it be the
good throw he could make. it succeed in enforce submission from
the jaded man this morning: his empoisoned system at this moment
quail before Bulstrode's cold, resolute bearing, and he be take off
quietly in the carriage before the family breakfast time. the servant
imagine he to be a poor relation, and be not surprised that a
strict man like their master, who hold his head high in the world,
should be ashamed of such a cousin and want to get rid of he. the
banker's drive of ten mile with his hat companion be a dreary
beginning of the Christmas day; but at the end of the drive, Raffles
have recover his spirit, and part in a contentment for which there
be the good reason that the banker have give he a hundred pound.
various motif urge Bulstrode to this open-handedness, but he do not
himself inquire closely into all of they. as he have stand watch
Raffles in his uneasy sleep, it have certainly enter his mind that the
man have be much shatter since the first gift of two hundred pound.
he have take care to repeat the incisive statement of his resolve not
to be play on any more; and have try to penetrate Raffles with the
fact that he have show the risk of bribe he to be quite equal to
the risk of defy he. but when, free from his repulsive presence,
Bulstrode return to his quiet home, he bring with he no confidence
that he have secure more than a respite. it be as if he have have a
loathsome dream, and could not shake off its image with their hateful
kindre of sensation--as if on all the pleasant surrounding of his
life a dangerous reptile have leave his slimy trace.
who can know how much of his most inward life be make up of the
thought he believe other man to have about he, until that fabric of
opinion be threaten with ruin?
Bulstrode be only the more conscious that there be a deposit of
uneasy presentiment in his wife's mind, because she carefully avoid
any allusion to it. he have be use every day to taste the flavor of
supremacy and the tribute of complete deference: and the certainty that
he be watch or measure with a hide suspicion of his have some
discreditable secret, make his voice totter when he be speak to
edification. foresee, to man of Bulstrode's anxious temperament, be
often bad than see; and his imagination continually heighten the
anguish of an imminent disgrace. yes, imminent; for if his defiance of
Raffles do not keep the man away--and though he pray for this result
he hardly hop for it--the disgrace be certain. in vain he say to
himself that, if permit, it would be a divine visitation, a
chastisement, a preparation; he recoil from the imagined burning; and
he judge that it must be more for the divine glory that he should
escape dishonor. that recoil have at last urge he to make
preparation for quit Middlemarch. if evil truth must be report
of he, he would then be at a less scorching distance from the contempt
of his old neighbor; and in a new scene, where his life would not have
gather the same wide sensibility, the tormentor, if he pursue he,
would be less formidable. to leave the place finally would, he know,
be extremely painful to his wife, and on other ground he would have
prefer to stay where he have strike root. hence he make his
preparation at first in a conditional way, wish to leave on all
side an opening for his return after brief absence, if any favorable
intervention of Providence should dissipate his fear. he be
prepare to transfer his management of the Bank, and to give up any
active control of other commercial affair in the neighborhood, on the
ground of his fail health, but without exclude his future
resumption of such work. the measure would cause he some add
expense and some diminution of income beyond what he have already
undergone from the general depression of trade; and the Hospital
present itself as a principal object of outlay on which he could
fairly economize.
this be the experience which have determine his conversation with
Lydgate. but at this time his arrangement have most of they go no
far than a stage at which he could recall they if they prove to be
unnecessary. he continually defer the final step; in the midst of
his fear, like many a man who be in danger of shipwreck or of be
dash from his carriage by runaway horse, he have a clinging
impression that something would happen to hinder the bad, and that to
spoil his life by a late transplantation might be over-hasty--especially
since it be difficult to account satisfactorily to his wife for the
project of their indefinite exile from the only place where she would
like to live.
among the affair Bulstrode have to care for, be the management of the
farm at Stone Court in case of his absence; and on this as well as on
all other matter connect with any house and land he possess in or
about Middlemarch, he have consult Caleb Garth. like every one else
who have business of that sort, he want to get the agent who be more
anxious for his employer's interest than his own. with regard to
Stone Court, since Bulstrode wish to retain his hold on the stock,
and to have an arrangement by which he himself could, if he choose,
resume his favorite recreation of superintendence, Caleb have advise
he not to trust to a mere bailiff, but to let the land, stock, and
implement yearly, and take a proportionate share of the proceed.
"may I trust to you to find I a tenant on these term, Mr. Garth?"
say Bulstrode. "and will you mention to I the yearly sum which would
repay you for manage these affair which we have discuss together?"
"Iwill think about it," say Caleb, in his blunt way. "Iwill see how I
can make it out."
if it have not be that he have to consider Fred Vincy's future, Mr.
Garth would not probably have be glad of any addition to his work, of
which his wife be always fear an excess for he as he grow old.
but on quit Bulstrode after that conversation, a very alluring idea
occur to he about this say letting of Stone Court. what if
Bulstrode would agree to his place Fred Vincy there on the
understanding that he, Caleb Garth, should be responsible for the
management? it would be an excellent schooling for Fred; he might make
a modest income there, and still have time leave to get knowledge by
help in other business. he mention his notion to Mrs. Garth with
such evident delight that she could not bear to chill his pleasure by
express her constant fear of his undertaking too much.
"the lad would be as happy as two," he say, throw himself back in
his chair, and look radiant, "if I could tell he it be all
settle. think; Susan! his mind have be run on that place for
year before old Featherstone die. and it would be as pretty a turn
of thing as could be that he should hold the place in a good
industrious way after all--by his taking to business. for itbe likely
enough Bulstrode might let he go on, and gradually buy the stock. he
havenot make up his mind, I can see, whether or not he shall settle
somewhere else as a last thing. I never be well pleased with a
notion in my life. and then the child might be marry by-and-by,
Susan."
"you will not give any hint of the plan to Fred, until you be sure
that Bulstrode would agree to the plan?" say Mrs. Garth, in a tone of
gentle caution. "and as to marriage, Caleb, we old people need not
help to hasten it."
"oh, I donot know," say Caleb, swing his head aside. "marriage be
a taming thing. Fred would want less of my bit and bridle. however, I
shall say nothing till I know the ground Ibe treading on. I shall
speak to Bulstrode again."
he take his early opportunity of do so. Bulstrode have anything
but a warm interest in his nephew Fred Vincy, but he have a strong wish
to secure Mr. Garth's service on many scatter point of business at
which he be sure to be a considerable loser, if they be under less
conscientious management. on that ground he make no objection to Mr.
Garth's proposal; and there be also another reason why he be not
sorry to give a consent which be to benefit one of the Vincy family.
it be that Mrs. Bulstrode, have hear of Lydgate's debt, have be
anxious to know whether her husband could not do something for poor
Rosamond, and have be much troubled on learn from he that
Lydgate's affair be not easily remediable, and that the wise plan
be to let they "take their course." Mrs. Bulstrode have then say for
the first time, "I think you be always a little hard towards my
family, Nicholas. and I be sure I have no reason to deny any of my
relative. too worldly they may be, but no one ever have to say that
they be not respectable."
"my dear Harriet," say Mr. Bulstrode, wince under his wife's eye,
which be fill with tear, "I have supply your brother with a
great deal of capital. I cannot be expect to take care of his
married child."
that seem to be true, and Mrs. Bulstrode's remonstrance subside into
pity for poor Rosamond, whose extravagant education she have always
foresee the fruit of.
but remember that dialogue, Mr. Bulstrode feel that when he have to
talk to his wife fully about his plan of quit Middlemarch, he
should be glad to tell she that he have make an arrangement which might
be for the good of her nephew Fred. at present he have merely mention
to she that he think of shut up the Shrubs for a few month, and
take a house on the Southern Coast.
hence Mr. Garth get the assurance he desire, namely, that in case of
Bulstrode's departure from Middlemarch for an indefinite time, Fred
Vincy should be allow to have the tenancy of Stone Court on the term
propose.
Caleb be so elated with his hope of this "neat turn" be give to
thing, that if his self-control have not be brace by a little
affectionate wifely scolding, he would have betray everything to
Mary, want "to give the child comfort." however, he restrain
himself, and keep in strict privacy from Fred certain visit which he
be make to Stone Court, in order to look more thoroughly into the
state of the land and stock, and take a preliminary estimate. he be
certainly more eager in these visit than the probable speed of event
require he to be; but he be stimulate by a fatherly delight in
occupy his mind with this bit of probable happiness which he hold in
store like a hidden birthday gift for Fred and Mary.
"but suppose the whole scheme should turn out to be a castle in the
air?" say Mrs. Garth.
"well, well," reply Caleb; "the castle will tumble about nobody's
head."
CHAPTER LXIX.
"if thou hast hear a word, let it die with thee."
--Ecclesiasticus.
Mr. Bulstrode be still seat in his manager's room at the Bank, about
three o'clock of the same day on which he have receive Lydgate there,
when the clerk enter to say that his horse be wait, and also that
Mr. Garth be outside and beg to speak with he.
"by all mean," say Bulstrode; and Caleb enter. "pray sit down, Mr.
Garth," continue the banker, in his suave tone.
"I be glad that you arrive just in time to find I here. I know you
count your minute."
"oh," say Caleb, gently, with a slow swing of his head on one side, as
he seat himself and lay his hat on the floor.
he look at the ground, lean forward and let his long finger
droop between his leg, while each finger move in succession, as if it
be share some thought which fill his large quiet brow.
Mr. Bulstrode, like every one else who know Caleb, be use to his
slowness in beginning to speak on any topic which he feel to be
important, and rather expect that he be about to recur to the buying
of some house in Blindman's Court, for the sake of pull they down,
as a sacrifice of property which would be well repay by the influx of
air and light on that spot. it be by proposition of this kind that
Caleb be sometimes troublesome to his employer; but he have usually
find Bulstrode ready to meet he in project of improvement, and they
have get on well together. when he speak again, however, it be to say,
in rather a subdued voice--
"I have just come away from Stone Court, Mr. Bulstrode."
"you find nothing wrong there, I hope," say the banker; "I be there
myself yesterday. Abel have do well with the lamb this year."
"why, yes," say Caleb, look up gravely, "there be something wrong--a
stranger, who be very ill, I think. he want a doctor, and I come to
tell you of that. his name be Raffles."
he see the shock of his word pass through Bulstrode's frame. on
this subject the banker have think that his fear be too constantly
on the watch to be take by surprise; but he have be mistake.
"poor wretch!" he say in a compassionate tone, though his lip
tremble a little. "do you know how he come there?"
"I take he myself," say Caleb, quietly--"took he up in my gig. he
have get down from the coach, and be walk a little beyond the
turning from the toll-house, and I overtake he. he remember see
I with you once before, at Stone Court, and he ask I to take he
on. I see he be ill: it seem to I the right thing to do, to carry
he under shelter. and now I think you should lose no time in get
advice for he." Caleb take up his hat from the floor as he end, and
rise slowly from his seat.
"certainly," say Bulstrode, whose mind be very active at this moment.
"perhaps you will yourself oblige I, Mr. Garth, by call at Mr.
Lydgate's as you pass--or stay! he may at this hour probably be at the
Hospital. I will first send my man on the horse there with a note this
instant, and then I will myself ride to Stone Court."
Bulstrode quickly write a note, and go out himself to give the
commission to his man. when he return, Caleb be stand as before
with one hand on the back of the chair, hold his hat with the other.
in Bulstrode's mind the dominant thought be, "perhaps Raffles only
speak to Garth of his illness. Garth may wonder, as he must have do
before, at this disreputable fellow's claim intimacy with I; but he
will know nothing. and he be friendly to I--I can be of use to he."
he long for some confirmation of this hopeful conjecture, but to have
ask any question as to what Raffles have say or do would have be
to betray fear.
"I be exceedingly oblige to you, Mr. Garth," he say, in his usual
tone of politeness. "my servant will be back in a few minute, and I
shall then go myself to see what can be do for this unfortunate man.
perhaps you have some other business with I? if so, pray be seat."
"thank you," say Caleb, make a slight gesture with his right hand to
waive the invitation. "I wish to say, Mr. Bulstrode, that I must
request you to put your business into some other hand than mine. I be
oblige to you for your handsome way of meet I--about the letting
of Stone Court, and all other business. but I must give it up." a
sharp certainty enter like a stab into Bulstrode's soul.
"this be sudden, Mr. Garth," be all he could say at first.
"it be," say Caleb; "but it be quite fix. I must give it up."
he speak with a firmness which be very gentle, and yet he could see
that Bulstrode seem to cower under that gentleness, his face look
dry and his eye swerve away from the glance which rest on he.
Caleb feel a deep pity for he, but he could have use no pretext to
account for his resolve, even if they would have be of any use.
"you have be lead to this, I apprehend, by some slander concern I
utter by that unhappy creature," say Bulstrode, anxious now to know
the utmost.
"that be true. I cannot deny that I act upon what I hear from he."
"you be a conscientious man, Mr. Garth--a man, I trust, who feel
himself accountable to God. you would not wish to injure I by be
too ready to believe a slander," say Bulstrode, cast about for
plea that might be adapt to his hearer's mind. "that be a poor
reason for give up a connection which I think I may say will be
mutually beneficial."
"I would injure no man if I could help it," say Caleb; "even if I
think God wink at it. I hope I should have a feeling for my
fellow-creature. but, sir--I be oblige to believe that this Raffles
have tell I the truth. and I cannot be happy in work with you, or
profit by you. it hurt my mind. I must beg you to seek another
agent."
"very well, Mr. Garth. but I must at least claim to know the bad
that he have tell you. I must know what be the foul speech that I be
liable to be the victim of," say Bulstrode, a certain amount of anger
begin to mingle with his humiliation before this quiet man who
renounce his benefit.
"thatbe needless," say Caleb, wave his hand, bow his head
slightly, and not swerve from the tone which have in it the merciful
intention to spare this pitiable man. "what he have say to I will
never pass from my lip, unless something now unknown force it from
I. if you lead a harmful life for gain, and keep other out of their
right by deceit, to get the more for yourself, I dare say you
repent--you would like to go back, and cannot: that must be a bitter
thing"--caleb pause a moment and shake his head--"it be not for I to
make your life hard to you."
"but you do--you do make it hard to I," say Bulstrode constrain
into a genuine, plead cry. "you make it hard to I by turn
your back on I."
"that Ibe force to do," say Caleb, still more gently, lift up his
hand. "I be sorry. I donot judge you and say, he be wicked, and I be
righteous. God forbid. I donot know everything. a man may do wrong,
and his will may rise clear out of it, though he cannot get his life
clear. thatbe a bad punishment. if it be so with you,--well, Ibe
very sorry for you. but I have that feeling inside I, that I cannot go
on work with you. thatbe all, Mr. Bulstrode. everything else be
bury, so far as my will go. and I wish you good-day."
"one moment, Mr. Garth!" say Bulstrode, hurriedly. "I may trust then
to your solemn assurance that you will not repeat either to man or
woman what--even if it have any degree of truth in it--be yet a
malicious representation?" Caleb's wrath be stir, and he say,
indignantly--
"why should I have say it if I donot mean it? I be in no fear of
you. such tale as that will never tempt my tongue."
"excuse I--I be agitate--I be the victim of this abandon man."
"stop a bit! you have get to consider whether you donot help to make
he bad, when you profit by his vice."
"you be wrong I by too readily believe he," say Bulstrode,
oppress, as by a nightmare, with the inability to deny flatly what
raffle might have say; and yet feel it an escape that Caleb have
not so state it to he as to ask for that flat denial.
"no," say Caleb, lift his hand deprecatingly; "I be ready to
believe well, when well be prove. I rob you of no good chance.
as to speak, I hold it a crime to expose a man's sin unless Ibe
clear it must be do to save the innocent. that be my way of
thinking, Mr. Bulstrode, and what I say, Ihave no need to swear. I wish
you good-day."
some hour later, when he be at home, Caleb say to his wife,
incidentally, that he have have some little difference with Bulstrode,
and that in consequence, he have give up all notion of take Stone
Court, and indeed have resign do further business for he.
"he be disposed to interfere too much, be he?" say Mrs. Garth,
imagine that her husband have be touch on his sensitive point, and
not be allow to do what he think right as to material and mode
of work.
"oh," say Caleb, bow his head and wave his hand gravely. and
Mrs. Garth know that this be a sign of his not intend to speak
far on the subject.
as for Bulstrode, he have almost immediately mount his horse and set
off for Stone Court, be anxious to arrive there before Lydgate.
his mind be crowd with image and conjecture, which be a language
to his hope and fear, just as we hear tone from the vibration which
shake our whole system. the deep humiliation with which he have wince
under Caleb Garth's knowledge of his past and rejection of his
patronage, alternate with and almost give way to the sense of safety
in the fact that Garth, and no other, have be the man to whom Raffles
have speak. it seem to he a sort of earnest that Providence
intend his rescue from bad consequence; the way be thus leave
open for the hope of secrecy. that Raffles should be afflict with
illness, that he should have be lead to Stone Court rather than
elsewhere--Bulstrode's heart flutter at the vision of probability
which these event conjure up. if it should turn out that he be
free from all danger of disgrace--if he could breathe in perfect
liberty--his life should be more consecrated than it have ever be
before. he mentally lift up this vow as if it would urge the result
he long for--he try to believe in the potency of that prayerful
resolution--its potency to determine death. he know that he ought to
say, "Thy will be do;" and he say it often. but the intense desire
remain that the will of God might be the death of that hat man.
yet when he arrive at Stone Court he could not see the change in
Raffles without a shock. but for his pallor and feebleness, Bulstrode
would have call the change in he entirely mental. instead of his
loud torment mood, he show an intense, vague terror, and seem to
deprecate Bulstrode's anger, because the money be all go--he have
be rob--it have half of it be take from he. he have only come
here because he be ill and somebody be hunt he--somebody be
after he he have tell nobody anything, he have keep his mouth shut.
Bulstrode, not know the significance of these symptom, interpret
this new nervous susceptibility into a means of alarm Raffles into
true confession, and tax he with falsehood in say that he have
not tell anything, since he have just tell the man who take he up in
his gig and bring he to Stone Court. raffle deny this with
solemn adjuration; the fact be that the link of consciousness be
interrupt in he, and that his minute terror-stricken narrative to
Caleb Garth have be deliver under a set of visionary impulse which
have drop back into darkness.
Bulstrode's heart sink again at this sign that he could get no grasp
over the wretched man's mind, and that no word of Raffles could be
trust as to the fact which he most want to know, namely, whether or
not he have really keep silence to every one in the neighborhood except
Caleb Garth. the housekeeper have tell he without the least constraint
of manner that since Mr. Garth leave, Raffles have ask she for beer,
and after that have not speak, seem very ill. on that side it might
be conclude that there have be no betrayal. Mrs. Abel think, like
the servant at the Shrubs, that the strange man belong to the
unpleasant "kin" who be among the trouble of the rich; she have at
first refer the kinship to Mr. Rigg, and where there be property
leave, the buzz presence of such large blue-bottle seem natural
enough. how he could be "kin" to Bulstrode as well be not so clear,
but Mrs. Abel agree with her husband that there be "no knowing," a
proposition which have a great deal of mental food for she, so that she
shake her head over it without further speculation.
in less than an hour Lydgate arrive. Bulstrode meet he outside the
wainscote parlor, where Raffles be, and said--
"I have call you in, Mr. Lydgate, to an unfortunate man who be once
in my employment, many year ago. afterwards he go to America, and
return I fear to an idle dissolute life. be destitute, he have a
claim on I. he be slightly connect with Rigg, the former owner of
this place, and in consequence find his way here. I believe he be
seriously ill: apparently his mind be affect. I feel bound to do the
utmost for he."
Lydgate, who have the remembrance of his last conversation with
Bulstrode strongly upon he, be not dispose to say an unnecessary
word to he, and bow slightly in answer to this account; but just
before enter the room he turn automatically and say, "what be his
name?"--to know name be as much a part of the medical man's
accomplishment as of the practical politician's.
"Raffles, John Raffles," say Bulstrode, who hop that whatever became
of Raffles, Lydgate would never know any more of he.
when he have thoroughly examine and consider the patient, Lydgate
order that he should go to bed, and be keep there in as complete
quiet as possible, and then go with Bulstrode into another room.
"it be a serious case, I apprehend," say the banker, before Lydgate
begin to speak.
"no--and yes," say lydgate, half dubiously. "it be difficult to
decide as to the possible effect of long-stand complication; but
the man have a robust constitution to begin with. I should not expect
this attack to be fatal, though of course the system be in a ticklish
state. he should be well watch and attend to."
"I will remain here myself," say Bulstrode. "Mrs. Abel and her
husband be inexperienced. I can easily remain here for the night, if
you will oblige I by take a note for Mrs. Bulstrode."
"I should think that be hardly necessary," say Lydgate. "he seem
tame and terrify enough. he might become more unmanageable. but
there be a man here--be there not?"
"I have more than once stay here a few night for the sake of
seclusion," say Bulstrode, indifferently; "I be quite disposed to do
so now. Mrs. Abel and her husband can relieve or aid I, if necessary."
"very well. then I need give my direction only to you," say Lydgate,
not feel surprised at a little peculiarity in Bulstrode.
"you think, then, that the case be hopeful?" say Bulstrode, when
Lydgate have end give his order.
"unless there turn out to be further complication, such as I have not
at present detect--yes," say Lydgate. "he may pass on to a bad
stage; but I should not wonder if he get well in a few day, by
adhere to the treatment I have prescribe. there must be firmness.
remember, if he call for liquor of any sort, not to give they to he.
in my opinion, man in his condition be oftener kill by treatment
than by the disease. still, new symptom may arise. I shall come
again to-morrow morning."
after wait for the note to be carry to Mrs. Bulstrode, Lydgate
ride away, form no conjecture, in the first instance, about the
history of Raffles, but rehearse the whole argument, which have lately
be much stir by the publication of Dr. Ware's abundant experience
in America, as to the right way of treat case of alcoholic
poisoning such as this. lydgate, when abroad, have already be
interested in this question: he be strongly convince against the
prevalent practice of allow alcohol and persistently administer
large dos of opium; and he have repeatedly act on this conviction
with a favorable result.
"the man be in a diseased state," he think, "but therebe a good deal
of wear in he still. I suppose he be an object of charity to
Bulstrode. it be curious what patch of hardness and tenderness lie
side by side in man's disposition. Bulstrode seem the most
unsympathetic fellow I ever see about some people, and yet he have take
no end of trouble, and spend a great deal of money, on benevolent
object. I suppose he have some test by which he find out whom Heaven
care for--he have make up his mind that it donot care for I."
this streak of bitterness come from a plenteous source, and keep
widening in the current of his thought as he near Lowick Gate. he
have not be there since his first interview with Bulstrode in the
morning, have be find at the Hospital by the banker's messenger;
and for the first time he be return to his home without the vision
of any expedient in the background which leave he a hope of raise
money enough to deliver he from the come destitution of everything
which make his married life tolerable--everything which save he and
Rosamond from that bare isolation in which they would be force to
recognize how little of a comfort they could be to each other. it be
more bearable to do without tenderness for himself than to see that his
own tenderness could make no amend for the lack of other thing to
she. the suffering of his own pride from humiliation past and to
come be keen enough, yet they be hardly distinguishable to himself
from that more acute pain which dominate they--the pain of foresee
that Rosamond would come to regard he chiefly as the cause of
disappointment and unhappiness to she. he have never like the
makeshift of poverty, and they have never before enter into his
prospect for himself; but he be begin now to imagine how two
creature who love each other, and have a stock of thought in common,
might laugh over their shabby furniture, and their calculation how far
they could afford butter and egg. but the glimpse of that poetry
seem as far off from he as the carelessness of the golden age; in
poor Rosamond's mind there be not room enough for luxury to look
small in. he get down from his horse in a very sad mood, and go into
the house, not expect to be cheer except by his dinner, and
reflect that before the evening close it would be wise to tell
Rosamond of his application to Bulstrode and its failure. it would be
well not to lose time in prepare she for the bad.
but his dinner wait long for he before he be able to eat it. for
on enter he find that Dover's agent have already put a man in the
house, and when he ask where Mrs. Lydgate be, he be tell that she
be in her bedroom. he go up and find she stretch on the bed pale
and silent, without an answer even in her face to any word or look of
his. he sit down by the bed and lean over she say with almost a
cry of prayer--
"forgive I for this misery, my poor Rosamond! let we only love one
another."
she look at he silently, still with the blank despair on her face;
but then the tear begin to fill her blue eye, and her lip tremble.
the strong man have have too much to bear that day. he let his head fall
beside hers and sob.
he do not hinder she from go to her father early in the morning--it
seem now that he ought not to hinder she from do as she
please. in half an hour she come back, and say that papa and mamma
wish she to go and stay with they while thing be in this miserable
state. Papa say he could do nothing about the debt--if he pay this,
there would be half-a-dozen more. she have well come back home again
till Lydgate have get a comfortable home for she. "do you object,
Tertius?"
"do as you like," say Lydgate. "but thing be not come to a crisis
immediately. there be no hurry."
"I should not go till to-morrow," say Rosamond; "I shall want to pack
my clothe."
"oh, I would wait a little long than to-morrow--there be no knowing
what may happen," say Lydgate, with bitter irony. "I may get my neck
break, and that may make thing easy to you."
it be Lydgate's misfortune and Rosamond's too, that his tenderness
towards she, which be both an emotional prompting and a
well-consider resolve, be inevitably interrupt by these outburst
of indignation either ironical or remonstrant. she think they
totally unwarranted, and the repulsion which this exceptional severity
excited in she be in danger of make the more persistent tenderness
unacceptable.
"I see you do not wish I to go," she say, with chill mildness; "why
can you not say so, without that kind of violence? I shall stay until
you request I to do otherwise."
Lydgate say no more, but go out on his round. he feel bruised and
shatter, and there be a dark line under his eye which Rosamond have
not see before. she could not bear to look at he. Tertius have a way
of take thing which make they a great deal bad for she.
CHAPTER LXX.
our deed still travel with we from afar,
and what we have be make we what we be."
Bulstrode's first object after Lydgate have leave Stone Court be to
examine Raffles's pocket, which he imagine be sure to carry sign
in the shape of hotel-bill of the place he have stop in, if he have
not tell the truth in say that he have come straight from Liverpool
because he be ill and have no money. there be various bill cram
into his pocketbook, but none of a later date than Christmas at any
other place, except one, which bear date that morning. this be
crumple up with a hand-bill about a horse-fair in one of his
tail-pocket, and represent the cost of three day' stay at an inn at
Bilkley, where the fair be hold--a town at least forty mile from
Middlemarch. the bill be heavy, and since Raffles have no luggage with
he, it seem probable that he have leave his portmanteau behind in
payment, in order to save money for his travel fare; for his purse
be empty, and he have only a couple of sixpence and some loose pence
in his pocket.
Bulstrode gather a sense of safety from these indication that
Raffles have really keep at a distance from Middlemarch since his
memorable visit at Christmas. at a distance and among people who be
stranger to Bulstrode, what satisfaction could there be to Raffles's
tormenting, self-magnify vein in tell old scandalous story
about a Middlemarch banker? and what harm if he do talk? the chief
point now be to keep watch over he as long as there be any danger of
that intelligible raving, that unaccountable impulse to tell, which
seem to have act towards Caleb Garth; and Bulstrode feel much
anxiety lest some such impulse should come over he at the sight of
Lydgate. he sit up alone with he through the night, only order the
housekeeper to lie down in her clothe, so as to be ready when he
call she, allege his own indisposition to sleep, and his anxiety to
carry out the doctor's order. he do carry they out faithfully,
although Raffles be incessantly ask for brandy, and declare that
he be sink away--that the earth be sink away from under he.
he be restless and sleepless, but still quail and manageable. on
the offer of the food order by Lydgate, which he refuse, and the
denial of other thing which he demand, he seem to concentrate all
his terror on Bulstrode, imploringly deprecate his anger, his revenge
on he by starvation, and declare with strong oath that he have never
tell any mortal a word against he. even this Bulstrode feel that he
would not have like Lydgate to hear; but a more alarming sign of
fitful alternation in his delirium be, that in-the morning twilight
Raffles suddenly seem to imagine a doctor present, address he and
declare that Bulstrode want to starve he to death out of revenge
for telling, when he never have tell.
Bulstrode's native imperiousness and strength of determination serve
he well. this delicate-look man, himself nervously perturb,
find the need stimulus in his strenuous circumstance, and through
that difficult night and morning, while he have the air of an animate
corpse return to movement without warmth, hold the mastery by its
chill impassibility his mind be intensely at work thinking of what he
have to guard against and what would win he security. whatever prayer
he might lift up, whatever statement he might inwardly make of this
man's wretched spiritual condition, and the duty he himself be under
to submit to the punishment divinely appoint for he rather than to
wish for evil to another--through all this effort to condense word
into a solid mental state, there pierce and spread with irresistible
vividness the image of the event he desire. and in the train of
those image come their apology. he could not but see the death of
Raffles, and see in it his own deliverance. what be the removal of
this wretched creature? he be impenitent--but be not public
criminal impenitent?--yet the law decide on their fate. should
Providence in this case award death, there be no sin in contemplate
death as the desirable issue--if he keep his hand from hasten
it--if he scrupulously do what be prescribe. even here there might
be a mistake: human prescription be fallible thing: Lydgate have
say that treatment have hasten death,--why not his own method of
treatment? but of course intention be everything in the question of
right and wrong.
and Bulstrode set himself to keep his intention separate from his
desire. he inwardly declare that he intend to obey order. why
should he have get into any argument about the validity of these
order? it be only the common trick of desire--which avail itself of
any irrelevant scepticism, find large room for itself in all
uncertainty about effect, in every obscurity that look like the
absence of law. still, he do obey the order.
his anxiety continually glance towards Lydgate, and his remembrance
of what have take place between they the morning before be accompany
with sensibility which have not be rouse at all during the actual
scene. he have then care but little about Lydgate's painful
impression with regard to the suggest change in the Hospital, or
about the disposition towards himself which what he hold to be his
justifiable refusal of a rather exorbitant request might call forth.
he recur to the scene now with a perception that he have probably
make Lydgate his enemy, and with an awakened desire to propitiate he,
or rather to create in he a strong sense of personal obligation. he
regret that he have not at once make even an unreasonable
money-sacrifice. for in case of unpleasant suspicion, or even
knowledge gather from the raving of Raffles, Bulstrode would have
feel that he have a defence in Lydgate's mind by have confer a
momentous benefit on he. but the regret have perhaps come too late.
strange, piteous conflict in the soul of this unhappy man, who have
long for year to be well than he be--who have take his selfish
passion into discipline and clothe they in severe robe, so that he have
walk with they as a devout choir, till now that a terror have rise
among they, and they could chant no long, but throw out their common
cry for safety.
it be nearly the middle of the day before Lydgate arrive: he have
mean to come early, but have be detain, he say; and his
shatter look be notice by Balstrode. but he immediately throw
himself into the consideration of the patient, and inquire strictly
into all that have occur. raffle be bad, would take hardly any
food, be persistently wakeful and restlessly rave; but still not
violent. contrary to Bulstrode's alarmed expectation, he take little
notice of Lydgate's presence, and continue to talk or murmur
incoherently.
"what do you think of he?" say Bulstrode, in private.
"the symptom be bad."
"you be less hopeful?"
"no; I still think he may come round. be you go to stay here
yourself?" say Lydgate, look at Bulstrode with an abrupt question,
which make he uneasy, though in reality it be not due to any
suspicious conjecture.
"yes, I think so," say Bulstrode, govern himself and speak with
deliberation. "Mrs. Bulstrode be advise of the reason which detain
I. Mrs. Abel and her husband be not experience enough to be leave
quite alone, and this kind of responsibility be scarcely include in
their service of I. you have some fresh instruction, I presume."
the chief new instruction that Lydgate have to give be on the
administration of extremely moderate dos of opium, in case of the
sleeplessness continue after several hour. he have take the
precaution of bring opium in his pocket, and he give minute
direction to Bulstrode as to the dos, and the point at which they
should cease. he insist on the risk of not cease; and repeat his
order that no alcohol should be give.
"from what I see of the case," he end, "narcotism be the only thing I
should be much afraid of. he may wear through even without much food.
therebe a good deal of strength in he."
"you look ill yourself, Mr. Lydgate--a most unusual, I may say
unprecedented thing in my knowledge of you," say Bulstrode, show a
solicitude as unlike his indifference the day before, as his present
recklessness about his own fatigue be unlike his habitual
self-cherish anxiety. "I fear you be harass."
"yes, I be," say Lydgate, brusquely, hold his hat, and ready to go.
"something new, I fear," say Bulstrode, inquiringly. "pray be seat."
"no, thank you," say Lydgate, with some hauteur. "I mention to you
yesterday what be the state of my affair. there be nothing to add,
except that the execution have since then be actually put into my
house. one can tell a good deal of trouble in a short sentence. I
will say good morning."
"Stay, Mr. Lydgate, stay," say Bulstrode; "I have be reconsider
this subject. I be yesterday take by surprise, and see it
superficially. Mrs. Bulstrode be anxious for her niece, and I myself
should grieve at a calamitous change in your position. claim on I
be numerous, but on reconsideration, I esteem it right that I should
incur a small sacrifice rather than leave you unaided. you say, I
think, that a thousand pound would suffice entirely to free you from
your burthen, and enable you to recover a firm stand?"
"yes," say Lydgate, a great leap of joy within he surmount every
other feeling; "that would pay all my debt, and leave I a little on
hand. I could set about economize in our way of living. and
by-and-by my practice might look up."
"if you will wait a moment, Mr. Lydgate, I will draw a cheek to that
amount. I be aware that help, to be effectual in these case, should
be thorough."
while Bulstrode write, Lydgate turn to the window thinking of his
home--think of his life with its good start save from frustration,
its good purpose still unbroken.
"you can give I a note of hand for this, Mr. Lydgate," say the
banker, advance towards he with the check. "and by-and-by, I hope,
you may be in circumstance gradually to repay I. meanwhile, I have
pleasure in think that you will be release from further difficulty."
"I be deeply obliged to you," say Lydgate. "you have restore to I
the prospect of work with some happiness and some chance of good."
it appear to he a very natural movement in Bulstrode that he should
have reconsider his refusal: it correspond with the more munificent
side of his character. but as he put his hack into a canter, that he
might get the soon home, and tell the good news to Rosamond, and get
cash at the bank to pay over to Dover's agent, there cross his mind,
with an unpleasant impression, as from a dark-wing flight of evil
augury across his vision, the thought of that contrast in himself which
a few month have bring--that he should be overjoy at be under a
strong personal obligation--that he should be overjoy at get
money for himself from Bulstrode.
the banker feel that he have do something to nullify one cause of
uneasiness, and yet he be scarcely the easy. he do not measure the
quantity of disease motive which have make he wish for Lydgate's
good-will, but the quantity be none the less actively there, like an
irritate agent in his blood. a man vow, and yet will not cast away
the mean of break his vow. be it that he distinctly mean to break
it? not at all; but the desire which tend to break it be at work in
he dimly, and make their way into his imagination, and relax his
muscle in the very moment when he be tell himself over again the
reason for his vow. raffle, recover quickly, return to the
free use of his odious power--how could Bulstrode wish for that?
raffle dead be the image that bring release, and indirectly he
pray for that way of release, beseech that, if it be possible,
the rest of his day here below might be free from the threat of an
ignominy which would break he utterly as an instrument of God's
service. lydgate's opinion be not on the side of promise that this
prayer would be fulfil; and as the day advance, Bulstrode feel
himself get irritated at the persistent life in this man, whom he
would fain have see sink into the silence of death imperious will
stir murderous impulse towards this brute life, over which will, by
itself, have no power. he say inwardly that he be get too much
worn; he would not sit up with the patient to-night, but leave he to
Mrs. Abel, who, if necessary, could call her husband.
at six o'clock, Raffles, have have only fitful perturb snatch of
sleep, from which he wake with fresh restlessness and perpetual cry
that he be sink away, Bulstrode begin to administer the opium
accord to Lydgate's direction. at the end of half an hour or more
he call Mrs. Abel and tell she that he find himself unfit for
far watch. he must now consign the patient to her care; and he
proceed to repeat to her lydgate's direction as to the quantity of
each dose. Mrs. Abel have not before know anything of Lydgate's
prescription; she have simply prepare and bring whatever Bulstrode
order, and have do what he point out to she. she begin now to ask
what else she should do besides administer the opium.
"nothing at present, except the offer of the soup or the soda-water:
you can come to I for further direction. unless there be any
important change, I shall not come into the room again to-night. you
will ask your husband for help if necessary. I must go to bed early."
"youhave much need, sir, Ibe sure," say Mrs. Abel, "and to take
something more strengthening than what youhave do."
Bulstrode go away now without anxiety as to what Raffles might say in
his raving, which have take on a muttering incoherence not likely to
create any dangerous belief. at any rate he must risk this. he go
down into the wainscoted parlor first, and begin to consider whether he
would not have his horse saddle and go home by the moonlight, and give
up care for earthly consequence. then, he wish that he have beg
Lydgate to come again that evening. perhaps he might deliver a
different opinion, and think that Raffles be get into a less
hopeful state. should he send for Lydgate? if Raffles be really
get bad, and slowly die, Bulstrode feel that he could go to bed
and sleep in gratitude to Providence. but be he bad? lydgate might
come and simply say that he be go on as he expect, and predict
that he would by-and-by fall into a good sleep, and get well. what be
the use of send for he? Bulstrode shrink from that result. no
idea or opinion could hinder he from see the one probability to
be, that Raffles recover would be just the same man as before, with
his strength as a tormentor renew, oblige he to drag away his wife
to spend her year apart from her friend and native place, carry an
alienate suspicion against he in her heart.
he have sit an hour and a half in this conflict by the firelight only,
when a sudden thought make he rise and light the bed-candle, which he
have bring down with he. the thought be, that he have not tell Mrs.
Abel when the dos of opium must cease.
he take hold of the candlestick, but stand motionless for a long while.
she might already have give he more than Lydgate have prescribe. but
it be excusable in he, that he should forget part of an order, in his
present wearied condition. he walk up-stair, candle in hand, not
know whether he should straightway enter his own room and go to bed,
or turn to the patient's room and rectify his omission. he pause in
the passage, with his face turn towards Raffles's room, and he could
hear he moan and murmuring. he be not asleep, then. who could
know that Lydgate's prescription would not be well disobey than
follow, since there be still no sleep?
he turn into his own room. before he have quite undressed, Mrs. Abel
rap at the door; he open it an inch, so that he could hear she
speak low.
"if you please, sir, should I have no brandy nor nothing to give the
poor creetur? he feel sink away, and nothing else will he
swaller--and but little strength in it, if he do--only the opium. and
he say more and more hebe sink down through the earth."
to her surprise, Mr. Bulstrode do not answer. a struggle be go on
within he.
"I think he must die for want o' support, if he go on in that way.
when I nurse my poor master, Mr. Robisson, I have to give he port-wine
and brandy constant, and a big glass at a time," add Mrs. Abel, with
a touch of remonstrance in her tone.
but again Mr. Bulstrode do not answer immediately, and she continue,
"itbe not a time to spare when people be at death's door, nor would
you wish it, sir, Ibe sure. else I should give he our own bottle o'
rum as we keep by we. but a sitter-up so as youhave be, and do
everything as lay in your power--"
here a key be thrust through the inch of doorway, and Mr. Bulstrode
say huskily, "that be the key of the wine-cooler. you will find plenty
of brandy there."
early in the morning--about six--Mr. Bulstrode rise and spend some time
in prayer. do any one suppose that private prayer be necessarily
candid--necessarily go to the root of action? private prayer be
inaudible speech, and speech be representative: who can represent
himself just as he be, even in his own reflection? Bulstrode have not
yet unravel in his thought the confused prompting of the last
four-and-twenty hour.
he listen in the passage, and could hear hard stertorous breathing.
then he walk out in the garden, and look at the early rime on the
grass and fresh spring leaf. when he re-enter the house, he feel
startle at the sight of Mrs. Abel.
"how be your patient--asleep, I think?" he say, with an attempt at
cheerfulness in his tone.
"hebe go very deep, sir," say Mrs. Abel. "he go off gradual
between three and four o'clock. would you please to go and look at
he? I think it no harm to leave he. my man's go afield, and the
little girl's see to the kettle."
Bulstrode go up. at a glance he know that Raffles be not in the
sleep which bring revival, but in the sleep which stream deep and
deep into the gulf of death.
he look round the room and see a bottle with some brandy in it, and
the almost empty opium phial. he put the phial out of sight, and
carry the brandy-bottle down-stair with he, lock it again in the
wine-cooler.
while breakfast he consider whether he should ride to Middlemarch
at once, or wait for Lydgate's arrival. he decide to wait, and tell
Mrs. Abel that she might go about her work--he could watch in the
bed-chamber.
as he sit there and behold the enemy of his peace go irrevocably
into silence, he feel more at rest than he have do for many month.
his conscience be soothe by the enfold wing of secrecy, which
seem just then like an angel send down for his relief. he draw out
his pocket-book to review various memoranda there as to the
arrangement he have project and partly carry out in the prospect of
quit Middlemarch, and consider how far he would let they stand or
recall they, now that his absence would be brief. some economy which
he feel desirable might still find a suitable occasion in his temporary
withdrawal from management, and he hop still that Mrs. Casaubon would
take a large share in the expense of the Hospital. in that way the
moment pass, until a change in the stertorous breathing be mark
enough to draw his attention wholly to the bed, and force he to think
of the depart life, which have once be subservient to his
own--which he have once be glad to find base enough for he to act on
as he would. it be his gladness then which impel he now to be
glad that the life be at an end.
and who could say that the death of Raffles have be hasten? who
know what would have save he?
Lydgate arrive at half-past ten, in time to witness the final pause of
the breath. when he enter the room Bulstrode observe a sudden
expression in his face, which be not so much surprise as a recognition
that he have not judge correctly. he stand by the bed in silence for
some time, with his eye turn on the die man, but with that subdue
activity of expression which show that he be carry on an inward
debate.
"when do this change begin?" say he, look at Bulstrode.
"I do not watch by he last night," say Bulstrode. "I be over-wear,
and leave he under Mrs. Abel's care. she say that he sink into sleep
between three and four o'clock. when I come in before eight he be
nearly in this condition."
Lydgate do not ask another question, but watch in silence until he
say, "itbe all over."
this morning Lydgate be in a state of recover hope and freedom. he
have set out on his work with all his old animation, and feel himself
strong enough to bear all the deficiency of his married life. and he
be conscious that Bulstrode have be a benefactor to he. but he be
uneasy about this case. he have not expect it to terminate as it have
do. yet he hardly know how to put a question on the subject to
Bulstrode without appear to insult he; and if he examine the
housekeeper--why, the man be dead. there seem to be no use in
imply that somebody's ignorance or imprudence have kill he. and
after all, he himself might be wrong.
he and Bulstrode ride back to Middlemarch together, talk of many
thing--chiefly cholera and the chance of the Reform Bill in the House
of Lords, and the firm resolve of the political Unions. nothing be
say about Raffles, except that Bulstrode mention the necessity of
have a grave for he in Lowick churchyard, and observe that, so far
as he know, the poor man have no connection, except Rigg, whom he have
state to be unfriendly towards he.
on return home Lydgate have a visit from Mr. Farebrother. the Vicar
have not be in the town the day before, but the news that there be an
execution in Lydgate's house have get to Lowick by the evening, have
be carry by Mr. Spicer, shoemaker and parish-clerk, who have it from
his brother, the respectable bell-hanger in Lowick Gate. since that
evening when Lydgate have come down from the billiard room with Fred
Vincy, Mr. Farebrother's thought about he have be rather gloomy.
play at the Green Dragon once or oftener might have be a trifle in
another man; but in Lydgate it be one of several sign that he be
get unlike his former self. he be begin to do thing for
which he have formerly even an excessive scorn. whatever certain
dissatisfaction in marriage, which some silly tinkling of gossip have
give he hint of, might have to do with this change, Mr. Farebrother
feel sure that it be chiefly connect with the debt which be be
more and more distinctly report, and he begin to fear that any notion
of Lydgate's have resource or friend in the background must be
quite illusory. the rebuff he have meet with in his first attempt to win
Lydgate's confidence, disincline he to a second; but this news of the
execution be actually in the house, determine the Vicar to overcome
his reluctance.
Lydgate have just dismiss a poor patient, in whom he be much
interested, and he come forward to put out his hand--with an open
cheerfulness which surprise Mr. Farebrother. could this too be a
proud rejection of sympathy and help? never mind; the sympathy and
help should be offer.
"how be you, Lydgate? I come to see you because I have hear something
which make I anxious about you," say the Vicar, in the tone of a good
brother, only that there be no reproach in it. they be both seat
by this time, and Lydgate answer immediately--
"I think I know what you mean. you have hear that there be an
execution in the house?"
"yes; be it true?"
"it be true," say Lydgate, with an air of freedom, as if he do not
mind talk about the affair now. "but the danger be over; the debt
be pay. I be out of my difficulty now: I shall be free from debt,
and able, I hope, to start afresh on a well plan."
"I be very thankful to hear it," say the Vicar, fall back in his
chair, and speak with that low-toned quickness which often follow
the removal of a load. "I like that well than all the news in the
'Times.' I confess I come to you with a heavy heart."
"thank you for come," say Lydgate, cordially. "I can enjoy the
kindness all the more because I be happy. I have certainly be a
good deal crush. Ibe afraid I shall find the bruise still painful
by-and by," he add, smile rather sadly; "but just now I can only
feel that the torture-screw be off."
Mr. Farebrother be silent for a moment, and then say earnestly, "my
dear fellow, let I ask you one question. forgive I if I take a
liberty."
"I donot believe you will ask anything that ought to offend I."
"then--this be necessary to set my heart quite at rest--you have
not--have you?--in order to pay your debt, incur another debt which
may harass you worse hereafter?"
"no," say Lydgate, color slightly. "there be no reason why I
should not tell you--since the fact be so--that the person to whom I be
indebted be Bulstrode. he have make I a very handsome advance--a
thousand pound--and he can afford to wait for repayment."
"well, that be generous," say Mr. Farebrother, compel himself to
approve of the man whom he dislike. his delicate feeling shrank from
dwell even in his thought on the fact that he have always urge
Lydgate to avoid any personal entanglement with Bulstrode. he add
immediately, "and Bulstrode must naturally feel an interest in your
welfare, after you have work with he in a way which have probably
reduce your income instead of add to it. I be glad to think that
he have act accordingly."
Lydgate feel uncomfortable under these kindly supposition. they make
more distinct within he the uneasy consciousness which have show its
first dim stirring only a few hour before, that Bulstrode's motif
for his sudden beneficence follow close upon the chillest
indifference might be merely selfish. he let the kindly supposition
pass. he could not tell the history of the loan, but it be more
vividly present with he than ever, as well as the fact which the Vicar
delicately ignore--that this relation of personal indebtedness to
Bulstrode be what he have once be most resolve to avoid.
he begin, instead of answer, to speak of his project economy,
and of his have come to look at his life from a different point of
view.
"I shall set up a surgery," he say. "I really think I make a mistaken
effort in that respect. and if Rosamond will not mind, I shall take an
apprentice. I donot like these thing, but if one carry they out
faithfully they be not really lower. I have have a severe galling
to begin with: that will make the small rub seem easy."
Poor Lydgate! the "if Rosamond will not mind," which have fall from
he involuntarily as part of his thought, be a significant mark of the
yoke he bear. but Mr. Farebrother, whose hope enter strongly into
the same current with Lydgate's, and who know nothing about he that
could now raise a melancholy presentiment, leave he with affectionate
congratulation.
CHAPTER LXXI.
Clown. . . . 'twa in the Bunch of Grapes, where, indeed,
you have a delight to sit, have you not?
Froth. I have so: because it be an open room, and good for winter.
Clo. why, very well then: I hope here be truth.
--measure for measure.
five day after the death of Raffles, Mr. Bambridge be stand at his
leisure under the large archway lead into the yard of the Green
Dragon. he be not fond of solitary contemplation, but he have only
just come out of the house, and any human figure stand at ease under
the archway in the early afternoon be as certain to attract
companionship as a pigeon which have find something worth peek at.
in this case there be no material object to feed upon, but the eye of
reason see a probability of mental sustenance in the shape of gossip.
Mr. Hopkins, the meek-mannered draper opposite, be the first to act on
this inward vision, be the more ambitious of a little masculine talk
because his customer be chiefly woman. Mr. Bambridge be rather
curt to the draper, feel that Hopkins be of course glad to talk to
_he_, but that he be not go to waste much of his talk on Hopkins.
soon, however, there be a small cluster of more important listener,
who be either deposit from the passer-by, or have saunter to the
spot expressly to see if there be anything go on at the Green
Dragon; and Mr. Bambridge be find it worth his while to say many
impressive thing about the fine stud he have be see and the
purchase he have make on a journey in the north from which he have just
return. gentleman present be assure that when they could show he
anything to cut out a blood mare, a bay, rise four, which be to be
see at Doncaster if they choose to go and look at it, Mr. Bambridge
would gratify they by be shoot "from here to Hereford." also, a pair
of black which he be go to put into the break recall vividly to
his mind a pair which he have sell to Faulkner in '19, for a hundred
guineas, and which Faulkner have sell for a hundred and sixty two month
later--any gent who could disprove this statement be offer the
privilege of call Mr. Bambridge by a very ugly name until the
exercise make his throat dry.
when the discourse be at this point of animation, come up Mr. Frank
Hawley. he be not a man to compromise his dignity by lounge at the
Green Dragon, but happen to pass along the High Street and see
Bambridge on the other side, he take some of his long stride across to
ask the horsedealer whether he have find the first-rate gig-horse which
he have engage to look for. Mr. Hawley be request to wait until he
have see a gray select at Bilkley: if that do not meet his wish to
a hair, Bambridge do not know a horse when he see it, which seem to
be the highest conceivable unlikelihood. Mr. Hawley, stand with his
back to the street, be fix a time for look at the gray and
see it try, when a horseman pass slowly by.
"Bulstrode!" say two or three voice at once in a low tone, one of
they, which be the draper's, respectfully prefix the "Mr.;" but
nobody have more intention in this interjectural naming than if they
have say "the Riverston coach" when that vehicle appear in the
distance. Mr. Hawley give a careless glance round at Bulstrode's back,
but as Bambridge's eye follow it he make a sarcastic grimace.
"by jingo! that remind I," he begin, lower his voice a little, "I
pick up something else at Bilkley besides your gig-horse, Mr. Hawley.
I pick up a fine story about Bulstrode. do you know how he come by
his fortune? any gentleman want a bit of curious information, I can
give it he free of expense. if everybody get their desert, Bulstrode
might have have to say his prayer at Botany Bay."
"what do you mean?" say Mr. Hawley, thrust his hand into his
pocket, and push a little forward under the archway. if Bulstrode
should turn out to be a rascal, Frank Hawley have a prophetic soul.
"I have it from a party who be an old chum of Bulstrode's. Iwill tell
you where I first pick he up," say Bambridge, with a sudden gesture
of his fore-finger. "he be at Larcher's sale, but I know nothing of
he then--he slip through my finger--be after Bulstrode, no
doubt. he tell I he can tap Bulstrode to any amount, know all his
secret. however, he blab to I at Bilkley: he take a stiff glass.
Damme if I think he mean to turn king's evidence; but hebe that sort
of brag fellow, the bragging run over hedge and ditch with he,
till hewould brag of a spavin as if it 'ud fetch money. a man should know
when to pull up." Mr. Bambridge make this remark with an air of
disgust, satisfy that his own bragging show a fine sense of the
marketable.
"whatbe the man's name? where can he be find?" say Mr. Hawley.
"as to where he be to be find, I leave he to it at the saracen's Head;
but his name be Raffles."
"Raffles!" exclaim Mr. Hopkins. "I furnish his funeral yesterday.
he be bury at Lowick. Mr. Bulstrode follow he. a very decent
funeral." there be a strong sensation among the listener. Mr.
Bambridge give an ejaculation in which "brimstone" be the mild
word, and Mr. Hawley, knit his brow and bend his head forward,
exclaim, "What?--where do the man die?"
"at Stone Court," say the draper. "the housekeeper say he be a
relation of the master's. he come there ill on Friday."
"why, it be on Wednesday I take a glass with he," interpose
Bambridge.
"do any doctor attend he?" say Mr. Hawley
"yes. Mr. Lydgate. Mr. Bulstrode sit up with he one night. he die
the third morning."
"go on, Bambridge," say Mr. Hawley, insistently. "what do this
fellow say about Bulstrode?"
the group have already become large, the town-clerk's presence be a
guarantee that something worth listen to be go on there; and Mr.
Bambridge deliver his narrative in the hearing of seven. it be
mainly what we know, include the fact about Will Ladislaw, with some
local color and circumstance add: it be what Bulstrode have dread
the betrayal of--and hop to have bury forever with the corpse of
Raffles--it be that haunt ghost of his early life which as he
ride past the archway of the Green Dragon he be trust that
Providence have deliver he from. yes, Providence. he have not
confess to himself yet that he have do anything in the way of
contrivance to this end; he have accept what seem to have be
offer. it be impossible to prove that he have do anything which
hasten the departure of that man's soul.
but this gossip about Bulstrode spread through Middlemarch like the
smell of fire. Mr. Frank Hawley follow up his information by send
a clerk whom he could trust to Stone Court on a pretext of inquire
about hay, but really to gather all that could be learn about Raffles
and his illness from Mrs. Abel. in this way it come to his knowledge
that Mr. Garth have carry the man to Stone Court in his gig; and Mr.
Hawley in consequence take an opportunity of see Caleb, call at
his office to ask whether he have time to undertake an arbitration if it
be require, and then ask he incidentally about Raffles. Caleb
be betray into no word injurious to Bulstrode beyond the fact which
he be force to admit, that he have give up act for he within the
last week. Mr Hawley draw his inference, and feeling convinced that
Raffles have tell his story to Garth, and that Garth have give up
Bulstrode's affair in consequence, say so a few hour later to Mr.
Toller. the statement be pass on until it have quite lose the stamp
of an inference, and be take as information come straight from
Garth, so that even a diligent historian might have conclude Caleb to
be the chief publisher of Bulstrode's misdemeanor.
Mr. Hawley be not slow to perceive that there be no handle for the
law either in the revelation make by Raffles or in the circumstance
of his death. he have himself ride to Lowick village that he might
look at the register and talk over the whole matter with Mr.
Farebrother, who be not more surprised than the lawyer that an ugly
secret should have come to light about Bulstrode, though he have always
have justice enough in he to hinder his antipathy from turn into
conclusion. but while they be talk another combination be
silently go forward in Mr. Farebrother's mind, which foreshadow
what be soon to be loudly speak of in Middlemarch as a necessary
"put of two and two together." with the reason which keep
Bulstrode in dread of Raffles there flash the thought that the dread
might have something to do with his munificence towards his medical
man; and though he resist the suggestion that it have be consciously
accept in any way as a bribe, he have a foreboding that this
complication of thing might be of malignant effect on Lydgate's
reputation. he perceive that Mr. Hawley know nothing at present of
the sudden relief from debt, and he himself be careful to glide away
from all approach towards the subject.
"well," he say, with a deep breath, want to wind up the illimitable
discussion of what might have be, though nothing could be legally
prove, "it be a strange story. so our mercurial Ladislaw have a queer
genealogy! a high-spirited young lady and a musical polish patriot
make a likely enough stock for he to spring from, but I should never
have suspect a grafting of the Jew pawnbroker. however, therebe no
know what a mixture will turn out beforehand. some sort of dirt
serve to clarify."
"itbe just what I should have expect," say Mr. Hawley, mount his
horse. "any cursed alien blood, Jew, Corsican, or Gypsy."
"I know hebe one of your black sheep, Hawley. but he be really a
disinterested, unworldly fellow," say Mr. Farebrother, smile.
"ay, ay, that be your whiggish twist," say Mr. Hawley, who have be in
the habit of say apologetically that Farebrother be such a damned
pleasant good-hearted fellow you would mistake he for a Tory.
Mr. Hawley ride home without thinking of Lydgate's attendance on
Raffles in any other light than as a piece of evidence on the side of
Bulstrode. but the news that Lydgate have all at once become able not
only to get rid of the execution in his house but to pay all his debt
in Middlemarch be spread fast, gather round it conjecture and
comment which give it new body and impetus, and soon fill the ear
of other person besides Mr. Hawley, who be not slow to see a
significant relation between this sudden command of money and
Bulstrode's desire to stifle the scandal of Raffles. that the money
come from Bulstrode would infallibly have be guess even if there
have be no direct evidence of it; for it have beforehand enter into
the gossip about Lydgate's affair, that neither his father-in-law nor
his own family would do anything for he, and direct evidence be
furnish not only by a clerk at the Bank, but by innocent Mrs.
Bulstrode herself, who mention the loan to Mrs. Plymdale, who
mention it to her daughter-in-law of the house of Toller, who
mention it generally. the business be feel to be so public and
important that it require dinner to feed it, and many invitation
be just then issue and accept on the strength of this scandal
concern Bulstrode and Lydgate; wife, widow, and single lady take
their work and go out to tea oftener than usual; and all public
conviviality, from the Green Dragon to Dollop's, gather a zest which
could not be win from the question whether the Lords would throw out
the Reform Bill.
for hardly anybody doubt that some scandalous reason or other be at
the bottom of Bulstrode's liberality to Lydgate. Mr. Hawley indeed, in
the first instance, invite a select party, include the two
physician, with Mr Toller and Mr. Wrench, expressly to hold a close
discussion as to the probability of Raffles's illness, recite to
they all the particular which have be gather from Mrs. Abel in
connection with Lydgate's certificate, that the death be due to
delirium tremen; and the medical gentleman, who all stand
undisturbedly on the old path in relation to this disease, declare
that they could see nothing in these particular which could be
transform into a positive ground of suspicion. but the moral ground
of suspicion remain: the strong motif Bulstrode clearly have for
wish to be rid of Raffles, and the fact that at this critical moment
he have give Lydgate the help which he must for some time have know
the need for; the disposition, moreover, to believe that Bulstrode
would be unscrupulous, and the absence of any indisposition to believe
that Lydgate might be as easily bribe as other haughty-minded man when
they have find themselves in want of money. even if the money have
be give merely to make he hold his tongue about the scandal of
Bulstrode's early life, the fact throw an odious light on Lydgate,
who have long be sneer at as make himself subservient to the
banker for the sake of work himself into predominance, and
discredit the eld member of his profession. hence, in spite of
the negative as to any direct sign of guilt in relation to the death at
Stone Court, Mr. Hawley's select party break up with the sense that the
affair have "an ugly look."
but this vague conviction of indeterminable guilt, which be enough to
keep up much head-shake and bite innuendo even among substantial
professional senior, have for the general mind all the superior power
of mystery over fact. everybody like well to conjecture how the
thing be, than simply to know it; for conjecture soon become more
confident than knowledge, and have a more liberal allowance for the
incompatible. even the more definite scandal concern Bulstrode's
early life be, for some mind, melt into the mass of mystery, as
so much lively metal to be pour out in dialogue, and to take such
fantastic shape as heaven please.
this be the tone of thought chiefly sanction by Mrs. Dollop, the
spirited landlady of the Tankard in Slaughter Lane, who have often to
resist the shallow pragmatism of customer dispose to think that their
report from the outer world be of equal force with what have "come
up" in her mind. how it have be bring to she she donot know, but
it be there before she as if it have be "score with the chalk on the
chimney-board--" as Bulstrode should say, "his inside be _that black_
as if the hair of his head know the thought of his heart, hewould tear
them up by the root."
"thatbe odd," say Mr. Limp, a meditative shoemaker, with weak eye and
a piping voice. "why, I read in the 'Trumpet' that be what the Duke
of Wellington say when he turn his coat and go over to the Romans."
"very like," say Mrs. Dollop. "if one raskill say it, itbe more
reason why another should. but hypo_crite_ as hebe be, and hold
thing with that high hand, as there be no parson I' the country good
enough for he, he be force to take Old Harry into his counsel, and
Old Harry's be too many for he."
"ay, ay, hebe a 'complice you cannot send out o' the country," say Mr.
Crabbe, the glazier, who gather much news and grope among it dimly.
"but by what I can make out, therebe they say Bulstrode be for
run away, for fear o' be find out, before now."
"hewill be drive away, whether or no," say Mr. Dill, the barber, who
have just drop in. "I shave Fletcher, Hawley's clerk, this
morning--hebe get a bad finger--and he say theybe all of one mind to
get rid of Bulstrode. Mr. Thesiger be turn against he, and want
he out o' the parish. and therebe gentleman in this town say theywould
as soon dine with a fellow from the hulk. 'and a deal soon I
would,' say Fletcher; 'for whatbe more against one's stomach than a
man come and make himself bad company with his religion, and give
out as the Ten Commandments be not enough for he, and all the while
hebe bad than half the man at the tread-mill?' Fletcher say so
himself."
"itwill be a bad thing for the town though, if Bulstrode's money go
out of it," say Mr. Limp, quaveringly.
"ah, therebe well folk spend their money bad," say a firm-voice
dyer, whose crimson hand look out of keep with his good-natured
face.
"but he willnot keep his money, by what I can make out," say the
glazier. "donot they say as therebe somebody can strip it off he? by
what I can understan', they could take every penny off he, if they
go to lawe."
"no such thing!" say the barber, who feel himself a little above his
company at Dollop's, but like it none the bad. "Fletcher say itbe
no such thing. he say they might prove over and over again whose
child this young Ladislaw be, and theywould do no more than if they
prove I come out of the Fens--he couldnot touch a penny."
"look you there now!" say Mrs. Dollop, indignantly. "I thank the Lord
he take my child to himself, if thatbe all the law can do for the
motherless. then by that, itbe o' no use who your father and mother
be. but as to listen to what one lawyer say without ask
another--I wonder at a man o' your cleverness, Mr. Dill. itbe well
know therebe always two side, if no more; else whowould go to law, I
should like to know? itbe a poor tale, with all the law as there be up
and down, if itbe no use prove whose child you be. Fletcher may say
that if he like, but I say, donot fletcher _I_!"
Mr. Dill affect to laugh in a complimentary way at Mrs. Dollop, as a
woman who be more than a match for the lawyer; be dispose to
submit to much twitting from a landlady who have a long score against
he.
"if they come to lawe, and itbe all true as folk say, therebe more
to be look to nor money," say the glazier. "therebe this poor
creetur as be dead and go; by what I can make out, hewould see the day
when he be a deal fine gentleman nor Bulstrode."
"Finer gentleman! Iwill warrant he," say Mrs. Dollop; "and a far
personabler man, by what I can hear. as I say when Mr. Baldwin, the
tax-gatherer, come in, a-standing where you sit, and say, 'Bulstrode
get all his money as he bring into this town by thieve and
swindling,'--I say, 'you donot make I no wiser, Mr. Baldwin: itbe set
my blood a-creep to look at he ever sin' here he come into
Slaughter Lane a-wanting to buy the house over my head: folk donot
look the color o' the dough-tub and stare at you as if they want to
see into your backbone for nothingk.' that be what I say, and Mr.
Baldwin can bear I witness."
"and in the right of it too," say Mr. Crabbe. "for by what I can
make out, this Raffles, as they call he, be a lusty, fresh-color
man as youwould wish to see, and the good o' company--though dead he lie
in Lowick churchyard sure enough; and by what I can understan', therebe
they know more than they _should_ know about how he get there."
"Iwill believe you!" say Mrs. Dallop, with a touch of scorn at Mr.
Crabbe's apparent dimness. "when a manbe be 'tice to a lone house,
and therebe they can pay for hospital and nurse for half the
country-side choose to be sitter-up night and day, and nobody to come
near but a doctor as be know to stick at nothingk, and as poor as he
can hang together, and after that so flush o' money as he can pay off
Mr. byle the butcher as his bill have be run on for the good o'
joint since last Michaelmas be a twelvemonth--I donot want anybody to
come and tell I as therebe be more go on nor the Prayer-book's
get a service for--I donot want to stand wink and blinking and
thinking."
Mrs. Dollop look round with the air of a landlady accustom to
dominate her company. there be a chorus of adhesion from the more
courageous; but Mr. Limp, after take a draught, place his flat hand
together and press they hard between his knee, look down at they
with blear-eyed contemplation, as if the scorch power of Mrs.
Dollop's speech have quite dry up and nullify his wit until they
could be bring round again by further moisture.
"why shouldnot they dig the man up and have the Crowner?" say the
dyer. "itbe be do many and manybe the time. if therebe be foul
play they might find it out."
"not they, Mr. Jonas!" say Mrs Dollop, emphatically. "I know what
doctor be. theybe a deal too cunning to be find out. and this
Doctor Lydgate thatbe be for cut up everybody before the breath
be well out o' their body--itbe plain enough what use he want to
make o' look into respectable people's inside. he know drug, you
may be sure, as you can neither smell nor see, neither before theybe
swallow nor after. why, Ihave see drop myself order by Doctor
Gambit, as be our club doctor and a good charikter, and have bring
more live child into the world nor ever another I' middlemarch--I
say Ihave see drop myself as make no difference whether they be in
the glass or out, and yet have grip you the next day. so Iwill leave
your own sense to judge. donot tell I! all I say be, itbe a mercy
they donot take this Doctor Lydgate on to our club. therebe many a
mother's child might ha' rue it."
the head of this discussion at "Dollop's" have be the common theme
among all class in the town, have be carry to Lowick Parsonage on
one side and to Tipton Grange on the other, have come fully to the ear
of the Vincy family, and have be discuss with sad reference to "poor
Harriet" by all Mrs. Bulstrode's friend, before Lydgate know
distinctly why people be look strangely at he, and before
Bulstrode himself suspect the betrayal of his secret. he have not
be accustom to very cordial relation with his neighbor, and hence
he could not miss the sign of cordiality; moreover, he have be take
journey on business of various kind, have now make up his mind that
he need not quit Middlemarch, and feel able consequently to
determine on matter which he have before leave in suspense.
"we will make a journey to Cheltenham in the course of a month or two,"
he have say to his wife. "there be great spiritual advantage to be
have in that town along with the air and the water, and six week there
will be eminently refreshing to we."
he really believe in the spiritual advantage, and mean that his life
henceforth should be the more devoted because of those later sin which
he represent to himself as hypothetic, pray hypothetically for
their pardon:--"if I have herein transgress."
as to the Hospital, he avoid say anything further to lydgate,
fear to manifest a too sudden change of plan immediately on the
death of Raffles. in his secret soul he believe that Lydgate
suspect his order to have be intentionally disobey, and
suspect this he must also suspect a motive. but nothing have be
betray to he as to the history of Raffles, and Bulstrode be anxious
not to do anything which would give emphasis to his undefined
suspicion. as to any certainty that a particular method of treatment
would either save or kill, Lydgate himself be constantly argue
against such dogmatism; he have no right to speak, and he have every
motive for be silent. hence Bulstrode feel himself providentially
secure. the only incident he have strongly wince under have be an
occasional encounter with Caleb Garth, who, however, have raise his hat
with mild gravity.
meanwhile, on the part of the principal townsman a strong determination
be grow against he.
a meeting be to be hold in the Town-Hall on a sanitary question which
have rise into press importance by the occurrence of a cholera case
in the town. since the Act of Parliament, which have be hurriedly
pass, authorize assessment for sanitary measure, there have be a
Board for the superintendence of such measure appoint in
Middlemarch, and much cleansing and preparation have be concur in
by whig and Tories. the question now be, whether a piece of ground
outside the town should be secure as a burial-ground by mean of
assessment or by private subscription. the meeting be to be open, and
almost everybody of importance in the town be expect to be there.
Mr. Bulstrode be a member of the Board, and just before twelve o'clock
he start from the Bank with the intention of urge the plan of
private subscription. under the hesitation of his project, he have for
some time keep himself in the background, and he feel that he should
this morning resume his old position as a man of action and influence
in the public affair of the town where he expect to end his day.
among the various person go in the same direction, he see Lydgate;
they join, talk over the object of the meeting, and enter it
together.
it seem that everybody of mark have be early than they. but there
be still space leave near the head of the large central table, and
they make their way thither. Mr. Farebrother sit opposite, not far
from Mr. Hawley; all the medical man be there; Mr. Thesiger be in
the chair, and Mr. Brooke of Tipton be on his right hand.
Lydgate notice a peculiar interchange of glance when he and Bulstrode
take their seat.
after the business have be fully open by the chairman, who point
out the advantage of purchase by subscription a piece of ground
large enough to be ultimately use as a general cemetery, Mr.
Bulstrode, whose rather high-pitch but subdued and fluent voice the
town be use to at meeting of this sort, rise and ask leave to
deliver his opinion. lydgate could see again the peculiar interchange
of glance before Mr. Hawley start up, and say in his firm resonant
voice, "Mr. Chairman, I request that before any one deliver his
opinion on this point I may be permit to speak on a question of
public feeling, which not only by myself, but by many gentleman
present, be regard as preliminary."
Mr. Hawley's mode of speech, even when public decorum repress his
"awful language," be formidable in its curtness and self-possession.
Mr. Thesiger sanction the request, Mr. Bulstrode sit down, and Mr.
Hawley continue.
"in what I have to say, Mr. Chairman, I be not speak simply on my
own behalf: I be speak with the concurrence and at the express
request of no few than eight of my fellow-townsman, who be
immediately around we. it be our united sentiment that Mr. Bulstrode
should be call upon--and I do now call upon he--to resign public
position which he hold not simply as a tax-payer, but as a gentleman
among gentleman. there be practice and there be act which, owe
to circumstance, the law cannot visit, though they may be bad than
many thing which be legally punishable. honest man and gentleman, if
they donot want the company of people who perpetrate such act, have
get to defend themselves as they well can, and that be what I and the
friend whom I may call my client in this affair be determined to do.
I donot say that Mr. Bulstrode have be guilty of shameful act, but I
call upon he either publicly to deny and confute the scandalous
statement make against he by a man now dead, and who die in his
house--the statement that he be for many year engage in nefarious
practice, and that he win his fortune by dishonest procedure--or else
to withdraw from position which could only have be allow he as a
gentleman among gentleman."
all eye in the room be turn on Mr. Bulstrode, who, since the first
mention of his name, have be go through a crisis of feel almost
too violent for his delicate frame to support. lydgate, who himself
be undergo a shock as from the terrible practical interpretation of
some faint augury, feel, nevertheless, that his own movement of
resentful hatred be check by that instinct of the Healer which
think first of bring rescue or relief to the sufferer, when he
look at the shrunken misery of Bulstrode's livid face.
the quick vision that his life be after all a failure, that he be a
dishonor man, and must quail before the glance of those towards whom
he have habitually assume the attitude of a reprover--that God have
disown he before man and leave he unscreened to the triumphant scorn
of those who be glad to have their hatred justify--the sense of
utter futility in that equivocation with his conscience in deal with
the life of his accomplice, an equivocation which now turn venomously
upon he with the full-grow fang of a discover lie:--all this
rush through he like the agony of terror which fail to kill, and
leave the ear still open to the return wave of execration. the
sudden sense of exposure after the re-established sense of safety
come--not to the coarse organization of a criminal but to--the
susceptible nerve of a man whose intense being lie in such mastery
and predominance as the condition of his life have shape for he.
but in that intense being lie the strength of reaction. through all
his bodily infirmity there run a tenacious nerve of ambitious
self-preserve will, which have continually leap out like a flame,
scatter all doctrinal fear, and which, even while he sit an object
of compassion for the merciful, be begin to stir and glow under
his ashy paleness. before the last word be out of Mr. Hawley's
mouth, Bulstrode feel that he should answer, and that his answer would
be a retort. he dare not get up and say, "I be not guilty, the whole
story be false"--even if he have dare this, it would have seem to
he, under his present keen sense of betrayal, as vain as to pull, for
cover to his nakedness, a frail rag which would rend at every little
strain.
for a few moment there be total silence, while every man in the room
be look at Bulstrode. he sit perfectly still, lean hard against
the back of his chair; he could not venture to rise, and when he begin
to speak he press his hand upon the seat on each side of he. but
his voice be perfectly audible, though hoarser than usual, and his
word be distinctly pronounce, though he pause between sentence as
if short of breath. he say, turn first toward Mr. Thesiger, and
then look at Mr. Hawley--
"I protest before you, sir, as a christian minister, against the
sanction of proceeding towards I which be dictate by virulent
hatred. those who be hostile to I be glad to believe any libel
utter by a loose tongue against I. and their conscience become
strict against I. say that the evil-speaking of which I be to be make
the victim accuse I of malpractices--" here Bulstrode's voice rise
and take on a more biting accent, till it seem a low cry--"who shall
be my accuser? not man whose own life be unchristian, nay,
scandalous--not man who themselves use low instrument to carry out
their end--whose profession be a tissue of chicanery--who have be
spend their income on their own sensual enjoyment, while I have
be devote mine to advance the good object with regard to this life
and the next."
after the word chicanery there be a grow noise, half of murmur and
half of hiss, while four person start up at once--Mr. Hawley, Mr.
Toller, Mr. Chichely, and Mr. Hackbutt; but Mr. Hawley's outburst be
instantaneous, and leave the other behind in silence.
"if you mean I, sir, I call you and every one else to the inspection
of my professional life. as to Christian or unchristian, I repudiate
your canting palaver Christianity; and as to the way in which I
spend my income, it be not my principle to maintain thief and cheat
offspring of their due inheritance in order to support religion and set
myself up as a saintly killjoy. I affect no niceness of conscience--I
have not find any nice standard necessary yet to measure your action
by, sir. and I again call upon you to enter into satisfactory
explanation concern the scandal against you, or else to withdraw
from post in which we at any rate decline you as a colleague. I say,
sir, we decline to co-operate with a man whose character be not clear
from infamous light cast upon it, not only by report but by recent
action."
"allow I, Mr. Hawley," say the chairman; and Mr. Hawley, still
fume, bow half impatiently, and sit down with his hand thrust deep
in his pocket.
"Mr. Bulstrode, it be not desirable, I think, to prolong the present
discussion," say Mr. Thesiger, turn to the pallid trembling man; "I
must so far concur with what have fall from Mr. Hawley in expression
of a general feeling, as to think it due to your christian profession
that you should clear yourself, if possible, from unhappy aspersion.
I for my part should be willing to give you full opportunity and
hearing. but I must say that your present attitude be painfully
inconsistent with those principle which you have seek to identify
yourself with, and for the honor of which I be bind to care. I
recommend you at present, as your clergyman, and one who hop for your
reinstatement in respect, to quit the room, and avoid further hindrance
to business."
Bulstrode, after a moment's hesitation, take his hat from the floor and
slowly rise, but he grasp the corner of the chair so totteringly that
Lydgate feel sure there be not strength enough in he to walk away
without support. what could he do? he could not see a man sink close
to he for want of help. he rise and give his arm to Bulstrode, and in
that way lead he out of the room; yet this act, which might have be
one of gentle duty and pure compassion, be at this moment unspeakably
bitter to he. it seem as if he be put his sign-manual to that
association of himself with Bulstrode, of which he now see the full
meaning as it must have present itself to other mind. he now feel
the conviction that this man who be lean tremblingly on his arm,
have give he the thousand pound as a bribe, and that somehow the
treatment of Raffles have be tamper with from an evil motive. the
inference be closely link enough; the town know of the loan,
believe it to be a bribe, and believe that he take it as a bribe.
Poor Lydgate, his mind struggle under the terrible clutch of this
revelation, be all the while morally force to take Mr. Bulstrode to
the Bank, send a man off for his carriage, and wait to accompany he
home.
meanwhile the business of the meeting be despatch, and fringe off
into eager discussion among various group concern this affair of
Bulstrode--and Lydgate.
Mr. Brooke, who have before hear only imperfect hint of it, and be
very uneasy that he have "go a little too far" in countenancing
Bulstrode, now get himself fully inform, and feel some benevolent
sadness in talk to Mr. Farebrother about the ugly light in which
Lydgate have come to be regard. Mr. Farebrother be go to walk
back to Lowick.
"step into my carriage," say Mr. Brooke. "I be go round to see
Mrs. Casaubon. she be to come back from Yorkshire last night. she
will like to see I, you know."
so they drive along, Mr. Brooke chat with good-natured hope that
there have not really be anything black in Lydgate's behavior--a
young fellow whom he have see to be quite above the common mark, when
he bring a letter from his uncle Sir Godwin. Mr. Farebrother say
little: he be deeply mournful: with a keen perception of human
weakness, he could not be confident that under the pressure of
humiliating need Lydgate have not fall below himself.
when the carriage drive up to the gate of the Manor, Dorothea be out
on the gravel, and come to greet they.
"well, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, "we have just come from a meeting--a
sanitary meeting, you know."
"be Mr. Lydgate there?" say Dorothea, who look full of health and
animation, and stand with her head bare under the gleaming April
light. "I want to see he and have a great consultation with he
about the Hospital. I have engage with Mr. Bulstrode to do so."
"oh, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, "we have be hear bad news--bad
news, you know."
they walk through the garden towards the churchyard gate, Mr.
Farebrother want to go on to the parsonage; and Dorothea hear the
whole sad story.
she listen with deep interest, and beg to hear twice over the
fact and impression concern Lydgate. after a short silence,
pause at the churchyard gate, and address Mr. Farebrother, she
say energetically--
"you donot believe that Mr. Lydgate be guilty of anything base? I will
not believe it. let we find out the truth and clear he!"
BOOK VIII.
SUNSET and SUNRISE.
CHAPTER LXXII.
full soul be double mirror, make still
an endless vista of fair thing before,
repeat thing behind.
Dorothea's impetuous generosity, which would have leap at once to the
vindication of Lydgate from the suspicion of have accept money as a
bribe, undergo a melancholy check when she come to consider all the
circumstance of the case by the light of Mr. Farebrother's experience.
"it be a delicate matter to touch," he say. "how can we begin to
inquire into it? it must be either publicly by set the magistrate
and coroner to work, or privately by question Lydgate. as to the
first proceed there be no solid ground to go upon, else Hawley would
have adopt it; and as to open the subject with Lydgate, I confess
I should shrink from it. he would probably take it as a deadly insult.
I have more than once experience the difficulty of speak to he on
personal matter. and--one should know the truth about his conduct
beforehand, to feel very confident of a good result."
"I feel convinced that his conduct have not be guilty: I believe that
people be almost always well than their neighbor think they be,"
say Dorothea. some of her intense experience in the last two year
have set her mind strongly in opposition to any unfavorable construction
of other; and for the first time she feel rather discontent with Mr.
Farebrother. she dislike this cautious weighing of consequence,
instead of an ardent faith in effort of justice and mercy, which would
conquer by their emotional force. two day afterwards, he be dining
at the Manor with her uncle and the Chettams, and when the dessert be
stand uneaten, the servant be out of the room, and Mr. Brooke be
nod in a nap, she return to the subject with renew vivacity.
"Mr. Lydgate would understand that if his friend hear a calumny about
he their first wish must be to justify he. what do we live for, if
it be not to make life less difficult to each other? I cannot be
indifferent to the trouble of a man who advise I in _my_ trouble,
and attend I in my illness."
Dorothea's tone and manner be not more energetic than they have be
when she be at the head of her uncle's table nearly three year
before, and her experience since have give she more right to express a
decide opinion. but Sir James Chettam be no long the diffident and
acquiescent suitor: he be the anxious brother-in-law, with a devout
admiration for his sister, but with a constant alarm lest she should
fall under some new illusion almost as bad as marry Casaubon. he
smile much less; when he say "exactly" it be more often an
introduction to a dissentient opinion than in those submissive bachelor
day; and Dorothea find to her surprise that she have to resolve not to
be afraid of he--all the more because he be really her good friend.
he disagree with she now.
"but, Dorothea," he say, remonstrantly, "you cannot undertake to manage
a man's life for he in that way. Lydgate must know--at least he will
soon come to know how he stand. if he can clear himself, he will. he
must act for himself."
"I think his friend must wait till they find an opportunity," add
Mr. Farebrother. "it be possible--I have often feel so much weakness
in myself that I can conceive even a man of honorable disposition, such
as I have always believe Lydgate to be, succumb to such a
temptation as that of accept money which be offer more or less
indirectly as a bribe to insure his silence about scandalous fact long
go by. I say, I can conceive this, if he be under the pressure of
hard circumstance--if he have be harass as I feel sure Lydgate have
be. I would not believe anything bad of he except under stringent
proof. but there be the terrible Nemesis follow on some error,
that it be always possible for those who like it to interpret they into
a crime: there be no proof in favor of the man outside his own
consciousness and assertion."
"oh, how cruel!" say Dorothea, clasp her hand. "and would you not
like to be the one person who believe in that man's innocence, if the
rest of the world belie he? besides, there be a man's character
beforehand to speak for he."
"but, my dear Mrs. Casaubon," say Mr. Farebrother, smile gently at
her ardor, "character be not cut in marble--it be not something solid
and unalterable. it be something live and change, and may become
diseased as our body do."
"then it may be rescue and heal," say Dorothea "I should not be
afraid of ask Mr. Lydgate to tell I the truth, that I might help
he. why should I be afraid? now that I be not to have the land,
James, I might do as Mr. Bulstrode propose, and take his place in
provide for the Hospital; and I have to consult Mr. Lydgate, to know
thoroughly what be the prospect of do good by keep up the
present plan. there be the good opportunity in the world for I to
ask for his confidence; and he would be able to tell I thing which
might make all the circumstance clear. then we would all stand by he
and bring he out of his trouble. People glorify all sort of bravery
except the bravery they might show on behalf of their near
neighbor." Dorothea's eye have a moist brightness in they, and the
change tone of her voice rouse her uncle, who begin to listen.
"it be true that a woman may venture on some effort of sympathy which
would hardly succeed if we man undertake they," say Mr. Farebrother,
almost convert by Dorothea's ardor.
"surely, a woman be bind to be cautious and listen to those who know
the world well than she do." say Sir James, with his little
frown. "whatever you do in the end, Dorothea, you should really keep
back at present, and not volunteer any meddling with this Bulstrode
business. we donot know yet what may turn up. you must agree with
I?" he end, look at Mr. Farebrother.
"I do think it would be well to wait," say the latter.
"yes, yes, my dear," say Mr. Brooke, not quite know at what point
the discussion have arrive, but come up to it with a contribution
which be generally appropriate. "it be easy to go too far, you know.
you must not let your idea run away with you. and as to be in a
hurry to put money into scheme--it willnot do, you know. Garth have
draw I in uncommonly with repair, drain, that sort of thing: Ibe
uncommonly out of pocket with one thing or another. I must pull up.
as for you, Chettam, you be spend a fortune on those oak fence
round your demesne."
Dorothea, submit uneasily to this discouragement, go with Celia
into the library, which be her usual drawing-room.
"now, Dodo, do listen to what James say," say Celia, "else you will
be get into a scrape. you always do, and you always will, when
you set about do as you please. and I think it be a mercy now after
all that you have get James to think for you. he let you have your
plan, only he hinder you from be take in. and that be the good
of have a brother instead of a husband. a husband would not let you
have your plan."
"as if I want a husband!" say Dorothea. "I only want not to have my
feeling check at every turn." Mrs. Casaubon be still undisciplined
enough to burst into angry tear.
"now, really, Dodo," say Celia, with rather a deep guttural than
usual, "you _be_ contradictory: first one thing and then another. you
use to submit to Mr. Casaubon quite shamefully: I think you would have
give up ever come to see I if he have ask you."
"of course I submit to he, because it be my duty; it be my
feeling for he," say Dorothea, look through the prism of her tear.
"then why cannot you think it your duty to submit a little to what James
wish?" say Celia, with a sense of stringency in her argument.
"because he only wish what be for your own good. and, of course, man
know good about everything, except what woman know well." Dorothea
laugh and forget her tear.
"well, I mean about baby and those thing," explain Celia. "I
should not give up to James when I know he be wrong, as you use to do
to Mr. Casaubon."
CHAPTER LXXIII.
Pity the laden one; this wander woe
may visit you and I.
when Lydgate have allay Mrs. Bulstrode's anxiety by tell she that
her husband have be seize with faintness at the meeting, but that he
trust soon to see he well and would call again the next day,
unless she-send for he early, he go directly home, get on his
horse, and ride three mile out of the town for the sake of be out
of reach.
he feel himself become violent and unreasonable as if rag under
the pain of sting: he be ready to curse the day on which he have come
to Middlemarch. everything that bad happen to he there seem a
mere preparation for this hateful fatality, which have come as a blight
on his honorable ambition, and must make even people who have only
vulgar standard regard his reputation as irrevocably damage. in such
moment a man can hardly escape be unloving. lydgate think of
himself as the sufferer, and of other as the agent who have injure
his lot. he have mean everything to turn out differently; and other
have thrust themselves into his life and thwart his purpose. his
marriage seem an unmitigated calamity; and he be afraid of go to
Rosamond before he have vent himself in this solitary rage, lest the
mere sight of she should exasperate he and make he behave
unwarrantably. there be episode in most man's life in which their
high quality can only cast a deter shadow over the object
that fill their inward vision: lydgate's tenderheartedness be present
just then only as a dread lest he should offend against it, not as an
emotion that sway he to tenderness. for he be very miserable.
only those who know the supremacy of the intellectual life--the life
which have a seed of ennoble thought and purpose within it--can
understand the grief of one who fall from that serene activity into
the absorb soul-waste struggle with worldly annoyance.
how be he to live on without vindicate himself among people who
suspect he of baseness? how could he go silently away from
Middlemarch as if he be retreat before a just condemnation? and
yet how be he to set about vindicate himself?
for that scene at the meeting, which he have just witness, although it
have tell he no particular, have be enough to make his own situation
thoroughly clear to he. Bulstrode have be in dread of scandalous
disclosure on the part of Raffles. Lydgate could now construct all
the probability of the case. "he be afraid of some betrayal in my
hearing: all he want be to bind I to he by a strong obligation:
that be why he pass on a sudden from hardness to liberality. and he
may have tamper with the patient--he may have disobey my order. I
fear he do. but whether he do or not, the world believe that he
somehow or other poison the man and that I wink at the crime, if I
donot help in it. and yet--and yet he may not be guilty of the last
offence; and it be just possible that the change towards I may have
be a genuine relenting--the effect of second thought such as he
allege. what we call the 'just possible' be sometimes true and the
thing we find it easy to believe be grossly false. in his last
dealing with this man Bulstrode may have keep his hand pure, in spite
of my suspicion to the contrary."
there be a benumb cruelty in his position. even if he renounce
every other consideration than that of justify himself--if he meet
shrug, cold glance, and avoidance as an accusation, and make a public
statement of all the fact as he know they, who would be convince? it
would be play the part of a fool to offer his own testimony on
behalf of himself, and say, "I do not take the money as a bribe." the
circumstance would always be strong than his assertion. and
besides, to come forward and tell everything about himself must include
declaration about Bulstrode which would darken the suspicion of
other against he. he must tell that he have not know of Raffles's
existence when he first mention his press need of money to
Bulstrode, and that he take the money innocently as a result of that
communication, not know that a new motive for the loan might have
arise on his be call in to this man. and after all, the
suspicion of Bulstrode's motif might be unjust.
but then come the question whether he should have act in precisely
the same way if he have not take the money? certainly, if Raffles have
continue alive and susceptible of further treatment when he arrive,
and he have then imagine any disobedience to his order on the part of
Bulstrode, he would have make a strict inquiry, and if his conjecture
have be verify he would have throw up the case, in spite of his
recent heavy obligation. but if he have not receive any money--if
Bulstrode have never revoke his cold recommendation of bankruptcy--would
he, Lydgate, have abstain from all inquiry even on find the
man dead?--would the shrinking from an insult to Bulstrode--would the
dubiousness of all medical treatment and the argument that his own
treatment would pass for the wrong with most member of his
profession--have have just the same force or significance with he?
that be the uneasy corner of Lydgate's consciousness while he be
review the fact and resist all reproach. if he have be
independent, this matter of a patient's treatment and the distinct rule
that he must do or see do that which he believe well for the life
commit to he, would have be the point on which he would have be
the sturdy. as it be, he have rest in the consideration that
disobedience to his order, however it might have arise, could not be
consider a crime, that in the dominant opinion obedience to his
order be just as likely to be fatal, and that the affair be simply
one of etiquette. whereas, again and again, in his time of freedom, he
have denounce the perversion of pathological doubt into moral doubt and
have said--"the pure experiment in treatment may still be
conscientious: my business be to take care of life, and to do the good
I can think of for it. science be properly more scrupulous than dogma.
Dogma give a charter to mistake, but the very breath of science be a
contest with mistake, and must keep the conscience alive." alas! the
scientific conscience have get into the debasing company of money
obligation and selfish respect.
"be there a medical man of they all in Middlemarch who would question
himself as I do?" say poor Lydgate, with a renew outburst of
rebellion against the oppression of his lot. "and yet they will all
feel warrant in make a wide space between I and they, as if I be
a leper! my practice and my reputation be utterly damned--I can see
that. even if I could be clear by valid evidence, it would make
little difference to the blessed world here. I have be set down as
taint and should be cheapen to they all the same."
already there have be abundant sign which have hitherto puzzle he,
that just when he have be pay off his debt and get cheerfully
on his foot, the townsman be avoid he or look strangely at
he, and in two instance it come to his knowledge that patient of his
have call in another practitioner. the reason be too plain now.
the general black-balling have begin.
no wonder that in Lydgate's energetic nature the sense of a hopeless
misconstruction easily turn into a dogged resistance. the scowl
which occasionally show itself on his square brow be not a
meaningless accident. already when he be re-enter the town after
that ride take in the first hour of sting pain, he be set his
mind on remain in Middlemarch in spite of the bad that could be
do against he. he would not retreat before calumny, as if he
submit to it. he would face it to the utmost, and no act of his
should show that he be afraid. it belong to the generosity as well
as defiant force of his nature that he resolve not to shrink from
show to the full his sense of obligation to Bulstrode. it be true
that the association with this man have be fatal to he--true that if
he have have the thousand pound still in his hand with all his debt
unpaid he would have return the money to Bulstrode, and take beggary
rather than the rescue which have be sully with the suspicion of a
bribe (for, remember, he be one of the proud among the son of
men)--nevertheless, he would not turn away from this crush
fellow-mortal whose aid he have use, and make a pitiful effort to get
acquittal for himself by howl against another. "I shall do as I
think right, and explain to nobody. they will try to starve I out,
but--" he be go on with an obstinate resolve, but he be get
near home, and the thought of Rosamond urge itself again into that
chief place from which it have be thrust by the agonized struggle of
wound honor and pride.
how would Rosamond take it all? here be another weight of chain to
drag, and poor Lydgate be in a bad mood for bear her dumb mastery.
he have no impulse to tell she the trouble which must soon be common to
they both. he prefer wait for the incidental disclosure which
event must soon bring about.
CHAPTER LXXIV.
"mercifully grant that we may grow aged together."
--book of TOBIT: Marriage Prayer.
in Middlemarch a wife could not long remain ignorant that the town hold
a bad opinion of her husband. no feminine intimate might carry she
friendship so far as to make a plain statement to the wife of the
unpleasant fact know or believe about her husband; but when a woman
with her thought much at leisure get they suddenly employ on
something grievously disadvantageous to her neighbor, various moral
impulse be call into play which tend to stimulate utterance.
Candor be one. to be candid, in Middlemarch phraseology, mean, to
use an early opportunity of let your friend know that you do not
take a cheerful view of their capacity, their conduct, or their
position; and a robust candor never wait to be ask for its opinion.
then, again, there be the love of truth--a wide phrase, but mean in
this relation, a lively objection to see a wife look happy than
her husband's character warrant, or manifest too much satisfaction in
her lot--the poor thing should have some hint give she that if she
know the truth she would have less complacency in her bonnet, and in
light dish for a supper-party. strong than all, there be the
regard for a friend's moral improvement, sometimes call her soul,
which be likely to be benefit by remark tend to gloom, utter
with the accompaniment of pensive staring at the furniture and a manner
imply that the speaker would not tell what be on her mind, from
regard to the feeling of her hearer. on the whole, one might say that
an ardent charity be at work set the virtuous mind to make a
neighbor unhappy for her good.
there be hardly any wife in Middlemarch whose matrimonial
misfortune would in different way be likely to call forth more of
this moral activity than Rosamond and her aunt Bulstrode. Mrs.
Bulstrode be not an object of dislike, and have never consciously
injure any human being. man have always think she a handsome
comfortable woman, and have reckon it among the sign of Bulstrode's
hypocrisy that he have choose a red-blooded vincy, instead of a ghastly
and melancholy person suit to his low esteem for earthly pleasure.
when the scandal about her husband be disclose they remark of
her--"Ah, poor woman! shebe as honest as the day--_she_ never
suspect anything wrong in he, you may depend on it." woman, who
be intimate with she, talk together much of "poor Harriet,"
imagine what her feeling must be when she come to know everything,
and conjecture how much she have already come to know. there be no
spiteful disposition towards she; rather, there be a busy benevolence
anxious to ascertain what it would be well for she to feel and do under
the circumstance, which of course keep the imagination occupy with
her character and history from the time when she be Harriet Vincy
till now. with the review of Mrs. Bulstrode and her position it be
inevitable to associate Rosamond, whose prospect be under the same
blight with her aunt's. Rosamond be more severely criticise and less
pitied, though she too, as one of the good old Vincy family who have
always be know in Middlemarch, be regard as a victim to marriage
with an interloper. the Vincys have their weakness, but then they lay
on the surface: there be never anything bad to be "find out"
concern they. Mrs. Bulstrode be vindicate from any resemblance to
her husband. Harriet's fault be her own.
"she have always be showy," say Mrs. Hackbutt, make tea for a small
party, "though she have get into the way of put her religion
forward, to conform to her husband; she have try to hold her head up
above Middlemarch by make it know that she invite clergyman and
heaven-know-who from Riverston and those place."
"we can hardly blame she for that," say Mrs. Sprague; "because few of
the good people in the town care to associate with Balstrode, and she
must have somebody to sit down at her table."
"Mr. Thesiger have always countenance he," say Mrs. Hackbutt. "I
think he must be sorry now."
"but he be never fond of he in his heart--that every one know," say
Mrs. Tom Toller. "Mr. Thesiger never go into extreme. he keep to
the truth in what be evangelical. it be only clergyman like Mr. Tyke,
who want to use dissent hymn-book and that low kind of religion,
who ever find Bulstrode to their taste."
"I understand, Mr. Tyke be in great distress about he," say Mrs.
Hackbutt. "and well he may be: they say the Bulstrodes have half keep
the Tyke family."
"and of coarse it be a discredit to his doctrine," say Mrs. Sprague,
who be elderly, and old-fashioned in her opinion.
"People will not make a boast of be methodistical in Middlemarch for
a good while to come."
"I think we must not set down people's bad action to their religion,"
say falcon-face Mrs. Plymdale, who have be listen hitherto.
"oh, my dear, we be forget," say Mrs. Sprague. "we ought not to
be talk of this before you."
"I be sure I have no reason to be partial," say Mrs. Plymdale,
color. "itbe true Mr. Plymdale have always be on good term with
Mr. Bulstrode, and Harriet Vincy be my friend long before she marry
he. but I have always keep my own opinion and tell she where she be
wrong, poor thing. still, in point of religion, I must say, Mr.
Bulstrode might have do what he have, and bad, and yet have be a
man of no religion. I donot say that there have not be a little too
much of that--I like moderation myself. but truth be truth. the man
try at the assize be not all over-religious, I suppose."
"well," say Mrs. Hackbutt, wheel adroitly, "all I can say be, that
I think she ought to separate from he."
"I cannot say that," say Mrs. Sprague. "she take he for well or
bad, you know."
"but 'bad' can never mean find out that your husband be fit for
newgate," say Mrs. Hackbutt. "Fancy live with such a man! I should
expect to be poison."
"yes, I think myself it be an encouragement to crime if such man be to
be take care of and wait on by good wife," say Mrs. Tom Toller.
"and a good wife poor Harriet have be," say Mrs. Plymdale. "she
think her husband the first of man. itbe true he have never deny she
anything."
"well, we shall see what she will do," say Mrs. Hackbutt. "I suppose
she know nothing yet, poor creature. I do hope and trust I shall not
see she, for I should be frightened to death lest I should say anything
about her husband. do you think any hint have reach she?"
"I should hardly think so," say Mrs. Tom Toller. "we hear that he be
ill, and have never stir out of the house since the meeting on
Thursday; but she be with her girl at church yesterday, and they have
new tuscan bonnet. her own have a feather in it. I have never see
that her religion make any difference in her dress."
"she wear very neat pattern always," say Mrs. Plymdale, a little
stung. "and that feather I know she get dye a pale lavender on
purpose to be consistent. I must say it of Harriet that she wish to
do right."
"as to she know what have happen, it cannot be keep from her long,"
say Mrs. Hackbutt. "the Vincys know, for Mr. Vincy be at the
meeting. it will he a great blow to he. there be his daughter as
well as his sister."
"yes, indeed," say Mrs. Sprague. "nobody suppose that Mr. Lydgate
can go on hold up his head in Middlemarch, thing look so black
about the thousand pound he take just at that man's death. it really
make one shudder."
"pride must have a fall," say Mrs. Hackbutt.
"I be not so sorry for Rosamond Vincy that be as I be for her aunt,"
say Mrs. Plymdale. "she need a lesson."
"I suppose the Bulstrodes will go and live abroad somewhere," say Mrs.
Sprague. "that be what be generally do when there be anything
disgraceful in a family."
"and a most deadly blow it will be to Harriet," say Mrs. Plymdale.
"if ever a woman be crush, she will be. I pity she from my heart.
and with all her fault, few woman be well. from a girl she have the
neat way, and be always good-hearted, and as open as the day. you
might look into her drawer when you would--always the same. and so
she have bring up Kate and Ellen. you may think how hard it will be
for she to go among foreigner."
"the doctor say that be what he should recommend the Lydgates to do,"
say Mrs. Sprague. "he say Lydgate ought to have keep among the
French."
"that would suit _she_ well enough, I dare say," say Mrs. Plymdale;
"there be that kind of lightness about she. but she get that from her
mother; she never get it from her aunt Bulstrode, who always give she
good advice, and to my knowledge would rather have have her marry
elsewhere."
Mrs. Plymdale be in a situation which cause she some complication of
feeling. there have be not only her intimacy with Mrs. Bulstrode, but
also a profitable business relation of the great Plymdale dyeing house
with Mr. Bulstrode, which on the one hand would have incline she to
desire that the mild view of his character should be the true one,
but on the other, make she the more afraid of seem to palliate his
culpability. again, the late alliance of her family with the Tollers
have bring she in connection with the good circle, which gratify she
in every direction except in the inclination to those serious view
which she believe to be the good in another sense. the sharp little
woman's conscience be somewhat troubled in the adjustment of these
oppose "best," and of her grief and satisfaction under late
event, which be likely to humble those who need humbling, but also
to fall heavily on her old friend whose fault she would have prefer
seeing on a background of prosperity.
Poor Mrs. Bulstrode, meanwhile, have be no far shake by the
oncoming tread of calamity than in the busy stirring of that secret
uneasiness which have always be present in she since the last visit of
Raffles to the Shrubs. that the hateful man have come ill to Stone
Court, and that her husband have choose to remain there and watch over
he, she allow to be explain by the fact that Raffles have be
employ and aid in early-day, and that this make a tie of
benevolence towards he in his degraded helplessness; and she have be
since then innocently cheer by her husband's more hopeful speech
about his own health and ability to continue his attention to business.
the calm be disturb when Lydgate have bring he home ill from the
meeting, and in spite of comfort assurance during the next few
day, she cry in private from the conviction that her husband be not
suffer from bodily illness merely, but from something that afflict
his mind. he would not allow she to read to he, and scarcely to sit
with he, allege nervous susceptibility to sound and movement; yet
she suspect that in shut himself up in his private room he want
to be busy with his paper. something, she feel sure, have happen.
perhaps it be some great loss of money; and she be keep in the dark.
not dare to question her husband, she say to Lydgate, on the fifth
day after the meeting, when she have not leave home except to go to
church--
"Mr. Lydgate, pray be open with I: I like to know the truth. have
anything happen to Mr. Bulstrode?"
"some little nervous shock," say Lydgate, evasively. he feel that it
be not for he to make the painful revelation.
"but what bring it on?" say Mrs. Bulstrode, look directly at he
with her large dark eye.
"there be often something poisonous in the air of public room," say
Lydgate. "strong man can stand it, but it tell on people in
proportion to the delicacy of their system. it be often impossible to
account for the precise moment of an attack--or rather, to say why the
strength give way at a particular moment."
Mrs. Bulstrode be not satisfied with this answer. there remain in
she the belief that some calamity have befall her husband, of which
she be to be keep in ignorance; and it be in her nature strongly to
object to such concealment. she beg leave for her daughter to sit
with their father, and drive into the town to pay some visit,
conjecture that if anything be know to have go wrong in Mr.
Bulstrode's affair, she should see or hear some sign of it.
she call on Mrs. Thesiger, who be not at home, and then drive to
Mrs. Hackbuttbe on the other side of the churchyard. Mrs. Hackbutt see
she come from an up-stair window, and remember her former alarm
lest she should meet Mrs. Bulstrode, feel almost bind in consistency
to send word that she be not at home; but against that, there be a
sudden strong desire within she for the excitement of an interview in
which she be quite determined not to make the slight allusion to
what be in her mind.
hence Mrs. Bulstrode be show into the drawing-room, and Mrs. Hackbutt
go to she, with more tightness of lip and rubbing of her hand than
be usually observable in she, these be precaution adopt against
freedom of speech. she be resolve not to ask how Mr. Bulstrode be.
"I have not be anywhere except to church for nearly a week," say
Mrs. Bulstrode, after a few introductory remark. "but Mr. Bulstrode
be take so ill at the meeting on Thursday that I have not like to
leave the house."
Mrs. Hackbutt rub the back of one hand with the palm of the other
hold against her chest, and let her eye ramble over the pattern on the
rug.
"be Mr. Hackbutt at the meeting?" persevere Mrs. Bulstrode.
"yes, he be," say Mrs. Hackbutt, with the same attitude. "the land
be to be buy by subscription, I believe."
"let we hope that there will be no more case of cholera to be bury
in it," say Mrs. Bulstrode. "it be an awful visitation. but I always
think Middlemarch a very healthy spot. I suppose it be be use to
it from a child; but I never see the town I should like to live at
well, and especially our end."
"I be sure I should be glad that you always should live at Middlemarch,
Mrs. Bulstrode," say Mrs. Hackbutt, with a slight sigh. "still, we
must learn to resign ourselves, wherever our lot may be cast. though I
be sure there will always be people in this town who will wish you
well."
Mrs. Hackbutt long to say, "if you take my advice you will part from
your husband," but it seem clear to she that the poor woman know
nothing of the thunder ready to bolt on her head, and she herself could
do no more than prepare she a little. Mrs. Bulstrode feel suddenly
rather chill and tremble: there be evidently something unusual
behind this speech of Mrs. Hackbutt's; but though she have set out with
the desire to be fully inform, she find herself unable now to pursue
her brave purpose, and turn the conversation by an inquiry about the
young Hackbutts, she soon take her leave say that she be go to
see Mrs. Plymdale. on her way thither she try to imagine that there
might have be some unusually warm spar at the meeting between Mr.
Bulstrode and some of his frequent opponent--perhaps Mr. Hackbutt
might have be one of they. that would account for everything.
but when she be in conversation with Mrs. Plymdale that comfort
explanation seem no long tenable. "Selina" receive she with a
pathetic affectionateness and a disposition to give edify answer on
the commonest topic, which could hardly have reference to an ordinary
quarrel of which the most important consequence be a perturbation of
Mr. Bulstrode's health. Beforehand Mrs. Bulstrode have think that she
would soon question Mrs. Plymdale than any one else; but she find to
her surprise that an old friend be not always the person whom it be
easy to make a confidant of: there be the barrier of remember
communication under other circumstance--there be the dislike of
be pity and inform by one who have be long willnot to allow she
the superiority. for certain word of mysterious appropriateness that
Mrs. Plymdale let fall about her resolution never to turn she back on
her friend, convince Mrs. Bulstrode that what have happen must be
some kind of misfortune, and instead of be able to say with her
native directness, "what be it that you have in your mind?" she find
herself anxious to get away before she have hear anything more
explicit. she begin to have an agitate certainty that the misfortune
be something more than the mere loss of money, be keenly sensitive
to the fact that Selina now, just as Mrs. Hackbutt have do before,
avoid notice what she say about her husband, as they would have
avoid notice a personal blemish.
she say good-by with nervous haste, and tell the coachman to drive to
Mr. Vincy's warehouse. in that short drive her dread gather so much
force from the sense of darkness, that when she enter the private
counting-house where her brother sit at his desk, her knee tremble
and her usually florid face be deathly pale. something of the same
effect be produce in he by the sight of she: he rise from his seat
to meet she, take she by the hand, and say, with his impulsive
rashness--
"God help you, Harriet! you know all."
that moment be perhaps bad than any which come after. it contain
that concentrated experience which in great crisis of emotion reveal
the bias of a nature, and be prophetic of the ultimate act which will
end an intermediate struggle. without that memory of Raffles she might
still have think only of monetary ruin, but now along with her
brother's look and word there dart into her mind the idea of some
guilt in her husband--then, under the working of terror come the image
of her husband expose to disgrace--and then, after an instant of
scorch shame in which she feel only the eye of the world, with one
leap of her heart she be at his side in mournful but unreproache
fellowship with shame and isolation. all this go on within she in a
mere flash of time--while she sink into the chair, and raise her eye
to her brother, who stand over she. "I know nothing, Walter. what be
it?" she say, faintly.
he tell she everything, very inartificially, in slow fragment, make
she aware that the scandal go much beyond proof, especially as to the
end of Raffles.
"People will talk," he say. "even if a man have be acquit by a
jury, theywill talk, and nod and wink--and as far as the world go, a
man might often as well be guilty as not. itbe a breakdown blow, and
it damage lydgate as much as Bulstrode. I donot pretend to say what
be the truth. I only wish we have never hear the name of either
Bulstrode or Lydgate. youwould well have be a Vincy all your life,
and so have Rosamond." Mrs. Bulstrode make no reply.
"but you must bear up as well as you can, Harriet. People donot blame
_you_. and Iwill stand by you whatever you make up your mind to do,"
say the brother, with rough but well-mean affectionateness.
"give I your arm to the carriage, Walter," say Mrs. Bulstrode. "I
feel very weak."
and when she get home she be oblige to say to her daughter, "I be not
well, my dear; I must go and lie down. attend to your papa. leave I
in quiet. I shall take no dinner."
she lock herself in her room. she need time to get use to she
maim consciousness, her poor lop life, before she could walk
steadily to the place allot she. a new searching light have fall
on her husband's character, and she could not judge he leniently: the
twenty year in which she have believe in he and venerate he by
virtue of his concealment come back with particular that make they
seem an odious deceit. he have marry she with that bad past life
hide behind he, and she have no faith leave to protest his innocence
of the bad that be impute to he. her honest ostentatious nature
make the sharing of a merit dishonor as bitter as it could be to any
mortal.
but this imperfectly teach woman, whose phrase and habit be an odd
patchwork, have a loyal spirit within she. the man whose prosperity she
have share through nearly half a life, and who have unvaryingly
cherish she--now that punishment have befall he it be not possible
to she in any sense to forsake he. there be a forsaking which still
sit at the same board and lie on the same couch with the forsaken
soul, wither it the more by unlove proximity. she know, when she
lock her door, that she should unlock it ready to go down to her
unhappy husband and espouse his sorrow, and say of his guilt, I will
mourn and not reproach. but she need time to gather up her strength;
she need to sob out her farewell to all the gladness and pride of her
life. when she have resolve to go down, she prepare herself by some
little act which might seem mere folly to a hard onlooker; they be
her way of express to all spectator visible or invisible that she
have begin a new life in which she embrace humiliation. she take off
all her ornament and put on a plain black gown, and instead of wear
her much-adorn cap and large bow of hair, she brush her hair down
and put on a plain bonnet-cap, which make she look suddenly like an
early Methodist.
Bulstrode, who know that his wife have be out and have come in say
that she be not well, have spend the time in an agitation equal to
her. he have look forward to she learn the truth from other, and
have acquiesce in that probability, as something easy to he than any
confession. but now that he imagine the moment of her knowledge come,
he await the result in anguish. his daughter have be oblige to
consent to leave he, and though he have allow some food to be bring
to he, he have not touch it. he feel himself perish slowly in
unpitied misery. perhaps he should never see his wife's face with
affection in it again. and if he turn to God there seem to be no
answer but the pressure of retribution.
it be eight o'clock in the evening before the door open and his wife
enter. he dare not look up at she. he sit with his eye bent down,
and as she go towards he she think he look small--he seem
so withered and shrink. a movement of new compassion and old
tenderness go through she like a great wave, and put one hand on
his which rest on the arm of the chair, and the other on his
shoulder, she say, solemnly but kindly--
"look up, Nicholas."
he raise his eye with a little start and look at her half amazed
for a moment: her pale face, she change, mourn dress, the trembling
about her mouth, all say, "I know;" and her hand and eye rest
gently on he. he burst out cry and they cry together, she
sit at his side. they could not yet speak to each other of the
shame which she be bear with he, or of the act which have bring
it down on they. his confession be silent, and her promise of
faithfulness be silent. open-minded as she be, she nevertheless
shrink from the word which would have express their mutual
consciousness, as she would have shrink from flake of fire. she could
not say, "how much be only sland and false suspicion?" and he do not
say, "I be innocent."
CHAPTER LXXV.
"Le sentiment de la faussete des plaisirs present, et
l'ignorance de la vanite des plaisir absent causent
l'inconstance."--pascal.
Rosamond have a gleam of return cheerfulness when the house be free
from the threaten figure, and when all the disagreeable creditor
be pay. but she be not joyous: her married life have fulfil none
of her hope, and have be quite spoil for her imagination. in this
brief interval of calm, Lydgate, remember that he have often be
stormy in his hour of perturbation, and mindful of the pain Rosamond
have have to bear, be carefully gentle towards she; but he, too, have
lose some of his old spirit, and he still feel it necessary to refer to
an economical change in their way of live as a matter of course,
try to reconcile she to it gradually, and repress his anger when
she answer by wish that he would go to live in London. when she
do not make this answer, she listen languidly, and wonder what she
have that be worth live for. the hard and contemptuous word which
have fall from her husband in his anger have deeply offend that
vanity which he have at first call into active enjoyment; and what she
regard as his perverse way of look at thing, keep up a secret
repulsion, which make she receive all his tenderness as a poor
substitute for the happiness he have fail to give she. they be at a
disadvantage with their neighbor, and there be no long any outlook
towards Quallingham--there be no outlook anywhere except in an
occasional letter from Will Ladislaw. she have feel sting and
disappoint by Will's resolution to quit Middlemarch, for in spite of
what she know and guess about his admiration for Dorothea, she
secretly cherish the belief that he have, or would necessarily come to
have, much more admiration for herself; Rosamond be one of those
woman who live much in the idea that each man they meet would have
prefer they if the preference have not be hopeless. Mrs. Casaubon
be all very well; but willbe interest in she date before he know Mrs.
Lydgate. Rosamond take his way of talk to herself, which be a
mixture of playful fault-finding and hyperbolical gallantry, as the
disguise of a deep feeling; and in his presence she feel that
agreeable titillation of vanity and sense of romantic drama which
Lydgate's presence have no long the magic to create. she even
fancy--what will not man and woman fancy in these matters?--that
will exaggerate his admiration for Mrs. Casaubon in order to pique
herself. in this way poor Rosamond's brain have be busy before Will's
departure. he would have make, she think, a much more suitable
husband for she than she have find in Lydgate. no notion could have
be false than this, for Rosamond's discontent in her marriage be
due to the condition of marriage itself, to its demand for
self-suppression and tolerance, and not to the nature of her husband;
but the easy conception of an unreal Better have a sentimental charm
which divert her ennui. she construct a little romance which be
to vary the flatness of her life: will Ladislaw be always to be a
bachelor and live near she, always to be at her command, and have an
understand though never fully express passion for she, which would be
send out lambent flame every now and then in interesting scene.
his departure have be a proportionate disappointment, and have sadly
increase her weariness of Middlemarch; but at first she have the
alternative dream of pleasure in store from her intercourse with the
family at Quallingham. since then the trouble of her married life have
deepen, and the absence of other relief encourage her regretful
rumination over that thin romance which she have once feed on. man and
woman make sad mistake about their own symptom, take their vague
uneasy longing, sometimes for genius, sometimes for religion, and
oftener still for a mighty love. will Ladislaw have write chatty
letter, half to she and half to Lydgate, and she have reply: their
separation, she feel, be not likely to be final, and the change she
now most long for be that Lydgate should go to live in London;
everything would be agreeable in London; and she have set to work with
quiet determination to win this result, when there come a sudden,
delightful promise which inspirit she.
it come shortly before the memorable meeting at the town-hall, and be
nothing less than a letter from Will Ladislaw to Lydgate, which turn
indeed chiefly on his new interest in plan of colonization, but
mention incidentally, that he might find it necessary to pay a visit
to Middlemarch within the next few week--a very pleasant necessity, he
say, almost as good as holiday to a schoolboy. he hop there be
his old place on the rug, and a great deal of music in store for he.
but he be quite uncertain as to the time. while Lydgate be read
the letter to Rosamond, her face look like a revive flower--it grow
pretty and more blooming. there be nothing unendurable now: the
debt be pay, Mr. Ladislaw be come, and Lydgate would be
persuade to leave Middlemarch and settle in London, which be "so
different from a provincial town."
that be a bright bit of morning. but soon the sky become black over
poor Rosamond. the presence of a new gloom in her husband, about which
he be entirely reserve towards she--for he dread to expose his
lacerate feeling to her neutrality and misconception--soon receive a
painfully strange explanation, alien to all her previous notion of
what could affect her happiness. in the new gayety of her spirit,
think that Lydgate have merely a bad fit of moodiness than usual,
cause he to leave her remark unanswered, and evidently to keep out
of her way as much as possible, she choose, a few day after the
meeting, and without speak to he on the subject, to send out note
of invitation for a small evening party, feel convinced that this
be a judicious step, since people seem to have be keep aloof
from they, and want restore to the old habit of intercourse. when
the invitation have be accept, she would tell Lydgate, and give he
a wise admonition as to how a medical man should behave to his
neighbor; for Rosamond have the grave little air possible about
other people's duty. but all the invitation be decline, and the
last answer come into Lydgate's hand.
"this be Chichely's scratch. what be he write to you about?" say
Lydgate, wonderingly, as he hand the note to she. she be oblige to
let he see it, and, look at she severely, he said--
"why on earth have you be send out invitation without tell I,
Rosamond? I beg, I insist that you will not invite any one to this
house. I suppose you have be invite other, and they have refuse
too." she say nothing.
"do you hear I?" thunder Lydgate.
"yes, certainly I hear you," say Rosamond, turn her head aside with
the movement of a graceful long-neck bird.
Lydgate toss his head without any grace and walk out of the room,
feel himself dangerous. Rosamond's thought be, that he be get
more and more unbearable--not that there be any new special reason for
this peremptoriness. his indisposition to tell she anything in which
he be sure beforehand that she would not be interested be grow
into an unreflecting habit, and she be in ignorance of everything
connect with the thousand pound except that the loan have come from
her uncle Bulstrode. lydgate's odious humor and their neighbor'
apparent avoidance of they have an unaccountable date for she in their
relief from money difficulty. if the invitation have be accept
she would have go to invite her mamma and the rest, whom she have see
nothing of for several day; and she now put on her bonnet to go and
inquire what have become of they all, suddenly feel as if there be
a conspiracy to leave she in isolation with a husband dispose to
offend everybody. it be after the dinner hour, and she find she
father and mother seat together alone in the drawing-room. they
greet she with sad look, say "well, my dear!" and no more. she
have never see her father look so downcast; and seat herself near
he she said--
"be there anything the matter, papa?"
he do not answer, but Mrs. Vincy say, "oh, my dear, have you hear
nothing? it willnot be long before it reach you."
"be it anything about Tertius?" say Rosamond, turn pale. the idea
of trouble immediately connect itself with what have be
unaccountable to she in he.
"oh, my dear, yes. to think of your marrying into this trouble. debt
be bad enough, but this will be bad."
"stay, stay, Lucy," say Mr. Vincy. "have you hear nothing about your
uncle Bulstrode, Rosamond?"
"no, papa," say the poor thing, feel as if trouble be not
anything she have before experience, but some invisible power with an
iron grasp that make her soul faint within she.
her father tell she everything, say at the end, "itbe well for you
to know, my dear. I think Lydgate must leave the town. thing have
go against he. I dare say he couldnot help it. I donot accuse he
of any harm," say Mr. Vincy. he have always before be dispose to
find the utmost fault with Lydgate.
the shock to Rosamond be terrible. it seem to she that no lot could
be so cruelly hard as hers to have marry a man who have become the
centre of infamous suspicion. in many case it be inevitable that the
shame be feel to be the bad part of crime; and it would have require
a great deal of disentangle reflection, such as have never enter
into Rosamond's life, for she in these moment to feel that her trouble
be less than if her husband have be certainly know to have do
something criminal. all the shame seem to be there. and she have
innocently marry this man with the belief that he and his family be
a glory to she! she show her usual reticence to her parent, and
only say, that if Lydgate have do as she wish he would have leave
Middlemarch long ago.
"she bear it beyond anything," say her mother when she be go.
"ah, thank God!" say Mr. Vincy, who be much break down.
but Rosamond go home with a sense of justify repugnance towards her
husband. what have he really do--how have he really act? she do
not know. why have he not tell she everything? he do not speak to she
on the subject, and of course she could not speak to he. it come into
her mind once that she would ask her father to let she go home again;
but dwell on that prospect make it seem utter dreariness to she: a
married woman go back to live with her parent--life seem to have
no meaning for she in such a position: she could not contemplate
herself in it.
the next two day Lydgate observe a change in she, and believe that
she have hear the bad news. would she speak to he about it, or would
she go on forever in the silence which seem to imply that she
believe he guilty? we must remember that he be in a morbid state of
mind, in which almost all contact be pain. certainly Rosamond in this
case have equal reason to complain of reserve and want of confidence on
his part; but in the bitterness of his soul he excuse himself;--wa
he not justify in shrink from the task of tell she, since now
she know the truth she have no impulse to speak to he? but a
deeply-lie consciousness that he be in fault make he restless, and
the silence between they become intolerable to he; it be as if they
be both adrift on one piece of wreck and look away from each other.
he think, "I be a fool. havenot I give up expect anything? I
have marry care, not help." and that evening he said--
"Rosamond, have you hear anything that distress you?"
"yes," she answer, lay down her work, which she have be carry
on with a languid semi-consciousness, most unlike her usual self.
"what have you hear?"
"everything, I suppose. Papa tell I."
"that people think I disgrace?"
"yes," say Rosamond, faintly, begin to sew again automatically.
there be silence. Lydgate think, "if she have any trust in I--any
notion of what I be, she ought to speak now and say that she do not
believe I have deserve disgrace."
but Rosamond on her side go on move her finger languidly.
whatever be to be say on the subject she expect to come from
Tertius. what do she know? and if he be innocent of any wrong, why
do he not do something to clear himself?
this silence of hers bring a new rush of gall to that bitter mood in
which Lydgate have be say to himself that nobody believe in
he--even Farebrother have not come forward. he have begin to question
she with the intent that their conversation should disperse the chill
fog which have gather between they, but he feel his resolution check
by despair resentment. even this trouble, like the rest, she seem
to regard as if it be her alone. he be always to she a being
apart, do what she object to. he start from his chair with an
angry impulse, and thrust his hand in his pocket, walk up and
down the room. there be an underlie consciousness all the while
that he should have to master this anger, and tell she everything, and
convince she of the fact. for he have almost learn the lesson that
he must bend himself to her nature, and that because she come short in
her sympathy, he must give the more. soon he recur to his intention
of open himself: the occasion must not be lose. if he could bring
she to feel with some solemnity that here be a slander which must be
meet and not run away from, and that the whole trouble have come out of
his desperate want of money, it would be a moment for urge powerfully
on she that they should be one in the resolve to do with as little
money as possible, so that they might weather the bad time and keep
themselves independent. he would mention the definite measure which
he desire to take, and win she to a willing spirit. he be bind to
try this--and what else be there for he to do?
he do not know how long he have be walk uneasily backwards and
forward, but Rosamond feel that it be long, and wish that he would
sit down. she too have begin to think this an opportunity for urge on
Tertius what he ought to do. whatever might be the truth about all
this misery, there be one dread which assert itself.
lydgate at last seat himself, not in his usual chair, but in one
nearer to Rosamond, lean aside in it towards she, and look at she
gravely before he reopen the sad subject. he have conquer himself
so far, and be about to speak with a sense of solemnity, as on an
occasion which be not to be repeat. he have even open his lip,
when Rosamond, let her hand fall, look at he and said--
"surely, Tertius--"
"well?"
"surely now at last you have give up the idea of stay in
Middlemarch. I cannot go on live here. let we go to London. Papa,
and every one else, say you have well go. whatever misery I have to
put up with, it will be easy away from here."
Lydgate feel miserably jarred. instead of that critical outpouring for
which he have prepare himself with effort, here be the old round to be
go through again. he could not bear it. with a quick change of
countenance he rise and go out of the room.
perhaps if he have be strong enough to persist in his determination to
be the more because she be less, that evening might have have a well
issue. if his energy could have bear down that check, he might still
have work on Rosamond's vision and will. we cannot be sure that any
nature, however inflexible or peculiar, will resist this effect from a
more massive being than their own. they may be take by storm and for
the moment convert, become part of the soul which enwrap they in
the ardor of its movement. but poor Lydgate have a throb pain
within he, and his energy have fall short of its task.
the beginning of mutual understanding and resolve seem as far off as
ever; nay, it seem block out by the sense of unsuccessful effort.
they live on from day to day with their thought still apart, lydgate
go about what work he have in a mood of despair, and rosamond
feeling, with some justification, that he be behave cruelly. it be
of no use to say anything to Tertius; but when will Ladislaw come, she
be determined to tell he everything. in spite of her general
reticence, she need some one who would recognize her wrong.
CHAPTER LXXVI.
"to mercy, pity, peace, and love
all pray in their distress,
and to these virtue of delight,
return their thankfulness.
. . . . . .
for Mercy have a human heart,
Pity a human face;
and Love, the human form divine;
and Peace, the human dress.
--WILLIAM blake: song of Innocence.
some day later, Lydgate be rid to Lowick Manor, in consequence of
a summon from Dorothea. the summon have not be unexpected, since it
have follow a letter from Mr. Bulstrode, in which he state that he
have resume his arrangement for quit Middlemarch, and must remind
Lydgate of his previous communication about the Hospital, to the
purport of which he still adhere. it have be his duty, before take
further step, to reopen the subject with Mrs. Casaubon, who now
wish, as before, to discuss the question with Lydgate. "your view
may possibly have undergo some change," write Mr. Bulstrode; "but, in
that case also, it be desirable that you should lay they before she."
Dorothea await his arrival with eager interest. though, in deference
to her masculine adviser, she have refrain from what Sir James have
call "interfere in this Bulstrode business," the hardship of
Lydgate's position be continually in her mind, and when Bulstrode
apply to she again about the hospital, she feel that the opportunity
be come to she which she have be hinder from hastening. in her
luxurious home, wander under the bough of her own great tree, she
thought be go out over the lot of other, and her emotion be
imprison. the idea of some active good within her reach, "haunt
she like a passion," and another's need have once come to she as a
distinct image, preoccupy her desire with the yearning to give
relief, and make her own ease tasteless. she be full of confident
hope about this interview with Lydgate, never heed what be say of
his personal reserve; never heed that she be a very young woman.
nothing could have seem more irrelevant to Dorothea than insistence
on her youth and sex when she be move to show her human fellowship.
as she sit wait in the library, she could do nothing but live
through again all the past scene which have bring Lydgate into her
memory. they all owe their significance to her marriage and its
trouble--but no; there be two occasion in which the image of
Lydgate have come painfully in connection with his wife and some one
else. the pain have be allay for Dorothea, but it have leave in her
an awakened conjecture as to what Lydgate's marriage might be to he, a
susceptibility to the slight hint about Mrs. Lydgate. these
thought be like a drama to she, and make her eye bright, and give
an attitude of suspense to her whole frame, though she be only look
out from the brown library on to the turf and the bright green bud
which stand in relief against the dark evergreen.
when Lydgate come in, she be almost shocked at the change in his face,
which be strikingly perceptible to she who have not see he for two
month. it be not the change of emaciation, but that effect which
even young face will very soon show from the persistent presence of
resentment and despondency. her cordial look, when she put out her
hand to he, soften his expression, but only with melancholy.
"I have wish very much to see you for a long while, Mr. Lydgate,"
say Dorothea when they be seat opposite each other; "but I put off
ask you to come until Mr. Bulstrode apply to I again about the
Hospital. I know that the advantage of keep the management of it
separate from that of the Infirmary depend on you, or, at least, on
the good which you be encourage to hope for from have it under your
control. and I be sure you will not refuse to tell I exactly what you
think."
"you want to decide whether you should give a generous support to the
Hospital," say Lydgate. "I cannot conscientiously advise you to do it
in dependence on any activity of mine. I may be oblige to leave the
town."
he speak curtly, feel the ache of despair as to his be able to
carry out any purpose that Rosamond have set her mind against.
"not because there be no one to believe in you?" say Dorothea, pour
out her word in clearness from a full heart. "I know the unhappy
mistake about you. I know they from the first moment to be mistake.
you have never do anything vile. you would not do anything
dishonorable."
it be the first assurance of belief in he that have fall on
Lydgate's ear. he draw a deep breath, and say, "thank you." he could
say no more: it be something very new and strange in his life that
these few word of trust from a woman should be so much to he.
"I beseech you to tell I how everything be," say Dorothea,
fearlessly. "I be sure that the truth would clear you."
Lydgate start up from his chair and go towards the window,
forget where he be. he have so often go over in his mind the
possibility of explain everything without aggravate appearance
that would tell, perhaps unfairly, against Bulstrode, and have so often
decide against it--he have so often say to himself that his assertion
would not change people's impression--that Dorothea's word sound
like a temptation to do something which in his soberness he have
pronounce to be unreasonable.
"tell I, pray," say Dorothea, with simple earnestness; "then we can
consult together. it be wicked to let people think evil of any one
falsely, when it can be hinder."
Lydgate turn, remember where he be, and see Dorothea's face
look up at he with a sweet trustful gravity. the presence of a
noble nature, generous in its wish, ardent in its charity, change
the light for we: we begin to see thing again in their large,
quieter mass, and to believe that we too can be see and judge in
the wholeness of our character. that influence be begin to act on
Lydgate, who have for many day be see all life as one who be
drag and struggle amid the throng. he sit down again, and feel
that he be recover his old self in the consciousness that he be
with one who believe in it.
"I donot want," he say, "to bear hard on Bulstrode, who have lend I
money of which I be in need--though I would rather have go without
it now. he be hunt down and miserable, and have only a poor thread of
life in he. but I should like to tell you everything. it will be a
comfort to I to speak where belief have go beforehand, and where I
shall not seem to be offer assertion of my own honesty. you will
feel what be fair to another, as you feel what be fair to I."
"do trust I," say Dorothea; "I will not repeat anything without your
leave. but at the very least, I could say that you have make all the
circumstance clear to I, and that I know you be not in any way
guilty. Mr. Farebrother would believe I, and my uncle, and Sir James
Chettam. Nay, there be person in Middlemarch to whom I could go;
although they donot know much of I, they would believe I. they would
know that I could have no other motive than truth and justice. I would
take any pain to clear you. I have very little to do. there be
nothing well that I can do in the world."
Dorothea's voice, as she make this childlike picture of what she would
do, might have be almost take as a proof that she could do it
effectively. the search tenderness of her woman's tone seem make
for a defence against ready accuser. Lydgate do not stay to think
that she be quixotic: he give himself up, for the first time in his
life, to the exquisite sense of lean entirely on a generous
sympathy, without any check of proud reserve. and he tell she
everything, from the time when, under the pressure of his difficulty,
he unwillingly make his first application to Bulstrode; gradually, in
the relief of speak, get into a more thorough utterance of what
have go on in his mind--enter fully into the fact that his
treatment of the patient be oppose to the dominant practice, into his
doubt at the last, his ideal of medical duty, and his uneasy
consciousness that the acceptance of the money have make some difference
in his private inclination and professional behavior, though not in his
fulfilment of any publicly recognize obligation.
"it have come to my knowledge since," he add, "that Hawley send some
one to examine the housekeeper at Stone Court, and she say that she
give the patient all the opium in the phial I leave, as well as a good
deal of brandy. but that would not have be oppose to ordinary
prescription, even of first-rate man. the suspicion against I have
no hold there: they be ground on the knowledge that I take money,
that Bulstrode have strong motif for wish the man to die, and that
he give I the money as a bribe to concur in some malpractice or other
against the patient--that in any case I accept a bribe to hold my
tongue. they be just the suspicion that cling the most obstinately,
because they lie in people's inclination and can never be disprove.
how my order come to be disobey be a question to which I donot know
the answer. it be still possible that Bulstrode be innocent of any
criminal intention--even possible that he have nothing to do with the
disobedience, and merely abstain from mention it. but all that
have nothing to do with the public belief. it be one of those case on
which a man be condemn on the ground of his character--it be
believe that he have commit a crime in some undefined way, because
he have the motive for do it; and Bulstrode's character have envelop
I, because I take his money. I be simply blight--like a damage
ear of corn--the business be do and cannot be undo."
"oh, it be hard!" say Dorothea. "I understand the difficulty there be
in your vindicating yourself. and that all this should have come to
you who have mean to lead a high life than the common, and to find
out well way--I cannot bear to rest in this as unchangeable. I know
you mean that. I remember what you say to I when you first speak to
I about the hospital. there be no sorrow I have think more about
than that--to love what be great, and try to reach it, and yet to fail."
"yes," say Lydgate, feel that here he have find room for the full
meaning of his grief. "I have some ambition. I mean everything to be
different with I. I think I have more strength and mastery. but the
most terrible obstacle be such as nobody can see except oneself."
"suppose," say Dorothea, meditatively,--"suppose we keep on the
Hospital accord to the present plan, and you stay here though only
with the friendship and support of a few, the evil feeling towards you
would gradually die out; there would come opportunity in which people
would be force to acknowledge that they have be unjust to you,
because they would see that your purpose be pure. you may still win
a great fame like the Louis and Laennec I have hear you speak of, and
we shall all be proud of you," she end, with a smile.
"that might do if I have my old trust in myself," say Lydgate,
mournfully. "nothing gall I more than the notion of turn round
and run away before this slander, leave it unchecked behind I.
still, I cannot ask any one to put a great deal of money into a plan
which depend on I."
"it would be quite worth my while," say Dorothea, simply. "only
think. I be very uncomfortable with my money, because they tell I I
have too little for any great scheme of the sort I like good, and yet I
have too much. I donot know what to do. I have seven hundred a-year
of my own fortune, and nineteen hundred a-year that Mr. Casaubon leave
I, and between three and four thousand of ready money in the bank. I
wish to raise money and pay it off gradually out of my income which I
donot want, to buy land with and find a village which should be a
school of industry; but Sir James and my uncle have convince I that
the risk would be too great. so you see that what I should most
rejoice at would be to have something good to do with my money: I
should like it to make other people's life well to they. it make
I very uneasy--come all to I who donot want it."
a smile break through the gloom of Lydgate's face. the childlike
grave-eyed earnestness with which Dorothea say all this be
irresistible--blent into an adorable whole with her ready understanding
of high experience. (of low experience such as play a great part in
the world, poor Mrs. Casaubon have a very blurred shortsighted
knowledge, little help by her imagination.) but she take the smile as
encouragement of her plan.
"I think you see now that you speak too scrupulously," she say, in a
tone of persuasion. "the hospital would be one good; and make your
life quite whole and well again would be another."
Lydgate's smile have die away. "you have the goodness as well as the
money to do all that; if it could be do," he say. "But--"
he hesitate a little while, look vaguely towards the window; and
she sit in silent expectation. at last he turn towards she and say
impetuously--
"why should I not tell you?--you know what sort of bond marriage be.
you will understand everything."
Dorothea feel her heart begin to beat fast. have he that sorrow
too? but she fear to say any word, and he go on immediately.
"it be impossible for I now to do anything--to take any step without
consider my wife's happiness. the thing that I might like to do if
I be alone, be become impossible to I. I cannot see her miserable.
she marry I without know what she be go into, and it might
have be well for she if she have not marry I."
"I know, I know--you could not give her pain, if you be not oblige
to do it," say Dorothea, with keen memory of her own life.
"and she have set her mind against stay. she wish to go. the
trouble she have have here have weary she," say Lydgate, break off
again, lest he should say too much.
"but when she see the good that might come of staying--" say Dorothea,
remonstrantly, look at Lydgate as if he have forget the reason
which have just be consider. he do not speak immediately.
"she would not see it," he say at last, curtly, feel at first that
this statement must do without explanation. "and, indeed, I have lose
all spirit about carry on my life here." he pause a moment and
then, follow the impulse to let Dorothea see deeply into the
difficulty of his life, he say, "the fact be, this trouble have come
upon she confusedly. we have not be able to speak to each other
about it. I be not sure what be in her mind about it: she may fear
that I have really do something base. it be my fault; I ought to be
more open. but I have be suffer cruelly."
"may I go and see she?" say Dorothea, eagerly. "would she accept my
sympathy? I would tell she that you have not be blamable before any
one's judgment but your own. I would tell she that you shall be
clear in every fair mind. I would cheer her heart. will you ask she
if I may go to see she? I do see she once."
"I be sure you may," say Lydgate, seize the proposition with some
hope. "she would feel honor--cheer, I think, by the proof that you
at least have some respect for I. I will not speak to she about your
come--that she may not connect it with my wish at all. I know very
well that I ought not to have leave anything to be tell she by other,
but--"
he break off, and there be a moment's silence. Dorothea refrain
from say what be in her mind--how well she know that there might be
invisible barrier to speech between husband and wife. this be a
point on which even sympathy might make a wound. she return to the
more outward aspect of Lydgate's position, say cheerfully--
"and if Mrs. Lydgate know that there be friend who would believe in
you and support you, she might then be glad that you should stay in
your place and recover your hope--and do what you mean to do.
perhaps then you would see that it be right to agree with what I
propose about your continue at the Hospital. surely you would, if
you still have faith in it as a means of make your knowledge useful?"
Lydgate do not answer, and she see that he be debate with himself.
"you need not decide immediately," she say, gently. "a few day hence
it will be early enough for I to send my answer to Mr. Bulstrode."
Lydgate still wait, but at last turn to speak in his most decisive
tone.
"no; I prefer that there should be no interval leave for wavering. I be
no long sure enough of myself--I mean of what it would be possible
for I to do under the change circumstance of my life. it would be
dishonorable to let other engage themselves to anything serious in
dependence on I. I might be oblige to go away after all; I see
little chance of anything else. the whole thing be too problematic; I
cannot consent to be the cause of your goodness be waste. no--let
the new Hospital be join with the old Infirmary, and everything go on
as it might have do if I have never come. I have keep a valuable
register since I have be there; I shall send it to a man who will
make use of it," he end bitterly. "I can think of nothing for a long
while but get an income."
"it hurt I very much to hear you speak so hopelessly," say Dorothea.
"it would be a happiness to your friend, who believe in your future,
in your power to do great thing, if you would let they save you from
that. think how much money I have; it would be like take a burthen
from I if you take some of it every year till you get free from this
fettering want of income. why should not people do these thing? it
be so difficult to make share at all even. this be one way."
"God bless you, Mrs. Casaubon!" say Lydgate, rise as if with the
same impulse that make his word energetic, and rest his arm on the
back of the great leather chair he have be sit in. "it be good
that you should have such feeling. but I be not the man who ought to
allow himself to benefit by they. I have not give guarantee enough.
I must not at least sink into the degradation of be pension for
work that I never achieve. it be very clear to I that I must not
count on anything else than get away from Middlemarch as soon as I
can manage it. I should not be able for a long while, at the very
good, to get an income here, and--and it be easy to make necessary
change in a new place. I must do as other man do, and think what will
please the world and bring in money; look for a little opening in the
London crowd, and push myself; set up in a watering-place, or go to
some southern town where there be plenty of idle English, and get
myself puffed,--that be the sort of shell I must creep into and try to
keep my soul alive in."
"now that be not brave," say Dorothea,--"to give up the fight."
"no, it be not brave," say Lydgate, "but if a man be afraid of
creep paralysis?" then, in another tone, "yet you have make a great
difference in my courage by believe in I. everything seem more
bearable since I have talk to you; and if you can clear I in a few
other mind, especially in Farebrother's, I shall be deeply grateful.
the point I wish you not to mention be the fact of disobedience to my
order. that would soon get distort. after all, there be no
evidence for I but people's opinion of I beforehand. you can only
repeat my own report of myself."
"Mr. Farebrother will believe--other will believe," say Dorothea. "I
can say of you what will make it stupidity to suppose that you would be
bribe to do a wickedness."
"I donot know," say Lydgate, with something like a groan in his voice.
"I have not take a bribe yet. but there be a pale shade of bribery
which be sometimes call prosperity. you will do I another great
kindness, then, and come to see my wife?"
"yes, I will. I remember how pretty she be," say Dorothea, into whose
mind every impression about Rosamond have cut deep. "I hope she will
like I."
as Lydgate ride away, he think, "this young creature have a heart
large enough for the Virgin Mary. she evidently think nothing of her
own future, and would pledge away half her income at once, as if she
want nothing for herself but a chair to sit in from which she can
look down with those clear eye at the poor mortal who pray to she.
she seem to have what I never see in any woman before--a fountain of
friendship towards man--a man can make a friend of she. Casaubon must
have raise some heroic hallucination in she. I wonder if she could
have any other sort of passion for a man? Ladislaw?--there be
certainly an unusual feeling between they. and Casaubon must have have
a notion of it. well--her love might help a man more than her money."
Dorothea on her side have immediately form a plan of relieve lydgate
from his obligation to Bulstrode, which she feel sure be a part,
though small, of the galling pressure he have to bear. she sit down at
once under the inspiration of their interview, and write a brief note,
in which she plead that she have more claim than Mr. Bulstrode have to
the satisfaction of provide the money which have be serviceable to
Lydgate--that it would be unkind in Lydgate not to grant she the
position of be his helper in this small matter, the favor be
entirely to she who have so little that be plainly mark out for she
to do with her superfluous money. he might call she a creditor or by
any other name if it do but imply that he grant her request. she
enclose a check for a thousand pound, and determine to take the
letter with she the next day when she go to see Rosamond.
CHAPTER LXXVII.
"and thus thy fall hath leave a kind of blot,
to mark the full-fraught man and well indue
with some suspicion."
--Henry V.
the next day Lydgate have to go to Brassing, and tell Rosamond that he
should be away until the evening. of late she have never go beyond
her own house and garden, except to church, and once to see her papa,
to whom she say, "if Tertius go away, you will help we to move, will
you not, papa? I suppose we shall have very little money. I be sure I
hope some one will help we." and Mr. Vincy have say, "yes, child, I
donot mind a hundred or two. I can see the end of that." with these
exception she have sit at home in languid melancholy and suspense,
fix her mind on Will Ladislaw's come as the one point of hope and
interest, and associate this with some new urgency on Lydgate to make
immediate arrangement for leave Middlemarch and go to London,
till she feel assure that the coming would be a potent cause of the
going, without at all see how. this way of establish sequence
be too common to be fairly regard as a peculiar folly in Rosamond.
and it be precisely this sort of sequence which cause the great
shock when it be sunder: for to see how an effect may be produce be
often to see possible missing and check; but to see nothing except
the desirable cause, and close upon it the desirable effect, rid we of
doubt and make our mind strongly intuitive. that be the process
go on in poor Rosamond, while she arrange all object around she
with the same nicety as ever, only with more slowness--or sit down to
the piano, mean to play, and then desist, yet linger on the
music stool with her white finger suspend on the wooden front, and
look before she in dreamy ennui. her melancholy have become so
mark that Lydgate feel a strange timidity before it, as a perpetual
silent reproach, and the strong man, master by his keen sensibility
towards this fair fragile creature whose life he seem somehow to have
bruise, shrank from her look, and sometimes start at her approach,
fear of she and fear for she rush in only the more forcibly after it
have be momentarily expel by exasperation.
but this morning Rosamond descend from her room upstairs--where she
sometimes sit the whole day when Lydgate be out--equip for a walk
in the town. she have a letter to post--a letter address to Mr.
Ladislaw and write with charming discretion, but intend to hasten
his arrival by a hint of trouble. the servant-maid, their sole
house-servant now, notice she come down-stair in her walk dress,
and think "there never do anybody look so pretty in a bonnet poor
thing."
meanwhile Dorothea's mind be fill with her project of go to
Rosamond, and with the many thought, both of the past and the probable
future, which gather round the idea of that visit. until yesterday
when Lydgate have open to she a glimpse of some trouble in his married
life, the image of Mrs. Lydgate have always be associate for she with
that of Will Ladislaw. even in her most uneasy moment--even when she
have be agitate by Mrs. Cadwallader's painfully graphic report of
gossip--her effort, nay, her strong impulsive prompting, have be
towards the vindication of Will from any sully surmise; and when,
in her meeting with he afterwards, she have at first interpret his
word as a probable allusion to a feeling towards Mrs. Lydgate which he
be determined to cut himself off from indulge, she have have a quick,
sad, excuse vision of the charm there might be in his constant
opportunity of companionship with that fair creature, who most likely
share his other taste as she evidently do his delight in music. but
there have follow his parting word--the few passionate word in
which he have imply that she herself be the object of whom his love
hold he in dread, that it be his love for she only which he be
resolve not to declare but to carry away into banishment. from the
time of that parting, Dorothea, believe in Will's love for she,
believe with a proud delight in his delicate sense of honor and his
determination that no one should impeach he justly, feel her heart
quite at rest as to the regard he might have for Mrs. Lydgate. she be
sure that the regard be blameless.
there be nature in which, if they love we, we be conscious of have
a sort of baptism and consecration: they bind we over to rectitude and
purity by their pure belief about we; and our sin become that bad
kind of sacrilege which tear down the invisible altar of trust. "if
you be not good, none be good"--those little word may give a
terrific meaning to responsibility, may hold a vitriolic intensity for
remorse.
Dorothea's nature be of that kind: her own passionate fault lay along
the easily count open channel of her ardent character; and while she
be full of pity for the visible mistake of other, she have not yet
any material within her experience for subtle construction and
suspicion of hide wrong. but that simplicity of her, hold up an
ideal for other in her believe conception of they, be one of the
great power of her womanhood. and it have from the first act
strongly on Will Ladislaw. he feel, when he part from she, that the
brief word by which he have try to convey to she his feeling about
herself and the division which her fortune make between they, would
only profit by their brevity when Dorothea have to interpret they: he
feel that in her mind he have find his high estimate.
and he be right there. in the month since their parting Dorothea have
feel a delicious though sad repose in their relation to each other, as
one which be inwardly whole and without blemish. she have an active
force of antagonism within she, when the antagonism turn on the
defence either of plan or person that she believe in; and the wrong
which she feel that will have receive from her husband, and the
external condition which to other be ground for slight he,
only give the more tenacity to her affection and admire judgment.
and now with the disclosure about Bulstrode have come another fact
affect Will's social position, which rouse afresh Dorothea's inward
resistance to what be say about he in that part of her world which
lie within park paling.
"Young Ladislaw the grandson of a thieve Jew pawnbroker" be a phrase
which have enter emphatically into the dialogue about the Bulstrode
business, at Lowick, Tipton, and Freshitt, and be a bad kind of
placard on poor Willbe back than the "italian with white mouse."
Upright Sir James Chettam be convince that his own satisfaction be
righteous when he think with some complacency that here be an add
league to that mountainous distance between Ladislaw and Dorothea,
which enable he to dismiss any anxiety in that direction as too
absurd. and perhaps there have be some pleasure in point Mr.
Brooke's attention to this ugly bit of Ladislaw's genealogy, as a fresh
candle for he to see his own folly by. Dorothea have observe the
animus with which willbe part in the painful story have be recall
more than once; but she have utter no word, be check now, as she
have not be formerly in speak of Will, by the consciousness of a
deep relation between they which must always remain in consecrated
secrecy. but her silence shroud her resistant emotion into a more
thorough glow; and this misfortune in Will's lot which, it seem,
other be wish to fle at his back as an opprobrium, only give
something more of enthusiasm to her clinging thought.
she entertain no vision of their ever come into nearer union, and
yet she have take no posture of renunciation. she have accept she
whole relation to Will very simply as part of her marriage sorrow, and
would have think it very sinful in she to keep up an inward wail
because she be not completely happy, be rather disposed to dwell on
the superfluity of her lot. she could bear that the chief pleasure
of her tenderness should lie in memory, and the idea of marriage come
to she solely as a repulsive proposition from some suitor of whom she
at present know nothing, but whose merit, as see by her friend,
would be a source of torment to her:--"somebody who will manage your
property for you, my dear," be Mr. Brooke's attractive suggestion of
suitable characteristic. "I should like to manage it myself, if I
know what to do with it," say Dorothea. no--she adhere to her
declaration that she would never be marry again, and in the long
valley of her life which look so flat and empty of waymark, guidance
would come as she walk along the road, and see her fellow-passenger
by the way.
this habitual state of feeling about Will Ladislaw have be strong in
all her wake hour since she have propose to pay a visit to Mrs.
Lydgate, make a sort of background against which she see Rosamond's
figure present to she without hindrance to her interest and
compassion. there be evidently some mental separation, some barrier
to complete confidence which have arise between this wife and the
husband who have yet make her happiness a law to he. that be a
trouble which no third person must directly touch. but Dorothea
think with deep pity of the loneliness which must have come upon
Rosamond from the suspicion cast on her husband; and there would
surely be help in the manifestation of respect for lydgate and sympathy
with she.
"I shall talk to she about her husband," think Dorothea, as she be
be drive towards the town. the clear spring morning, the scent of
the moist earth, the fresh leaf just show their crease-up wealth
of greenery from out their half-open sheath, seem part of the
cheerfulness she be feel from a long conversation with Mr.
Farebrother, who have joyfully accept the justify explanation of
Lydgate's conduct. "I shall take Mrs. Lydgate good news, and perhaps
she will like to talk to I and make a friend of I."
Dorothea have another errand in Lowick Gate: it be about a new
fine-toned bell for the school-house, and as she have to get out of her
carriage very near to Lydgate's, she walk thither across the street,
have tell the coachman to wait for some package. the street door
be open, and the servant be take the opportunity of look out at
the carriage which be pause within sight when it become apparent to
she that the lady who "belong to it" be come towards she.
"be Mrs. Lydgate at home?" say Dorothea.
"Ibe not sure, my lady; Iwill see, if youwill please to walk in," say
Martha, a little confused on the score of her kitchen apron, but
collect enough to be sure that "mum" be not the right title for this
queenly young widow with a carriage and pair. "will you please to walk
in, and Iwill go and see."
"say that I be Mrs. Casaubon," say Dorothea, as Martha move forward
intend to show she into the drawing-room and then to go up-stair to
see if Rosamond have return from her walk.
they cross the broad part of the entrance-hall, and turn up the
passage which lead to the garden. the drawing-room door be unlatched,
and Martha, push it without look into the room, wait for Mrs.
Casaubon to enter and then turn away, the door have swing open and
swing back again without noise.
Dorothea have less of outward vision than usual this morning, be
fill with image of thing as they have be and be go to be.
she find herself on the other side of the door without see anything
remarkable, but immediately she hear a voice speak in low tone
which startle she as with a sense of dream in daylight, and
advance unconsciously a step or two beyond the project slab of a
bookcase, she see, in the terrible illumination of a certainty which
fill up all outline, something which make she pause, motionless,
without self-possession enough to speak.
seat with his back towards she on a sofa which stand against the wall
on a line with the door by which she have enter, she see will
Ladislaw: close by he and turn towards he with a flushed
tearfulness which give a new brilliancy to her face sit Rosamond, her
bonnet hang back, while will lean towards her clasp both her
upraised hand in his and speak with low-toned fervor.
Rosamond in her agitated absorption have not notice the silently
advance figure; but when Dorothea, after the first immeasurable
instant of this vision, move confusedly backward and find herself
impede by some piece of furniture, Rosamond be suddenly aware of her
presence, and with a spasmodic movement snatch away her hand and
rise, look at Dorothea who be necessarily arrest. will Ladislaw,
start up, look round also, and meet Dorothea's eye with a new
lightning in they, seem change to marble: but she immediately
turn they away from he to Rosamond and say in a firm voice--
"excuse I, Mrs. Lydgate, the servant do not know that you be here.
I call to deliver an important letter for Mr. Lydgate, which I wish
to put into your own hand."
she lay down the letter on the small table which have check she
retreat, and then include Rosamond and Will in one distant glance and
bow, she go quickly out of the room, meet in the passage the
surprised Martha, who say she be sorry the mistress be not at home,
and then show the strange lady out with an inward reflection that
grand people be probably more impatient than other.
Dorothea walk across the street with her most elastic step and be
quickly in her carriage again.
"drive on to Freshitt Hall," she say to the coachman, and any one
look at she might have think that though she be pale than usual
she be never animate by a more self-possess energy. and that be
really her experience. it be as if she have drink a great draught of
scorn that stimulate she beyond the susceptibility to other feeling.
she have see something so far below her belief, that her emotion
rush back from it and make an excited throng without an object. she
need something active to turn her excitement out upon. she feel
power to walk and work for a day, without meat or drink. and she would
carry out the purpose with which she have start in the morning, of
go to Freshitt and Tipton to tell Sir James and her uncle all that
she wish they to know about Lydgate, whose married loneliness under
his trial now present itself to she with new significance, and make
she more ardent in readiness to be his champion. she have never feel
anything like this triumphant power of indignation in the struggle of
her married life, in which there have always be a quickly subdue
pang; and she take it as a sign of new strength.
"Dodo, how very bright your eye be!" say Celia, when Sir James be
go out of the room. "and you donot see anything you look at, Arthur
or anything. you be go to do something uncomfortable, I know. be
it all about Mr. Lydgate, or have something else happen?" Celia have
be use to watch her sister with expectation.
"yes, dear, a great many thing have happen," say Dodo, in her full
tone.
"I wonder what," say Celia, fold her arm cozily and lean
forward upon they.
"oh, all the trouble of all people on the face of the earth," say
Dorothea, lift her arm to the back of her head.
"dear I, Dodo, be you go to have a scheme for they?" say Celia, a
little uneasy at this Hamlet-like raving.
but Sir James come in again, ready to accompany Dorothea to the Grange,
and she finish her expedition well, not swerve in her resolution
until she descend at her own door.
CHAPTER LXXVIII.
"would it be yesterday and I I' the grave,
with her sweet faith above for monument"
Rosamond and will stand motionless--they do not know how long--he
look towards the spot where Dorothea have stand, and she look
towards he with doubt. it seem an endless time to Rosamond, in
whose inmost soul there be hardly so much annoyance as gratification
from what have just happen. shallow nature dream of an easy sway
over the emotion of other, trust implicitly in their own petty
magic to turn the deep stream, and confident, by pretty gesture
and remark, of make the thing that be not as though it be. she
know that will have receive a severe blow, but she have be little use
to imagine other people's state of mind except as a material cut
into shape by her own wish; and she believe in her own power to
soothe or subdue. even Tertius, that most perverse of man, be always
subdue in the long-run: event have be obstinate, but still Rosamond
would have say now, as she do before her marriage, that she never
give up what she have set her mind on.
she put out her arm and lay the tip of her finger on Will's
coat-sleeve.
"donot touch I!" he say, with an utterance like the cut of a lash,
dart from she, and change from pink to white and back again, as if
his whole frame be tingle with the pain of the sting. he wheel
round to the other side of the room and stand opposite to she, with the
tip of his finger in his pocket and his head throw back, look
fiercely not at Rosamond but at a point a few inch away from she.
she be keenly offend, but the sign she make of this be such as
only Lydgate be use to interpret. she become suddenly quiet and
seat herself, untie her hang bonnet and lay it down with she
shawl. her little hand which she fold before she be very cold.
it would have be safe for Will in the first instance to have take
up his hat and go away; but he have feel no impulse to do this; on the
contrary, he have a horrible inclination to stay and shatter Rosamond
with his anger. it seem as impossible to bear the fatality she have
draw down on he without vent his fury as it would be to a panther
to bear the javelin-wound without spring and bite. and yet--how
could he tell a woman that he be ready to curse she? he be fume
under a repressive law which he be force to acknowledge: he be
dangerously poise, and Rosamond's voice now bring the decisive
vibration. in flute-like tone of sarcasm she said--
"you can easily go after Mrs. Casaubon and explain your preference."
"go after she!" he burst out, with a sharp edge in his voice. "do you
think she would turn to look at I, or value any word I ever utter to
she again at more than a dirty feather?--explain! how can a man
explain at the expense of a woman?"
"you can tell she what you please," say Rosamond with more tremor.
"do you suppose she would like I well for sacrifice you? she be
not a woman to be flatter because I make myself despicable--to
believe that I must be true to she because I be a dastard to you."
he begin to move about with the restlessness of a wild animal that see
prey but cannot reach it. presently he burst out again--
"I have no hope before--not much--of anything well to come. but I have
one certainty--that she believe in I. whatever people have say or
do about I, she believe in me.--That's go! shewill never again
think I anything but a paltry pretence--too nice to take heaven
except upon flattering condition, and yet sell myself for any
devil's change by the sly. shewill think of I as an incarnate insult
to she, from the first moment we--"
will stop as if he have find himself grasp something that must
not be throw and shatter. he find another vent for his rage by
snatch up Rosamond's word again, as if they be reptile to be
throttle and fling off.
"explain! tell a man to explain how he drop into hell! explain my
preference! I never have a _preference_ for she, any more than I have a
preference for breathing. no other woman exist by the side of she. I
would rather touch her hand if it be dead, than I would touch any
other woman's living."
Rosamond, while these poison weapon be be hurl at she, be
almost lose the sense of her identity, and seem to be wake into
some new terrible existence. she have no sense of chill resolute
repulsion, of reticent self-justification such as she have know under
Lydgate's most stormy displeasure: all her sensibility be turn into
a bewilder novelty of pain; she feel a new terrified recoil under a
lash never experience before. what another nature feel in opposition
to her own be be burn and bite into her consciousness. when
will have cease to speak she have become an image of sickened misery:
her lip be pale, and her eye have a tearless dismay in they. if it
have be Tertius who stand opposite to she, that look of misery would
have be a pang to he, and he would have sink by her side to comfort
she, with that strong-arm comfort which, she have often hold very
cheap.
let it be forgive to will that he have no such movement of pity. he
have feel no bond beforehand to this woman who have spoil the ideal
treasure of his life, and he hold himself blameless. he know that he
be cruel, but he have no relenting in he yet.
after he have do speak, he still move about, half in absence of
mind, and Rosamond sit perfectly still. at length will, seem to
bethink himself, take up his hat, yet stand some moment irresolute.
he have speak to she in a way that make a phrase of common politeness
difficult to utter; and yet, now that he have come to the point of go
away from she without further speech, he shrink from it as a brutality;
he feel check and stultify in his anger. he walk towards the
mantel-piece and lean his arm on it, and wait in silence for--he
hardly know what. the vindictive fire be still burn in he, and he
could utter no word of retractation; but it be nevertheless in his
mind that have come back to this hearth where he have enjoy a
caressing friendship he have find calamity seat there--he have have
suddenly reveal to he a trouble that lie outside the home as well as
within it. and what seem a foreboding be press upon he as with
slow pincers:--that his life might come to be enslave by this helpless
woman who have throw herself upon he in the dreary sadness of her
heart. but he be in gloomy rebellion against the fact that his quick
apprehensiveness foreshadow to he, and when his eye fall on
Rosamond's blighted face it seem to he that he be the more pitiable
of the two; for pain must enter into its glorify life of memory
before it can turn into compassion.
and so they remain for many minute, opposite each other, far apart,
in silence; Will's face still possess by a mute rage, and Rosamond's
by a mute misery. the poor thing have no force to fle out any passion
in return; the terrible collapse of the illusion towards which all her
hope have be strain be a stroke which have too thoroughly shake
she: her little world be in ruin, and she feel herself totter in
the midst as a lonely bewildered consciousness.
will wish that she would speak and bring some mitigate shadow
across his own cruel speech, which seem to stand star at they both
in mockery of any attempt at revive fellowship. but she say nothing,
and at last with a desperate effort over himself, he ask, "shall I
come in and see Lydgate this evening?"
"if you like," Rosamond answer, just audibly.
and then will go out of the house, Martha never know that he have
be in.
after he be go, Rosamond try to get up from her seat, but fall
back fainting. when she come to herself again, she feel too ill to
make the exertion of rise to ring the bell, and she remain helpless
until the girl, surprised at her long absence, think for the first
time of look for she in all the down-stair room. Rosamond say
that she have feel suddenly sick and faint, and want to be help
up-stair. when there she throw herself on the bed with her clothe on,
and lie in apparent torpor, as she have do once before on a memorable
day of grief.
Lydgate come home early than he have expect, about half-past five,
and find she there. the perception that she be ill throw every other
thought into the background. when he feel her pulse, her eye rest
on he with more persistence than they have do for a long while, as if
she feel some content that he be there. he perceive the difference
in a moment, and seat himself by she put his arm gently under she,
and bend over she say, "my poor Rosamond! have something agitated
you?" cling to he she fall into hysterical sobbing and cry, and
for the next hour he do nothing but soothe and tend she. he imagine
that Dorothea have be to see she, and that all this effect on her
nervous system, which evidently involve some new turning towards
himself, be due to the excitement of the new impression which that
visit have raise.
CHAPTER LXXIX.
"now, I see in my dream, that just as they have end their
talk, they draw nigh to a very miry slough, that be in the
midst of the plain; and they, be heedless, do both fall
suddenly into the bog. the name of the slough be
Despond."--bunyan.
when Rosamond be quiet, and Lydgate have leave she, hop that she
might soon sleep under the effect of an anodyne, he go into the
drawing-room to fetch a book which he have leave there, mean to spend
the evening in his work-room, and he see on the table Dorothea's letter
address to he. he have not venture to ask Rosamond if Mrs. Casaubon
have call, but the reading of this letter assure he of the fact, for
Dorothea mention that it be to be carry by herself.
when will Ladislaw come in a little later Lydgate meet he with a
surprise which make it clear that he have not be tell of the early
visit, and will could not say, "do not Mrs. Lydgate tell you that I
come this morning?"
"Poor Rosamond be ill," Lydgate add immediately on his greeting.
"not seriously, I hope," say will.
"no--only a slight nervous shock--the effect of some agitation. she
have be overwrought lately. the truth be, Ladislaw, I be an unlucky
devil. we have go through several round of purgatory since you
leave, and I have lately get on to a bad ledge of it than ever. I
suppose you be only just come down--you look rather battered--you
have not be long enough in the town to hear anything?"
"I travel all night and get to the White Hart at eight o'clock this
morning. I have be shut myself up and rest," say will,
feel himself a sneak, but see no alternative to this evasion.
and then he hear Lydgate's account of the trouble which Rosamond have
already depict to he in her way. she have not mention the fact of
Will's name be connect with the public story--this detail not
immediately affect she--and he now hear it for the first time.
"I think it well to tell you that your name be mix up with the
disclosure," say Lydgate, who could understand well than most man
how Ladislaw might be sting by the revelation. "you will be sure to
hear it as soon as you turn out into the town. I suppose it be true
that Raffles speak to you."
"yes," say will, sardonically. "I shall be fortunate if gossip do
not make I the most disreputable person in the whole affair. I should
think the late version must be, that I plot with Raffles to murder
Bulstrode, and run away from Middlemarch for the purpose."
he be think "here be a new ring in the sound of my name to
recommend it in her hearing; however--what do it signify now?"
but he say nothing of Bulstrode's offer to he. will be very open
and careless about his personal affair, but it be among the more
exquisite touch in nature's modelling of he that he have a delicate
generosity which warn he into reticence here. he shrink from say
that he have reject Bulstrode's money, in the moment when he be
learn that it be Lydgate's misfortune to have accept it.
lydgate too be reticent in the midst of his confidence. he make no
allusion to Rosamond's feeling under their trouble, and of Dorothea he
only say, "Mrs. Casaubon have be the one person to come forward and
say that she have no belief in any of the suspicion against I."
observe a change in Will's face, he avoid any further mention of
she, feel himself too ignorant of their relation to each other not
to fear that his word might have some hide painful bearing on it.
and it occur to he that Dorothea be the real cause of the present
visit to Middlemarch.
the two man be pity each other, but it be only will who guess
the extent of his companion's trouble. when Lydgate speak with
desperate resignation of go to settle in London, and say with a
faint smile, "we shall have you again, old fellow." will feel
inexpressibly mournful, and say nothing. Rosamond have that morning
entreat he to urge this step on Lydgate; and it seem to he as if
he be behold in a magic panorama a future where he himself be
slide into that pleasureless yield to the small solicitation of
circumstance, which be a commoner history of perdition than any single
momentous bargain.
we be on a perilous margin when we begin to look passively at our
future self, and see our own figure lead with dull consent into
insipid misdoing and shabby achievement. Poor Lydgate be inwardly
groan on that margin, and will be arrive at it. it seem to he
this evening as if the cruelty of his outburst to Rosamond have make an
obligation for he, and he dread the obligation: he dread Lydgate's
unsuspecting good-will: he dread his own distaste for his spoil
life, which would leave he in motiveless levity.
CHAPTER LXXX.
"stern lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
the Godhead's most benignant grace;
nor know we anything so fair
as be the smile upon thy face;
flower laugh before thee on their bed,
and fragrance in thy footing tread;
Thou dost preserve the Stars from wrong;
and the most ancient Heavens, through thee, be fresh and strong.
--wordsworth: Ode to Duty.
when Dorothea have see Mr. Farebrother in the morning, she have promise
to go and dine at the parsonage on her return from Freshitt. there be
a frequent interchange of visit between she and the Farebrother
family, which enable she to say that she be not at all lonely at the
Manor, and to resist for the present the severe prescription of a lady
companion. when she reach home and remember her engagement, she
be glad of it; and find that she have still an hour before she could
dress for dinner, she walk straight to the schoolhouse and enter
into a conversation with the master and mistress about the new bell,
give eager attention to their small detail and repetition, and
get up a dramatic sense that her life be very busy. she pause on
her way back to talk to old Master Bunney who be put in some
garden-seed, and discourse wisely with that rural sage about the
crop that would make the most return on a perch of ground, and the
result of sixty year' experience as to soil--namely, that if your
soil be pretty mellow it would do, but if there come wet, wet, wet to
make it all of a mummy, why then--
Finding that the social spirit have beguile she into be rather late,
she dress hastily and go over to the parsonage rather early than
be necessary. that house be never dull, Mr. Farebrother, like
another White of Selborne, have continually something new to tell of
his inarticulate guest and protege, whom he be teach the boy not
to torment; and he have just set up a pair of beautiful goat to be pet
of the village in general, and to walk at large as sacred animal. the
evening go by cheerfully till after tea, Dorothea talk more than
usual and dilate with Mr. Farebrother on the possible history of
creature that converse compendiously with their antennae, and for
aught we know may hold reform parliament; when suddenly some
inarticulate little sound be hear which call everybody's
attention.
"Henrietta Noble," say Mrs. Farebrother, see her small sister
move about the furniture-leg distressfully, "what be the matter?"
"I have lose my tortoise-shell lozenge-box. I fear the kitten have
roll it away," say the tiny old lady, involuntarily continue her
beaver-like note.
"be it a great treasure, aunt?" say Mr. Farebrother, put up his
glass and look at the carpet.
"Mr. Ladislaw give it I," say Miss Noble. "a german box--very
pretty, but if it fall it always spin away as far as it can."
"oh, if it be Ladislaw's present," say Mr. Farebrother, in a deep tone
of comprehension, get up and hunt. the box be find at last
under a chiffoni, and Miss Noble grasp it with delight, say, "it
be under a fender the last time."
"that be an affair of the heart with my aunt," say Mr. Farebrother,
smile at Dorothea, as he reseat himself.
"if Henrietta Noble form an attachment to any one, Mrs. Casaubon,"
say his mother, emphatically,--"she be like a dog--she would take
their shoe for a pillow and sleep the well."
"Mr. Ladislaw's shoe, I would," say Henrietta Noble.
Dorothea make an attempt at smile in return. she be surprised and
annoy to find that her heart be palpitate violently, and that it
be quite useless to try after a recovery of her former animation.
alarm at herself--fear some further betrayal of a change so marked
in its occasion, she rise and say in a low voice with undisguised
anxiety, "I must go; I have overtire myself."
Mr. Farebrother, quick in perception, rise and say, "it be true; you
must have half-exhausted yourself in talk about Lydgate. that sort
of work tell upon one after the excitement be over."
he give she his arm back to the Manor, but Dorothea do not attempt to
speak, even when he say good-night.
the limit of resistance be reach, and she have sink back helpless
within the clutch of inescapable anguish. Dismissing Tantripp with a
few faint word, she lock her door, and turn away from it towards
the vacant room she press her hand hard on the top of her head, and
moan out--
"oh, I do love he!"
then come the hour in which the wave of suffer shake she too
thoroughly to leave any power of thought. she could only cry in loud
whisper, between her sob, after her lose belief which she have plant
and keep alive from a very little seed since the day in Rome--after
her lost joy of cling with silent love and faith to one who,
misprize by other, be worthy in her thought--after her lose woman's
pride of reign in his memory--after her sweet dim perspective of
hope, that along some pathway they should meet with unchanged
recognition and take up the backward year as a yesterday.
in that hour she repeat what the merciful eye of solitude have
look on for age in the spiritual struggle of man--she besought
hardness and coldness and ache weariness to bring her relief from the
mysterious incorporeal might of her anguish: she lie on the bare floor
and let the night grow cold around she; while her grand woman's frame
be shake by sob as if she have be a despair child.
there be two image--two live form that tear her heart in two, as
if it have be the heart of a mother who seem to see her child divide
by the sword, and press one bleed half to her breast while her
gaze go forth in agony towards the half which be carry away by the
lie woman that have never know the mother's pang.
here, with the nearness of an answer smile, here within the
vibrate bond of mutual speech, be the bright creature whom she have
trust--who have come to she like the spirit of morning visit the
dim vault where she sit as the bride of a wear-out life; and now, with
a full consciousness which have never awaken before, she stretch out
her arm towards he and cry with bitter cry that their nearness
be a parting vision: she discover her passion to herself in the
unshrinke utterance of despair.
and there, aloof, yet persistently with she, move wherever she move,
be the Will Ladislaw' who be a change belief exhaust of hope, a
detect illusion--no, a live man towards whom there could not yet
struggle any wail of regretful pity, from the midst of scorn and
indignation and jealous offend pride. the fire of Dorothea's anger
be not easily spend, and it flame out in fitful return of spurn
reproach. why have he come obtrude his life into her, her that
might have be whole enough without he? why have he bring his cheap
regard and his lip-bear word to she who have nothing paltry to give in
exchange? he know that he be delude she--wish, in the very moment
of farewell, to make she believe that he give she the whole price of
her heart, and know that he have spend it half before. why have he not
stay among the crowd of whom she ask nothing--but only pray that
they might be less contemptible?
but she lose energy at last even for her loud-whisper cry and
moan: she subside into helpless sob, and on the cold floor she
sob herself to sleep.
in the chill hour of the morning twilight, when all be dim around
she, she awake--not with any amazed wondering where she be or what have
happen, but with the clear consciousness that she be look into
the eye of sorrow. she rise, and wrap warm thing around she, and
seat herself in a great chair where she have often watch before.
she be vigorous enough to have bear that hard night without feel
ill in body, beyond some aching and fatigue; but she have wake to a new
condition: she feel as if her soul have be liberate from its terrible
conflict; she be no long wrestle with her grief, but could sit
down with it as a last companion and make it a sharer in her
thought. for now the thought come thickly. it be not in Dorothea's
nature, for long than the duration of a paroxysm, to sit in the
narrow cell of her calamity, in the besotte misery of a consciousness
that only see another's lot as an accident of its own.
she begin now to live through that yesterday morning deliberately
again, force herself to dwell on every detail and its possible
meaning. be she alone in that scene? be it her event only? she
force herself to think of it as bind up with another woman's life--a
woman towards whom she have set out with a longing to carry some
clearness and comfort into her beclouded youth. in her first outleap
of jealous indignation and disgust, when quit the hateful room, she
have fling away all the mercy with which she have undertake that visit.
she have envelop both Will and Rosamond in her burn scorn, and it
seem to she as if Rosamond be burn out of her sight forever. but
that base prompt which make a woman more cruel to a rival than to a
faithless lover, could have no strength of recurrence in Dorothea when
the dominant spirit of justice within she have once overcome the tumult
and have once show she the true measure of thing. all the active
thought with which she have before be represent to herself the
trial of Lydgate's lot, and this young marriage union which, like she
own, seem to have its hide as well as evident trouble--all this
vivid sympathetic experience return to she now as a power: it
assert itself as acquire knowledge assert itself and will not let
we see as we see in the day of our ignorance. she say to her own
irremediable grief, that it should make she more helpful, instead of
drive she back from effort.
and what sort of crisis might not this be in three life whose contact
with hers lay an obligation on she as if they have be suppliant
bear the sacred branch? the object of her rescue be not to be
seek out by her fancy: they be choose for she. she yearn towards
the perfect right, that it might make a throne within she, and rule her
errant will. "what should I do--how should I act now, this very day,
if I could clutch my own pain, and compel it to silence, and think of
those three?"
it have take long for she to come to that question, and there be light
pierce into the room. she open her curtain, and look out
towards the bit of road that lie in view, with field beyond outside
the entrance-gate. on the road there be a man with a bundle on his
back and a woman carry her baby; in the field she could see figure
move--perhaps the shepherd with his dog. far off in the bend sky
be the pearly light; and she feel the largeness of the world and the
manifold waking of man to labor and endurance. she be a part of that
involuntary, palpitate life, and could neither look out on it from
her luxurious shelter as a mere spectator, nor hide her eye in selfish
complaining.
what she would resolve to do that day do not yet seem quite clear, but
something that she could achieve stir she as with an approach
murmur which would soon gather distinctness. she take off the clothe
which seem to have some of the weariness of a hard watching in they,
and begin to make her toilet. presently she ring for Tantripp, who
come in her dressing-gown.
"why, madam, youhave never be in bed this blessed night," burst out
Tantripp, look first at the bed and then at Dorothea's face, which
in spite of bathing have the pale cheek and pink eyelid of a mater
dolorosa. "youwill kill yourself, you _will_. anybody might think now
you have a right to give yourself a little comfort."
"donot be alarm, Tantripp," say Dorothea, smile. "I have sleep; I
be not ill. I shall be glad of a cup of coffee as soon as possible.
and I want you to bring I my new dress; and most likely I shall want
my new bonnet to-day."
"theyhave lain there a month and more ready for you, madam, and most
thankful I shall be to see you with a couple o' pound' worth less of
crape," say Tantripp, stoop to light the fire. "therebe a reason
in mourning, as Ihave always say; and three fold at the bottom of your
skirt and a plain quilling in your bonnet--and if ever anybody look
like an angel, itbe you in a net quilling--be whatbe consistent for a
second year. at least, thatbe _my_ thinking," end Tantripp, look
anxiously at the fire; "and if anybody be to marry I flattering
himself I should wear those hijeous weeper two year for he, hewould be
deceive by his own vanity, thatbe all."
"the fire will do, my good Tan," say Dorothea, speak as she use to
do in the old Lausanne day, only with a very low voice; "get I the
coffee."
she fold herself in the large chair, and lean her head against it
in fatigued quiescence, while Tantripp go away wonder at this
strange contrariness in her young mistress--that just the morning when
she have more of a widow's face than ever, she should have ask for her
light mourning which she have waive before. Tantripp would never
have find the clew to this mystery. Dorothea wish to acknowledge
that she have not the less an active life before she because she have
bury a private joy; and the tradition that fresh garment belong to
all initiation, haunt her mind, make her grasp after even that
slight outward help towards calm resolve. for the resolve be not easy.
nevertheless at eleven o'clock she be walk towards Middlemarch,
have make up her mind that she would make as quietly and unnoticeably
as possible her second attempt to see and save Rosamond.
CHAPTER LXXXI.
"Du Erde warst auch diese Nacht bestandig,
und athm neu erquickt zu meinen Fussen,
Beginnest schon mit Lust mich zu umgeben,
zum regst und ruhrst ein kraftige Reschliessen
Zum hochsten Dasein immerfort zu streben.
--Faust: 2r Theil.
when Dorothea be again at Lydgate's door speak to Martha, he be in
the room close by with the door ajar, prepare to go out. he hear
her voice, and immediately come to she.
"do you think that Mrs. Lydgate can receive I this morning?" she say,
have reflect that it would be well to leave out all allusion to
her previous visit.
"I have no doubt she will," say Lydgate, suppress his thought about
Dorothea's look, which be as much change as Rosamond's, "if you
will be kind enough to come in and let I tell she that you be here.
she have not be very well since you be here yesterday, but she be
well this morning, and I think it be very likely that she will be
cheer by see you again."
it be plain that lydgate, as Dorothea have expect, know nothing about
the circumstance of her yesterday's visit; nay, he appear to imagine
that she have carry it out accord to her intention. she have
prepare a little note ask Rosamond to see she, which she would have
give to the servant if he have not be in the way, but now she be in
much anxiety as to the result of his announcement.
after lead she into the drawing-room, he pause to take a letter
from his pocket and put it into her hand, say, "I write this last
night, and be go to carry it to Lowick in my ride. when one be
grateful for something too good for common thank, writing be less
unsatisfactory than speech--one do not at least _hear_ how inadequate
the word be."
Dorothea's face brighten. "it be I who have most to thank for, since
you have let I take that place. you _have_ consent?" she say,
suddenly doubt.
"yes, the check be go to Bulstrode to-day."
he say no more, but go up-stair to Rosamond, who have but lately
finish dress herself, and sit languidly wonder what she should
do next, her habitual industry in small thing, even in the day of her
sadness, prompt she to begin some kind of occupation, which she
drag through slowly or pause in from lack of interest. she look
ill, but have recover her usual quietude of manner, and Lydgate have
fear to disturb she by any question. he have tell she of Dorothea's
letter contain the check, and afterwards he have say, "Ladislaw be
come, rosy; he sit with I last night; I dare say he will be here again
to-day. I think he look rather battered and depressed." and
Rosamond have make no reply.
now, when he come up, he say to she very gently, "rosy, dear, Mrs.
Casaubon be come to see you again; you would like to see she, would you
not?" that she color and give rather a startled movement do not
surprise he after the agitation produce by the interview yesterday--a
beneficent agitation, he think, since it seem to have make her turn
to he again.
Rosamond dare not say no. she dare not with a tone of her voice
touch the fact of yesterday. why have Mrs. Casaubon come again? the
answer be a blank which Rosamond could only fill up with dread, for
will Ladislaw's lacerate word have make every thought of Dorothea a
fresh smart to she. nevertheless, in her new humiliating uncertainty
she dare do nothing but comply. she do not say yes, but she rise and
let Lydgate put a light shawl over her shoulder, while he say, "I be
go out immediately." then something cross her mind which prompt
she to say, "pray tell Martha not to bring any one else into the
drawing-room." and Lydgate assent, think that he fully understand
this wish. he lead she down to the drawing-room door, and then turn
away, observe to himself that he be rather a blunder husband to
be dependent for his wife's trust in he on the influence of another
woman.
Rosamond, wrap her soft shawl around she as she walk towards
Dorothea, be inwardly wrap her soul in cold reserve. have Mrs.
Casaubon come to say anything to she about Will? if so, it be a
liberty that Rosamond resent; and she prepare herself to meet every
word with polite impassibility. will have bruise her pride too sorely
for she to feel any compunction towards he and Dorothea: her own
injury seem much the great. Dorothea be not only the "preferred"
woman, but have also a formidable advantage in be Lydgate's
benefactor; and to poor Rosamond's pain confused vision it seem
that this Mrs. Casaubon--this woman who predominate in all thing
concern she--must have come now with the sense of have the
advantage, and with animosity prompt she to use it. indeed, not
rosamond only, but any one else, know the outer fact of the case,
and not the simple inspiration on which Dorothea act, might well have
wonder why she come.
look like the lovely ghost of herself, her graceful slimness wrap
in her soft white shawl, the rounded infantine mouth and cheek
inevitably suggest mildness and innocence, Rosamond pause at three
yard' distance from her visitor and bow. but Dorothea, who have
take off her glove, from an impulse which she could never resist when
she want a sense of freedom, come forward, and with her face full of
a sad yet sweet openness, put out her hand. Rosamond could not avoid
meet her glance, could not avoid put her small hand into
Dorothea's, which clasp it with gentle motherliness; and immediately
a doubt of her own prepossession begin to stir within she. Rosamond's
eye be quick for face; she see that Mrs. Casaubon's face look pale
and change since yesterday, yet gentle, and like the firm softness of
her hand. but Dorothea have count a little too much on her own
strength: the clearness and intensity of her mental action this morning
be the continuance of a nervous exaltation which make her frame as
dangerously responsive as a bit of fine venetian crystal; and in
look at Rosamond, she suddenly find her heart swell, and be
unable to speak--all her effort be require to keep back tear. she
succeed in that, and the emotion only pass over her face like the
spirit of a sob; but it add to Rosamond's impression that Mrs.
Casaubon's state of mind must be something quite different from what
she have imagine.
so they sit down without a word of preface on the two chair that
happen to be near, and happen also to be close together; though
Rosamond's notion when she first bow be that she should stay a long
way off from Mrs. Casaubon. but she cease think how anything would
turn out--merely wonder what would come. and Dorothea begin to
speak quite simply, gather firmness as she go on.
"I have an errand yesterday which I do not finish; that be why I be
here again so soon. you will not think I too troublesome when I tell
you that I come to talk to you about the injustice that have be show
towards Mr. Lydgate. it will cheer you--will it not?--to know a great
deal about he, that he may not like to speak about himself just
because it be in his own vindication and to his own honor. you will
like to know that your husband have warm friend, who have not leave off
believe in his high character? you will let I speak of this without
think that I take a liberty?"
the cordial, plead tone which seem to flow with generous
heedlessness above all the fact which have fill Rosamond's mind as
ground of obstruction and hatred between she and this woman, come as
soothingly as a warm stream over her shrink fear. of course Mrs.
Casaubon have the fact in her mind, but she be not go to speak of
anything connect with they. that relief be too great for Rosamond
to feel much else at the moment. she answer prettily, in the new
ease of her soul--
"I know you have be very good. I shall like to hear anything you
will say to I about Tertius."
"the day before yesterday," say Dorothea, "when I have ask he to
come to Lowick to give I his opinion on the affair of the Hospital,
he tell I everything about his conduct and feeling in this sad event
which have make ignorant people cast suspicion on he. the reason he
tell I be because I be very bold and ask he. I believe that he
have never act dishonorably, and I beg he to tell I the history.
he confess to I that he have never tell it before, not even to you,
because he have a great dislike to say, 'I be not wrong,' as if that
be proof, when there be guilty people who will say so. the truth
be, he know nothing of this man Raffles, or that there be any bad
secret about he; and he think that Mr. Bulstrode offer he the
money because he repent, out of kindness, of have refuse it
before. all his anxiety about his patient be to treat he rightly,
and he be a little uncomfortable that the case do not end as he have
expect; but he think then and still think that there may have be
no wrong in it on any one's part. and I have tell Mr. Farebrother, and
Mr. Brooke, and Sir James Chettam: they all believe in your husband.
that will cheer you, will it not? that will give you courage?"
Dorothea's face have become animate, and as it beam on Rosamond very
close to she, she feel something like bashful timidity before a
superior, in the presence of this self-forgetful ardor. she say, with
blushing embarrassment, "thank you: you be very kind."
"and he feel that he have be so wrong not to pour out everything about
this to you. but you will forgive he. it be because he feel so
much more about your happiness than anything else--he feel his life
bind into one with your, and it hurt he more than anything, that
his misfortune must hurt you. he could speak to I because I be an
indifferent person. and then I ask he if I might come to see you;
because I feel so much for his trouble and your. that be why I come
yesterday, and why I be come to-day. trouble be so hard to bear, be it
not?-- how can we live and think that any one have trouble--pierce
trouble--and we could help they, and never try?"
Dorothea, completely sway by the feeling that she be uttering,
forget everything but that she be speak from out the heart of her
own trial to Rosamond's. the emotion have work itself more and more
into her utterance, till the tone might have go to one's very
marrow, like a low cry from some suffering creature in the darkness.
and she have unconsciously lay her hand again on the little hand that
she have press before.
Rosamond, with an overmaster pang, as if a wound within she have be
probe, burst into hysterical crying as she have do the day before
when she cling to her husband. poor Dorothea be feel a great wave
of her own sorrow return over she--her thought be draw to the
possible share that will Ladislaw might have in Rosamond's mental
tumult. she be begin to fear that she should not be able to
suppress herself enough to the end of this meeting, and while her hand
be still rest on Rosamond's lap, though the hand underneath it be
withdraw, she be struggle against her own rise sob. she try
to master herself with the thought that this might be a turning-point
in three life--not in her own; no, there the irrevocable have
happen, but--in those three life which be touch her with the
solemn neighborhood of danger and distress. the fragile creature who
be cry close to she--there might still be time to rescue she from
the misery of false incompatible bond; and this moment be unlike any
other: she and Rosamond could never be together again with the same
thrilling consciousness of yesterday within they both. she feel the
relation between they to be peculiar enough to give she a peculiar
influence, though she have no conception that the way in which her own
feeling be involve be fully know to Mrs. Lydgate.
it be a new crisis in Rosamond's experience than even Dorothea could
imagine: she be under the first great shock that have shatter her
dream-world in which she have be easily confident of herself and
critical of other; and this strange unexpected manifestation of
feel in a woman whom she have approach with a shrink aversion
and dread, as one who must necessarily have a jealous hatred towards
she, make her soul totter all the more with a sense that she have be
walk in an unknown world which have just break in upon she.
when Rosamond's convulsed throat be subside into calm, and she
withdraw the handkerchief with which she have be hide her face, her
eye meet Dorothea's as helplessly as if they have be blue flower.
what be the use of think about behavior after this crying? and
Dorothea look almost as childish, with the neglect trace of a
silent tear. Pride be break down between these two.
"we be talk about your husband," Dorothea say, with some
timidity. "I think his look be sadly change with suffer the
other day. I have not see he for many week before. he say he have
be feel very lonely in his trial; but I think he would have bear
it all well if he have be able to be quite open with you."
"Tertius be so angry and impatient if I say anything," say Rosamond,
imagine that he have be complain of she to Dorothea. "he ought
not to wonder that I object to speak to he on painful subject."
"it be himself he blame for not speak," say Dorothea. "what he
say of you be, that he could not be happy in do anything which
make you unhappy--that his marriage be of course a bond which must
affect his choice about everything; and for that reason he refuse my
proposal that he should keep his position at the Hospital, because that
would bind he to stay in Middlemarch, and he would not undertake to do
anything which would be painful to you. he could say that to I,
because he know that I have much trial in my marriage, from my
husband's illness, which hinder his plan and sadden he; and he
know that I have feel how hard it be to walk always in fear of hurt
another who be tie to we."
Dorothea wait a little; she have discern a faint pleasure steal
over Rosamond's face. but there be no answer, and she go on, with a
gathering tremor, "marriage be so unlike everything else. there be
something even awful in the nearness it bring. even if we love some
one else well than--than those we be married to, it would be no
use"--poor Dorothea, in her palpitating anxiety, could only seize she
language brokenly--"i mean, marriage drink up all our power of give
or get any blessedness in that sort of love. I know it may be very
dear--but it murder our marriage--and then the marriage stay with we
like a murder--and everything else be go. and then our husband--if
he love and trust we, and we have not help he, but make a curse
in his life--"
her voice have sink very low: there be a dread upon she of presume
too far, and of speak as if she herself be perfection address
error. she be too much preoccupied with her own anxiety, to be aware
that Rosamond be tremble too; and fill with the need to express
pity fellowship rather than rebuke, she put her hand on Rosamond's,
and say with more agitated rapidity,--"i know, I know that the feeling
may be very dear--it have take hold of we unawares--it be so hard, it
may seem like death to part with it--and we be weak--I be weak--"
the wave of her own sorrow, from out of which she be struggle to
save another, rush over Dorothea with conquering force. she stop
in speechless agitation, not cry, but feeling as if she be be
inwardly grapple. her face have become of a deathli paleness, her
lip tremble, and she press her hand helplessly on the hand that
lie under they.
Rosamond, take hold of by an emotion strong than her own--hurry
along in a new movement which give all thing some new, awful,
undefined aspect--could find no word, but involuntarily she put she
lip to Dorothea's forehead which be very near she, and then for a
minute the two woman clasp each other as if they have be in a
shipwreck.
"you be think what be not true," say Rosamond, in an eager
half-whisper, while she be still feel Dorothea's arm round
she--urge by a mysterious necessity to free herself from something
that oppress she as if it be blood guiltiness.
they move apart, look at each other.
"when you come in yesterday--it be not as you think," say Rosamond
in the same tone.
there be a movement of surprised attention in Dorothea. she expect
a vindication of Rosamond herself.
"he be tell I how he love another woman, that I might know he
could never love I," say Rosamond, get more and more hurried as
she go on. "and now I think he hat I because--because you
mistook he yesterday. he say it be through I that you will think
ill of he--think that he be a false person. but it shall not be
through I. he have never have any love for I--I know he have not--he
have always think slightly of I. he say yesterday that no other
woman exist for he beside you. the blame of what happen be
entirely mine. he say he could never explain to you--because of I.
he say you could never think well of he again. but now I have tell
you, and he cannot reproach I any more."
Rosamond have deliver her soul under impulse which she have not know
before. she have begin her confession under the subduing influence of
Dorothea's emotion; and as she go on she have gather the sense that
she be repel Will's reproach, which be still like a
knife-wound within she.
the revulsion of feeling in Dorothea be too strong to be call joy.
it be a tumult in which the terrible strain of the night and morning
make a resistant pain:--she could only perceive that this would be joy
when she have recover her power of feel it. her immediate
consciousness be one of immense sympathy without cheek; she care for
Rosamond without struggle now, and respond earnestly to her last
words--
"no, he cannot reproach you any more."
with her usual tendency to over-estimate the good in other, she feel a
great outgoing of her heart towards Rosamond, for the generous effort
which have redeem she from suffering, not count that the effort be
a reflex of her own energy. after they have be silent a little, she
said--
"you be not sorry that I come this morning?"
"no, you have be very good to I," say Rosamond. "I do not think
that you would be so good. I be very unhappy. I be not happy now.
everything be so sad."
"but well day will come. your husband will be rightly value. and
he depend on you for comfort. he love you well. the bad loss
would be to lose that--and you have not lose it," say Dorothea.
she try to thrust away the too overpowering thought of her own
relief, lest she should fail to win some sign that Rosamond's affection
be yearn back towards her husband.
"Tertius do not find fault with I, then?" say Rosamond,
understanding now that Lydgate might have say anything to Mrs.
Casaubon, and that she certainly be different from other woman.
perhaps there be a faint taste of jealousy in the question. a smile
begin to play over Dorothea's face as she said--
"no, indeed! how could you imagine it?" but here the door open, and
Lydgate enter.
"I be come back in my quality of doctor," he say. "after I go away,
I be haunt by two pale face: Mrs. Casaubon look as much in need
of care as you, rosy. and I think that I have not do my duty in
leave you together; so when I have be to Coleman's I come home
again. I notice that you be walk, Mrs. Casaubon, and the sky have
change--I think we may have rain. may I send some one to order your
carriage to come for you?"
"oh, no! I be strong: I need the walk," say Dorothea, rise with
animation in her face. "Mrs. Lydgate and I have chat a great deal,
and it be time for I to go. I have always be accuse of be
immoderate and say too much."
she put out her hand to Rosamond, and they say an earnest, quiet
good-by without kiss or other show of effusion: there have be between
they too much serious emotion for they to use the sign of it
superficially.
as Lydgate take she to the door she say nothing of Rosamond, but tell
he of Mr. Farebrother and the other friend who have listen with
belief to his story.
when he come back to Rosamond, she have already throw herself on the
sofa, in resign fatigue.
"well, Rosy," he say, stand over she, and touch her hair, "what
do you think of Mrs. Casaubon now you have see so much of she?"
"I think she must be well than any one," say Rosamond, "and she be
very beautiful. if you go to talk to she so often, you will be more
discontent with I than ever!"
Lydgate laugh at the "so often." "but have she make you any less
discontent with I?"
"I think she have," say Rosamond, look up in his face. "how heavy
your eye be, Tertius--and do push your hair back." he lift up his
large white hand to obey she, and feel thankful for this little mark of
interest in he. Poor Rosamond's vagrant fancy have come back terribly
scourge--meek enough to nestle under the old despise shelter. and
the shelter be still there: Lydgate have accept his narrow lot with
sad resignation. he have choose this fragile creature, and have take
the burthen of her life upon his arm. he must walk as he could,
carry that burthen pitifully.
CHAPTER LXXXII.
"my grief lie onward and my joy behind."
--SHAKESPEARE: sonnet.
Exiles notoriously feed much on hope, and be unlikely to stay in
banishment unless they be oblige. when will Ladislaw exile himself
from Middlemarch he have place no strong obstacle to his return than
his own resolve, which be by no mean an iron barrier, but simply a
state of mind liable to melt into a minuet with other state of mind,
and to find itself bow, smile, and give place with polite
facility. as the month go on, it have seem more and more difficult
to he to say why he should not run down to Middlemarch--merely for the
sake of hear something about Dorothea; and if on such a fly visit
he should chance by some strange coincidence to meet with she, there
be no reason for he to be ashamed of have take an innocent journey
which he have beforehand suppose that he should not take. since he be
hopelessly divide from she, he might surely venture into her
neighborhood; and as to the suspicious friend who keep a dragon watch
over she--their opinion seem less and less important with time and
change of air.
and there have come a reason quite irrespective of Dorothea, which
seem to make a journey to middlemarch a sort of philanthropic duty.
will have give a disinterested attention to an intended settlement on a
new plan in the Far West, and the need for fund in order to carry out
a good design have set he on debate with himself whether it would not
be a laudable use to make of his claim on Bulstrode, to urge the
application of that money which have be offer to himself as a mean
of carry out a scheme likely to be largely beneficial. the question
seem a very dubious one to Will, and his repugnance to again enter
into any relation with the banker might have make he dismiss it
quickly, if there have not arise in his imagination the probability
that his judgment might be more safely determine by a visit to
Middlemarch.
that be the object which will state to himself as a reason for come
down. he have mean to confide in Lydgate, and discuss the money
question with he, and he have mean to amuse himself for the few
evening of his stay by have a great deal of music and badinage with
fair Rosamond, without neglect his friend at Lowick Parsonage:--if
the Parsonage be close to the Manor, that be no fault of his. he have
neglect the Farebrothers before his departure, from a proud
resistance to the possible accusation of indirectly seek interview
with Dorothea; but hunger tame we, and will have become very hungry for
the vision of a certain form and the sound of a certain voice.
nothing, have do instead--not the opera, or the converse of zealous
politician, or the flattering reception (in dim corner) of his new
hand in lead article.
thus he have come down, foresee with confidence how almost everything
would be in his familiar little world; fear, indeed, that there
would be no surprise in his visit. but he have find that humdrum
world in a terribly dynamic condition, in which even badinage and
lyrism have turn explosive; and the first day of this visit have become
the most fatal epoch of his life. the next morning he feel so harass
with the nightmare of consequence--he dread so much the immediate
issue before he--that see while he breakfast the arrival of the
Riverston coach, he go out hurriedly and take his place on it, that
he might be relieve, at least for a day, from the necessity of do
or say anything in Middlemarch. will Ladislaw be in one of those
tangle crisis which be commoner in experience than one might imagine,
from the shallow absoluteness of man's judgment. he have find
Lydgate, for whom he have the sincere respect, under circumstance
which claim his thorough and frankly declare sympathy; and the
reason why, in spite of that claim, it would have be well for will
to have avoid all further intimacy, or even contact, with lydgate,
be precisely of the kind to make such a course appear impossible. to
a creature of Will's susceptible temperament--without any neutral
region of indifference in his nature, ready to turn everything that
befell he into the collision of a passionate drama--the revelation
that Rosamond have make her happiness in any way dependent on he be a
difficulty which his outburst of rage towards she have immeasurably
increase for he. he hat his own cruelty, and yet he dread to
show the fulness of his relenting: he must go to she again; the
friendship could not be put to a sudden end; and her unhappiness be a
power which he dread. and all the while there be no more foretaste
of enjoyment in the life before he than if his limb have be lop
off and he be make his fresh start on crutch. in the night he have
debate whether he should not get on the coach, not for Riverston, but
for London, leave a note to Lydgate which would give a makeshift
reason for his retreat. but there be strong cord pull he back
from that abrupt departure: the blight on his happiness in thinking of
Dorothea, the crushing of that chief hope which have remain in spite
of the acknowledge necessity for renunciation, be too fresh a misery
for he to resign himself to it and go straightway into a distance
which be also despair.
thus he do nothing more decide than take the Riverston coach. he
come back again by it while it be still daylight, have make up his
mind that he must go to Lydgate's that evening. the Rubicon, we know,
be a very insignificant stream to look at; its significance lay
entirely in certain invisible condition. will feel as if he be
force to cross his small boundary ditch, and what he see beyond it be
not empire, but discontent subjection.
but it be give to we sometimes even in our every-day life to witness
the save influence of a noble nature, the divine efficacy of rescue
that may lie in a self-subdue act of fellowship. if Dorothea, after
her night's anguish, have not take that walk to Rosamond--why, she
perhaps would have be a woman who gain a high character for
discretion, but it would certainly not have be as well for those
three who be on one hearth in Lydgate's house at half-past seven that
evening.
Rosamond have be prepare for Will's visit, and she receive he with
a languid coldness which Lydgate account for by her nervous
exhaustion, of which he could not suppose that it have any relation to
will. and when she sit in silence bend over a bit of work, he
innocently apologize for she in an indirect way by beg she to lean
backward and rest. will be miserable in the necessity for play the
part of a friend who be make his first appearance and greet to
Rosamond, while his thought be busy about her feeling since that
scene of yesterday, which seem still inexorably to enclose they both,
like the painful vision of a double madness. it happen that nothing
call Lydgate out of the room; but when Rosamond pour out the tea,
and will come near to fetch it, she place a tiny bit of fold paper
in his saucer. he see it and secure it quickly, but as he go back
to his inn he have no eagerness to unfold the paper. what Rosamond have
write to he would probably deepen the painful impression of the
evening. still, he open and read it by his bed-candle. there be
only these few word in her neatly flow hand:--
"I have tell Mrs. Casaubon. she be not under any mistake about you. I
tell she because she come to see I and be very kind. you will have
nothing to reproach I with now. I shall not have make any difference
to you."
the effect of these word be not quite all gladness. as will dwelt on
they with excited imagination, he feel his cheek and ear burn at
the thought of what have occur between Dorothea and Rosamond--at the
uncertainty how far Dorothea might still feel her dignity wound in
have an explanation of his conduct offer to she. there might still
remain in her mind a change association with he which make an
irremediable difference--a last flaw. with active fancy he work
himself into a state of doubt little more easy than that of the man who
have escape from wreck by night and stand on unknown ground in the
darkness. until that wretched yesterday--except the moment of
vexation long ago in the very same room and in the very same
presence--all their vision, all their thought of each other, have be
as in a world apart, where the sunshine fall on tall white lily,
where no evil lurk, and no other soul enter. but now--would
Dorothea meet he in that world again?
CHAPTER LXXXIII.
"and now good-morrow to our wake soul
which watch not one another out of fear;
for love all love of other sight control,
and make one little room, an everywhere."
--DR. DONNE.
on the second morning after Dorothea's visit to Rosamond, she have have
two night of sound sleep, and have not only lose all trace of fatigue,
but feel as if she have a great deal of superfluous strength--that be
to say, more strength than she could manage to concentrate on any
occupation. the day before, she have take long walk outside the
ground, and have pay two visit to the Parsonage; but she never in her
life tell any one the reason why she spend her time in that fruitless
manner, and this morning she be rather angry with herself for her
childish restlessness. to-day be to be spend quite differently. what
be there to be do in the village? oh dear! nothing. everybody be
well and have flannel; nobody's pig have die; and it be Saturday
morning, when there be a general scrubbing of door and door-stone,
and when it be useless to go into the school. but there be various
subject that Dorothea be try to get clear upon, and she resolve
to throw herself energetically into the gravest of all. she sit down
in the library before her particular little heap of book on political
economy and kindre matter, out of which she be try to get light
as to the good way of spend money so as not to injure one's
neighbor, or--what come to the same thing--so as to do they the most
good. here be a weighty subject which, if she could but lay hold of
it, would certainly keep her mind steady. unhappily her mind slip
off it for a whole hour; and at the end she find herself read
sentence twice over with an intense consciousness of many thing, but
not of any one thing contain in the text. this be hopeless. should
she order the carriage and drive to Tipton? no; for some reason or
other she prefer stay at Lowick. but her vagrant mind must be
reduce to order: there be an art in self-discipline; and she walk
round and round the brown library consider by what sort of manoeuvre
she could arrest her wander thought. perhaps a mere task be the
good mean--something to which she must go doggedly. be there not the
geography of Asia Minor, in which her slackness have often be rebuke
by Mr. Casaubon? she go to the cabinet of map and unroll one:
this morning she might make herself finally sure that Paphlagonia be
not on the Levantine coast, and fix her total darkness about the
Chalybes firmly on the shore of the Euxine. a map be a fine thing to
study when you be disposed to think of something else, be make up
of name that would turn into a chime if you go back upon they.
Dorothea set earnestly to work, bend close to her map, and utter
the name in an audible, subdued tone, which often get into a chime.
she look amusingly girlish after all her deep experience--nod
her head and mark the name off on her finger, with a little
pursing of her lip, and now and then break off to put her hand on
each side of her face and say, "oh dear! oh dear!"
there be no reason why this should end any more than a merry-go-round;
but it be at last interrupt by the opening of the door and the
announcement of Miss Noble.
the little old lady, whose bonnet hardly reach Dorothea's shoulder,
be warmly welcome, but while her hand be be press she make many
of her beaver-like noise, as if she have something difficult to say.
"do sit down," say Dorothea, roll a chair forward. "be I want
for anything? I shall be so glad if I can do anything."
"I will not stay," say Miss Noble, put her hand into her small
basket, and hold some article inside it nervously; "I have leave a
friend in the churchyard." she lapse into her inarticulate sound,
and unconsciously draw forth the article which she be finger. it
be the tortoise-shell lozenge-box, and Dorothea feel the color
mount to her cheek.
"Mr. Ladislaw," continue the timid little woman. "he fear he have
offend you, and have beg I to ask if you will see he for a few
minute."
Dorothea do not answer on the instant: it be cross her mind that
she could not receive he in this library, where her husband's
prohibition seem to dwell. she look towards the window. could she
go out and meet he in the ground? the sky be heavy, and the tree
have begin to shiver as at a come storm. besides, she shrink from
go out to he.
"do see he, Mrs. Casaubon," say Miss Noble, pathetically; "else I
must go back and say no, and that will hurt he."
"yes, I will see he," say Dorothea. "pray tell he to come."
what else be there to be do? there be nothing that she long for
at that moment except to see will: the possibility of see he have
thrust itself insistently between she and every other object; and yet
she have a throb excitement like an alarm upon she--a sense that
she be do something daringly defiant for his sake.
when the little lady have trot away on her mission, Dorothea stand in
the middle of the library with her hand fall clasp before she,
make no attempt to compose herself in an attitude of dignified
unconsciousness. what she be least conscious of just then be her own
body: she be think of what be likely to be in Will's mind, and of
the hard feeling that other have have about he. how could any duty
bind she to hardness? resistance to unjust dispraise have mingle with
her feeling for he from the very first, and now in the rebound of her
heart after her anguish the resistance be strong than ever. "if I
love he too much it be because he have be use so ill:"--there be a
voice within she say this to some imagine audience in the library,
when the door be open, and she see will before she.
she do not move, and he come towards she with more doubt and timidity
in his face than she have ever see before. he be in a state of
uncertainty which make he afraid lest some look or word of his should
condemn he to a new distance from she; and Dorothea be afraid of she
_own_ emotion. she look as if there be a spell upon she, keep
her motionless and hinder she from unclasp her hand, while some
intense, grave yearning be imprison within her eye. see that
she do not put out her hand as usual, will pause a yard from she and
say with embarrassment, "I be so grateful to you for see I."
"I want to see you," say Dorothea, have no other word at command.
it do not occur to she to sit down, and will do not give a cheerful
interpretation to this queenly way of receive he; but he go on to
say what he have make up his mind to say.
"I fear you think I foolish and perhaps wrong for come back so soon.
I have be punish for my impatience. you know--every one know
now--a painful story about my parentage. I know of it before I go
away, and I always mean to tell you of it if--if we ever meet again."
there be a slight movement in Dorothea, and she unclasp her hand,
but immediately fold they over each other.
"but the affair be matter of gossip now," will continue. "I wish
you to know that something connect with it--something which happen
before I go away, help to bring I down here again. at least I
think it excuse my coming. it be the idea of get Bulstrode to
apply some money to a public purpose--some money which he have think
of give I. perhaps it be rather to Bulstrode's credit that he
privately offer I compensation for an old injury: he offer to give
I a good income to make amend; but I suppose you know the
disagreeable story?"
will look doubtfully at Dorothea, but his manner be gather some
of the defiant courage with which he always think of this fact in his
destiny. he add, "you know that it must be altogether painful to I."
"yes--yes--I know," say Dorothea, hastily.
"I do not choose to accept an income from such a source. I be sure
that you would not think well of I if I do so," say will. why
should he mind say anything of that sort to she now? she know that
he have avow his love for she. "I feel that"--he break off,
nevertheless.
"you act as I should have expect you to act," say Dorothea, she
face brighten and her head become a little more erect on its
beautiful stem.
"I do not believe that you would let any circumstance of my birth
create a prejudice in you against I, though it be sure to do so in
other," say will, shake his head backward in his old way, and
look with a grave appeal into her eye.
"if it be a new hardship it would be a new reason for I to cling to
you," say Dorothea, fervidly. "nothing could have change I but--"
her heart be swell, and it be difficult to go on; she make a great
effort over herself to say in a low tremulous voice, "but think that
you be different--not so good as I have believe you to be."
"you be sure to believe I well than I be in everything but one,"
say will, give way to his own feeling in the evidence of her. "I
mean, in my truth to you. when I think you doubt of that, I donot
care about anything that be leave. I think it be all over with I,
and there be nothing to try for--only thing to endure."
"I donot doubt you any long," say Dorothea, put out her hand; a
vague fear for he impel her unutterable affection.
he take her hand and raise it to his lip with something like a sob.
but he stand with his hat and glove in the other hand, and might have
do for the portrait of a Royalist. still it be difficult to loose
the hand, and Dorothea, withdraw it in a confusion that distress
she, look and move away.
"see how dark the cloud have become, and how the tree be toss,"
she say, walk towards the window, yet speak and move with only
a dim sense of what she be do.
will follow she at a little distance, and lean against the tall
back of a leather chair, on which he venture now to lay his hat and
glove, and free himself from the intolerable durance of formality to
which he have be for the first time condemn in Dorothea's presence.
it must be confess that he feel very happy at that moment lean on
the chair. he be not much afraid of anything that she might feel now.
they stand silent, not look at each other, but look at the
evergreen which be be toss, and be show the pale underside
of their leaf against the blackening sky. will never enjoy the
prospect of a storm so much: it deliver he from the necessity of
go away. leaf and little branch be hurl about, and the
thunder be get near. the light be more and more sombre, but
there come a flash of lightning which make they start and look at each
other, and then smile. Dorothea begin to say what she have be
think of.
"that be a wrong thing for you to say, that you would have have nothing
to try for. if we have lose our own chief good, other people's good
would remain, and that be worth try for. some can be happy. I
seem to see that more clearly than ever, when I be the most
wretched. I can hardly think how I could have bear the trouble, if
that feeling have not come to I to make strength."
"you have never feel the sort of misery I feel," say will; "the misery
of know that you must despise I."
"but I have feel bad--it be bad to think ill--" Dorothea have begin
impetuously, but break off.
will color. he have the sense that whatever she say be utter in
the vision of a fatality that keep they apart. he be silent a moment,
and then say passionately--
"we may at least have the comfort of speak to each other without
disguise. since I must go away--since we must always be divide--you
may think of I as one on the brink of the grave."
while he be speak there come a vivid flash of lightning which light
each of they up for the other--and the light seem to be the terror of
a hopeless love. Dorothea dart instantaneously from the window; will
follow she, seize her hand with a spasmodic movement; and so they
stand, with their hand clasp, like two child, look out on the
storm, while the thunder give a tremendous crack and roll above they,
and the rain begin to pour down. then they turn their face towards
each other, with the memory of his last word in they, and they do not
loose each other's hand.
"there be no hope for I," say will. "even if you love I as well as
I love you--even if I be everything to you--I shall most likely
always be very poor: on a sober calculation, one can count on nothing
but a creep lot. it be impossible for we ever to belong to each
other. it be perhaps base of I to have ask for a word from you. I
mean to go away into silence, but I have not be able to do what I
mean."
"donot be sorry," say Dorothea, in her clear tender tone. "I would
rather share all the trouble of our parting."
her lip tremble, and so do his. it be never know which lip be
the first to move towards the other lip; but they kiss tremblingly,
and then they move apart.
the rain be dash against the window-pane as if an angry spirit
be within it, and behind it be the great swoop of the wind; it be
one of those moment in which both the busy and the idle pause with a
certain awe.
Dorothea sit down on the seat near to she, a long low ottoman in the
middle of the room, and with her hand fold over each other on her
lap, look at the drear outer world. will stand still an instant
look at she, then seat himself beside she, and lay his hand on
her, which turn itself upward to be clasp. they sit in that way
without look at each other, until the rain abate and begin to fall
in stillness. each have be full of thought which neither of they
could begin to utter.
but when the rain be quiet, Dorothea turn to look at Will. with
passionate exclamation, as if some torture screw be threaten he,
he start up and say, "it be impossible!"
he go and lean on the back of the chair again, and seem to be
battle with his own anger, while she look towards he sadly.
"it be as fatal as a murder or any other horror that divide people,"
he burst out again; "it be more intolerable--to have our life maim by
petty accident."
"no--don't say that--your life need not be maim," say Dorothea,
gently.
"yes, it must," say will, angrily. "it be cruel of you to speak in
that way--as if there be any comfort. you may see beyond the misery
of it, but I donot. it be unkind--it be throw back my love for you
as if it be a trifle, to speak in that way in the face of the fact.
we can never be marry."
"some time--we might," say Dorothea, in a trembling voice.
"when?" say will, bitterly. "what be the use of counting on any
success of mine? it be a mere toss up whether I shall ever do more
than keep myself decently, unless I choose to sell myself as a mere pen
and a mouthpiece. I can see that clearly enough. I could not offer
myself to any woman, even if she have no luxury to renounce."
there be silence. Dorothea's heart be full of something that she
want to say, and yet the word be too difficult. she be wholly
possess by they: at that moment debate be mute within she. and it
be very hard that she could not say what she want to say. will be
look out of the window angrily. if he would have look at she and
not go away from her side, she think everything would have be
easy. at last he turn, still rest against the chair, and
stretch his hand automatically towards his hat, say with a sort of
exasperation, "good-by."
"oh, I cannot bear it--my heart will break," say Dorothea, start
from her seat, the flood of her young passion bear down all the
obstruction which have keep she silent--the great tear rise and
fall in an instant: "I donot mind about poverty--I hate my wealth."
in an instant will be close to she and have his arm round she, but she
draw her head back and hold his away gently that she might go on
speaking, her large tear-fill eye look at his very simply, while
she say in a sob childlike way, "we could live quite well on my
own fortune--it be too much--seven hundred a-year--I want so little--no
new clothe--and I will learn what everything cost."
CHAPTER LXXXIV.
"though it be songe of old and yonge,
that I sholde be to blame,
Theyrs be the charge, that speak so large
in hurtynge of my name."
--the not-Browne Mayde.
it be just after the Lords have throw out the Reform Bill: that
explain how Mr. Cadwallader come to be walk on the slope of the
lawn near the great conservatory at Freshitt Hall, hold the "Times"
in his hand behind he, while he talk with a trout-fisher's
dispassionateness about the prospect of the country to Sir James
Chettam. Mrs. Cadwallader, the Dowager Lady Chettam, and Celia be
sometimes seat on garden-chair, sometimes walk to meet little
Arthur, who be be draw in his chariot, and, as become the
infantine Bouddha, be shelter by his sacred umbrella with handsome
silken fringe.
the lady also talk politic, though more fitfully. Mrs.
Cadwallader be strong on the intended creation of peer: she have it
for certain from her cousin that Truberry have go over to the other
side entirely at the instigation of his wife, who have scented peerage
in the air from the very first introduction of the Reform question, and
would sign her soul away to take precedence of her young sister, who
have marry a baronet. Lady Chettam think that such conduct be very
reprehensible, and remember that Mrs. Truberry's mother be a Miss
Walsingham of Melspring. Celia confess it be nice to be "Lady"
than "Mrs.," and that Dodo never minded about precedence if she could
have her own way. Mrs. Cadwallader hold that it be a poor
satisfaction to take precedence when everybody about you know that you
have not a drop of good blood in your vein; and Celia again, stop
to look at Arthur, say, "it would be very nice, though, if he be a
Viscount--and his lordship's little tooth come through! he might
have be, if James have be an Earl."
"my dear Celia," say the Dowager, "James's title be worth far more
than any new earldom. I never wish his father to be anything else
than Sir James."
"oh, I only mean about Arthur's little tooth," say Celia,
comfortably. "but see, here be my uncle come."
she trip off to meet her uncle, while Sir James and Mr. Cadwallader
come forward to make one group with the lady. Celia have slip her
arm through her uncle's, and he pat her hand with a rather
melancholy "well, my dear!" as they approach, it be evident that
Mr. Brooke be look deject, but this be fully account for by
the state of politic; and as he be shake hand all round without
more greeting than a "well, yoube all here, you know," the Rector
say, laughingly--
"donot take the throwing out of the Bill so much to heart, Brooke;
youhave get all the riff-raff of the country on your side."
"the Bill, eh? ah!" say Mr. Brooke, with a mild distractedness of
manner. "throw out, you know, eh? the Lords be go too far,
though. theywill have to pull up. sad news, you know. I mean, here at
home--sad news. but you must not blame I, Chettam."
"what be the matter?" say Sir James. "not another gamekeeper shot, I
hope? itbe what I should expect, when a fellow like trap Bass be
let off so easily."
"Gamekeeper? no. let we go in; I can tell you all in the house, you
know," say Mr. Brooke, nod at the Cadwalladers, to show that he
include they in his confidence. "as to poacher like Trapping Bass,
you know, Chettam," he continue, as they be enter, "when you be
a magistrate, youwill not find it so easy to commit. severity be all
very well, but itbe a great deal easy when youhave get somebody to do
it for you. you have a soft place in your heart yourself, you
know--you're not a Draco, a Jeffreys, that sort of thing."
Mr. Brooke be evidently in a state of nervous perturbation. when he
have something painful to tell, it be usually his way to introduce it
among a number of disjoint particular, as if it be a medicine that
would get a milder flavor by mix. he continue his chat with Sir
James about the poacher until they be all seat, and Mrs.
Cadwallader, impatient of this drivelling, said--
"Ibe die to know the sad news. the gamekeeper be not shoot: that be
settle. what be it, then?"
"well, itbe a very try thing, you know," say Mr. Brooke. "Ibe glad
you and the Rector be here; itbe a family matter--but you will help
we all to bear it, Cadwallader. Ihave get to break it to you, my dear."
here Mr. Brooke look at Celia--"You've no notion what it be, you
know. and, Chettam, it will annoy you uncommonly--but, you see, you
have not be able to hinder it, any more than I have. therebe
something singular in thing: they come round, you know."
"it must be about Dodo," say Celia, who have be use to think of her
sister as the dangerous part of the family machinery. she have seat
herself on a low stool against her husband's knee.
fx
"for God's sake let we hear what it be!" say Sir James.
"well, you know, Chettam, I couldnot help Casaubon's will: it be a
sort of will to make thing bad."
"exactly," say Sir James, hastily. "but _what_ be bad?"
"Dorothea be go to be marry again, you know," say Mr. Brooke,
nod towards Celia, who immediately look up at her husband with a
frightened glance, and put her hand on his knee. Sir James be almost
white with anger, but he do not speak.
"merciful heaven!" say Mrs. Cadwallader. "not to _young_ ladislaw?"
Mr. Brooke nod, say, "yes; to Ladislaw," and then fall into a
prudential silence.
"you see, Humphrey!" say Mrs. Cadwallader, wave her arm towards her
husband. "another time you will admit that I have some foresight; or
rather you will contradict I and be just as blind as ever. _you_
suppose that the young gentleman be go out of the country."
"so he might be, and yet come back," say the Rector, quietly
"when do you learn this?" say Sir James, not like to hear any one
else speak, though find it difficult to speak himself.
"yesterday," say Mr. Brooke, meekly. "I go to Lowick. Dorothea
send for I, you know. it have come about quite suddenly--neither of
they have any idea two day ago--not any idea, you know. therebe
something singular in thing. but Dorothea be quite determined--it be
no use oppose. I put it strongly to she. I do my duty, Chettam.
but she can act as she like, you know."
"it would have be well if I have call he out and shoot he a year
ago," say Sir James, not from bloody-mindedness, but because he need
something strong to say.
"really, James, that would have be very disagreeable," say Celia.
"be reasonable, Chettam. look at the affair more quietly," say Mr.
Cadwallader, sorry to see his good-natured friend so overmaster by
anger.
"that be not so very easy for a man of any dignity--with any sense of
right--when the affair happen to be in his own family," say Sir
James, still in his white indignation. "it be perfectly scandalous.
if Ladislaw have have a spark of honor he would have go out of the
country at once, and never show his face in it again. however, I be
not surprised. the day after Casaubon's funeral I say what ought to
be do. but I be not listen to."
"you want what be impossible, you know, Chettam," say Mr. Brooke.
"you want he ship off. I tell you Ladislaw be not to be do as
we like with: he have his idea. he be a remarkable fellow--I always
say he be a remarkable fellow."
"yes," say Sir James, unable to repress a retort, "it be rather a pity
you form that high opinion of he. we be indebted to that for his
be lodge in this neighborhood. we be indebted to that for see
a woman like Dorothea degrade herself by marry he." Sir James
make little stoppage between his clause, the word not come easily.
"a man so mark out by her husband's will, that delicacy ought to have
forbid she from see he again--who take she out of her proper
rank--into poverty--have the meanness to accept such a sacrifice--have
always have an objectionable position--a bad origin--and, I _believe_,
be a man of little principle and light character. that be my opinion."
Sir James end emphatically, turn aside and cross his leg.
"I point everything out to she," say Mr. Brooke, apologetically--"i
mean the poverty, and abandon her position. I say, 'my dear, you
donot know what it be to live on seven hundred a-year, and have no
carriage, and that kind of thing, and go amongst people who donot know
who you be.' I put it strongly to she. but I advise you to talk to
Dorothea herself. the fact be, she have a dislike to Casaubon's
property. you will hear what she say, you know."
"no--excuse I--I shall not," say Sir James, with more coolness. "I
cannot bear to see she again; it be too painful. it hurt I too much
that a woman like Dorothea should have do what be wrong."
"be just, Chettam," say the easy, large-lipped Rector, who object to
all this unnecessary discomfort. "Mrs. Casaubon may be act
imprudently: she be give up a fortune for the sake of a man, and we
man have so poor an opinion of each other that we can hardly call a
woman wise who do that. but I think you should not condemn it as a
wrong action, in the strict sense of the word."
"yes, I do," answer Sir James. "I think that Dorothea commit a
wrong action in marry Ladislaw."
"my dear fellow, we be rather apt to consider an act wrong because it
be unpleasant to we," say the Rector, quietly. like many man who take
life easily, he have the knack of say a home truth occasionally to
those who feel themselves virtuously out of temper. Sir James take out
his handkerchief and begin to bite the corner.
"it be very dreadful of Dodo, though," say Celia, wish to justify
her husband. "she say she _never would_ marry again--not anybody at
all."
"I hear she say the same thing myself," say Lady Chettam,
majestically, as if this be royal evidence.
"oh, there be usually a silent exception in such case," say Mrs.
Cadwallader. "the only wonder to I be, that any of you be surprised.
you do nothing to hinder it. if you would have have Lord Triton down
here to woo she with his philanthropy, he might have carry she off
before the year be over. there be no safety in anything else. Mr.
Casaubon have prepare all this as beautifully as possible. he make
himself disagreeable--or it please God to make he so--and then he
dare she to contradict he. itbe the way to make any trumpery
tempting, to ticket it at a high price in that way."
"I donot know what you mean by wrong, Cadwallader," say Sir James,
still feel a little stung, and turn round in his chair towards
the Rector. "hebe not a man we can take into the family. at least, I
must speak for myself," he continue, carefully keep his eye off
Mr. Brooke. "I suppose other will find his society too pleasant to
care about the propriety of the thing."
"well, you know, Chettam," say Mr. Brooke, good-humoredly, nurse his
leg, "I cannot turn my back on Dorothea. I must be a father to she up
to a certain point. I say, 'my dear, I willnot refuse to give you
away.' I have speak strongly before. but I can cut off the entail,
you know. it will cost money and be troublesome; but I can do it, you
know."
Mr. Brooke nod at Sir James, and feel that he be both show his
own force of resolution and propitiate what be just in the Baronet's
vexation. he have hit on a more ingenious mode of parry than he be
aware of. he have touch a motive of which Sir James be ashamed. the
mass of his feeling about Dorothea's marriage to Ladislaw be due
partly to excusable prejudice, or even justifiable opinion, partly to a
jealous repugnance hardly less in Ladislaw's case than in Casaubon's.
he be convince that the marriage be a fatal one for Dorothea. but
amid that mass run a vein of which he be too good and honorable a man
to like the avowal even to himself: it be undeniable that the union of
the two estate--Tipton and Freshitt--lie charmingly within a
ring-fence, be a prospect that flatter he for his son and heir.
hence when Mr. Brooke noddingly appeal to that motive, Sir James feel
a sudden embarrassment; there be a stoppage in his throat; he even
blush. he have find more word than usual in the first jet of his
anger, but Mr. Brooke's propitiation be more clog to his tongue
than Mr. Cadwallader's caustic hint.
but Celia be glad to have room for speech after her uncle's suggestion
of the marriage ceremony, and she say, though with as little eagerness
of manner as if the question have turn on an invitation to dinner, "do
you mean that Dodo be go to be marry directly, uncle?"
"in three week, you know," say Mr. Brooke, helplessly. "I can do
nothing to hinder it, Cadwallader," he add, turn for a little
countenance toward the Rector, who said--
"--I--should not make any fuss about it. if she like to be poor, that
be her affair. nobody would have say anything if she have marry the
young fellow because he be rich. plenty of benefice clergy be
poor than they will be. here be Elinor," continue the provoking
husband; "she vex her friend by I: I have hardly a thousand
a-year--I be a lout--nobody could see anything in I--my shoe be
not the right cut--all the man wonder how a woman could like I.
upon my word, I must take Ladislaw's part until I hear more harm of
he."
"Humphrey, that be all sophistry, and you know it," say his wife.
"everything be all one--that be the beginning and end with you. as if
you have not be a Cadwallader! do any one suppose that I would have
take such a monster as you by any other name?"
"and a clergyman too," observe Lady Chettam with approbation. "elinor
cannot be say to have descend below her rank. it be difficult to
say what Mr. Ladislaw be, eh, James?"
Sir James give a small grunt, which be less respectful than his usual
mode of answer his mother. Celia look up at he like a thoughtful
kitten.
"it must be admit that his blood be a frightful mixture!" say Mrs.
Cadwallader. "the Casaubon cuttle-fish fluid to begin with, and then a
rebellious polish fiddler or dancing-master, be it?--and then an old
clo--"
"Nonsense, Elinor," say the Rector, rise. "it be time for we to go."
"after all, he be a pretty sprig," say Mrs. Cadwallader, rise too,
and wish to make amend. "he be like the fine old Crichley
portrait before the idiot come in."
"Iwill go with you," say Mr. Brooke, start up with alacrity. "you
must all come and dine with I to-morrow, you know--eh, Celia, my dear?"
"you will, James--won't you?" say Celia, take her husband's hand.
"oh, of course, if you like," say Sir James, pull down his
waistcoat, but unable yet to adjust his face good-humoredly. "that be
to say, if it be not to meet anybody else.':
"no, no, no," say Mr. Brooke, understand the condition. "Dorothea
would not come, you know, unless you have be to see she."
when Sir James and Celia be alone, she say, "do you mind about my
have the carriage to go to, Lowick, James?"
"what, now, directly?" he answer, with some surprise.
"yes, it be very important," say Celia.
"remember, Celia, I cannot see she," say Sir James.
"not if she give up marry?"
"what be the use of say that?--however, Ibe go to the stable.
Iwill tell Briggs to bring the carriage round."
Celia think it be of great use, if not to say that, at least to take
a journey to Lowick in order to influence Dorothea's mind. all through
their girlhood she have feel that she could act on her sister by a word
judiciously place--by open a little window for the daylight of her
own understanding to enter among the strange colored lamp by which
Dodo habitually see. and Celia the matron naturally feel more able to
advise her childless sister. how could any one understand Dodo so well
as Celia do or love she so tenderly?
Dorothea, busy in her boudoir, feel a glow of pleasure at the sight of
her sister so soon after the revelation of her intended marriage. she
have prefigure to herself, even with exaggeration, the disgust of her
friend, and she have even fear that Celia might be keep aloof from
she.
"o Kitty, I be delighted to see you!" say Dorothea, put her hand
on Celia's shoulder, and beam on she. "I almost think you would
not come to I."
"I have not bring Arthur, because I be in a hurry," say Celia, and
they sit down on two small chair opposite each other, with their knee
touching.
"you know, Dodo, it be very bad," say Celia, in her placid guttural,
look as prettily free from humor as possible. "you have
disappoint we all so. and I cannot think that it ever _will_ be--you
never can go and live in that way. and then there be all your plan!
you never can have think of that. James would have take any trouble
for you, and you might have go on all your life do what you like."
"on the contrary, dear," say Dorothea, "I never could do anything that
I like. I have never carry out any plan yet."
"because you always want thing that wouldnot do. but other plan
would have come. and how can you marry Mr. Ladislaw, that we none of
we ever think you _could_ marry? it shock James so dreadfully. and
then it be all so different from what you have always be. you would
have Mr. Casaubon because he have such a great soul, and be so and
dismal and learn; and now, to think of marry Mr. Ladislaw, who have
get no estate or anything. I suppose it be because you must be make
yourself uncomfortable in some way or other."
Dorothea laugh.
"well, it be very serious, Dodo," say Celia, become more impressive.
"how will you live? and you will go away among queer people. and I
shall never see you--and you willnot mind about little Arthur--and I
think you always would--"
Celia's rare tear have get into her eye, and the corner of her mouth
be agitate.
"Dear Celia," say Dorothea, with tender gravity, "if you donot ever
see I, it will not be my fault."
"yes, it will," say Celia, with the same touching distortion of her
small feature. "how can I come to you or have you with I when James
cannot bear it?--that be because he think it be not right--he think
you be so wrong, Dodo. but you always be wrong: only I cannot help
love you. and nobody can think where you will live: where can you
go?"
"I be go to London," say Dorothea.
"how can you always live in a street? and you will be so poor. I
could give you half my thing, only how can I, when I never see you?"
"bless you, Kitty," say Dorothea, with gentle warmth. "take comfort:
perhaps James will forgive I some time."
"but it would be much well if you would not be marry," say Celia,
dry her eye, and return to her argument; "then there would be
nothing uncomfortable. and you would not do what nobody think you
could do. James always say you ought to be a queen; but this be not
at all be like a queen. you know what mistake you have always be
make, Dodo, and this be another. nobody think Mr. Ladislaw a proper
husband for you. and you _say you_ would never be marry again."
"it be quite true that I might be a wise person, Celia," say
Dorothea, "and that I might have do something well, if I have be
well. but this be what I be go to do. I have promise to marry
Mr. Ladislaw; and I be go to marry he."
the tone in which Dorothea say this be a note that Celia have long
learn to recognize. she be silent a few moment, and then say, as
if she have dismiss all contest, "be he very fond of you, Dodo?"
"I hope so. I be very fond of he."
"that be nice," say Celia, comfortably. "only I rather you have such a
sort of husband as James be, with a place very near, that I could drive
to."
Dorothea smile, and Celia look rather meditative. presently she
say, "I cannot think how it all come about." Celia think it would be
pleasant to hear the story.
"I dare say not," say-Dorothea, pinch her sister's chin. "if you
know how it come about, it would not seem wonderful to you."
"cannot you tell I?" say Celia, settle her arm cozily.
"no, dear, you would have to feel with I, else you would never know."
CHAPTER LIXXV.
"then go the jury out whose name be Mr. Blindman, Mr.
no-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr.
Heady, Mr. high-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr.
Hate-light, Mr. Implacable, who every one give in his
private verdict against he among themselves, and afterwards
unanimously conclude to bring he in guilty before the
judge. and first among themselves, Mr. Blindman, the
foreman, say, I see clearly that this man be a heretic.
then say Mr. no-good, away with such a fellow from the
earth! ay, say Mr. Malice, for I hate the very look of he.
then say Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure he. nor I,
say Mr. Live-loose; for he would be always condemn my
way. hang he, hang he, say Mr. Heady. a sorry scrub, say
Mr. high-mind. my heart riseth against he, say Mr. Enmity.
he be a rogue, say Mr. Liar. hanging be too good for he,
say Mr. Cruelty. let we despatch he out of the way say
Mr. Hate-light. then say Mr. Implacable, might I have all
the world give I, I could not be reconcile to he;
therefore let we forthwith bring he in guilty of death."
--Pilgrim's Progress.
when immortal Bunyan make his picture of the persecuting passion
bring in their verdict of guilty, who pity faithful? that be a
rare and blessed lot which some great man have not attain, to know
ourselves guiltless before a condemn crowd--to be sure that what we
be denounce for be solely the good in we. the pitiable lot be that
of the man who could not call himself a martyr even though he be to
persuade himself that the man who stone he be but ugly passion
incarnate--who know that he be stone, not for profess the right,
but for not be the man he profess to be.
this be the consciousness that Bulstrode be wither under while he
make his preparation for depart from Middlemarch, and go to end
his stricken life in that sad refuge, the indifference of new face.
the duteous merciful constancy of his wife have deliver he from one
dread, but it could not hinder her presence from be still a tribunal
before which he shrink from confession and desire advocacy. his
equivocation with himself about the death of Raffles have sustain the
conception of an omniscience whom he pray to, yet he have a terror
upon he which would not let he expose they to judgment by a full
confession to his wife: the act which he have wash and dilute with
inward argument and motive, and for which it seem comparatively easy
to win invisible pardon--what name would she call they by? that she
should ever silently call his act murder be what he could not bear.
he feel shroud by her doubt: he get strength to face she from the
sense that she could not yet feel warrant in pronounce that bad
condemnation on he. some time, perhaps--when he be die--he would
tell she all: in the deep shadow of that time, when she hold his hand
in the gathering darkness, she might listen without recoil from his
touch. perhaps: but concealment have be the habit of his life, and
the impulse to confession have no power against the dread of a deep
humiliation.
he be full of timid care for his wife, not only because he deprecate
any harshness of judgment from she, but because he feel a deep distress
at the sight of her suffering. she have send her daughter away to
board at a school on the coast, that this crisis might be hide from
they as far as possible. Set free by their absence from the
intolerable necessity of account for her grief or of behold their
frightened wonder, she could live unconstrainedly with the sorrow that
be every day streak her hair with whiteness and make her eyelid
languid.
"tell I anything that you would like to have I do, Harriet,"
Bulstrode have say to she; "I mean with regard to arrangement of
property. it be my intention not to sell the land I possess in this
neighborhood, but to leave it to you as a safe provision. if you have
any wish on such subject, do not conceal it from I."
a few day afterwards, when she have return from a visit to her
brother's, she begin to speak to her husband on a subject which have for
some time be in her mind.
"I _should_ like to do something for my brother's family, Nicholas; and
I think we be bind to make some amend to Rosamond and her husband.
Walter say Mr. Lydgate must leave the town, and his practice be almost
good for nothing, and they have very little leave to settle anywhere
with. I would rather do without something for ourselves, to make some
amend to my poor brother's family."
Mrs. Bulstrode do not wish to go near to the fact than in the
phrase "make some amend;" know that her husband must understand
she. he have a particular reason, which she be not aware of, for
wince under her suggestion. he hesitate before he said--
"it be not possible to carry out your wish in the way you propose, my
dear. Mr. Lydgate have virtually reject any further service from I.
he have return the thousand pound which I lend he. Mrs. Casaubon
advance he the sum for that purpose. here be his letter."
the letter seem to cut Mrs. Bulstrode severely. the mention of Mrs.
Casaubon's loan seem a reflection of that public feeling which hold
it a matter of course that every one would avoid a connection with her
husband. she be silent for some time; and the tear fall one after
the other, her chin trembling as she wipe they away. Bulstrode,
sit opposite to she, ache at the sight of that grief-wear face,
which two month before have be bright and blooming. it have age to
keep sad company with his own withered feature. urge into some
effort at comfort she, he said--
"there be another mean, Harriet, by which I might do a service to your
brother's family, if you like to act in it. and it would, I think, be
beneficial to you: it would be an advantageous way of manage the land
which I mean to be yours."
she look attentive.
"Garth once think of undertake the management of Stone Court in
order to place your nephew Fred there. the stock be to remain as it
be, and they be to pay a certain share of the profit instead of an
ordinary rent. that would be a desirable beginning for the young man,
in conjunction with his employment under Garth. would it be a
satisfaction to you?"
"yes, it would," say Mrs. Bulstrode, with some return of energy.
"Poor Walter be so cast down; I would try anything in my power to do
he some good before I go away. we have always be brother and
sister."
"you must make the proposal to Garth yourself, Harriet," say Mr.
Bulstrode, not like what he have to say, but desire the end he have
in view, for other reason besides the consolation of his wife. "you
must state to he that the land be virtually your, and that he need
have no transaction with I. communication can be make through
Standish. I mention this, because Garth give up be my agent. I can
put into your hand a paper which he himself draw up, state
condition; and you can propose his renew acceptance of they. I
think it be not unlikely that he will accept when you propose the thing
for the sake of your nephew."
CHAPTER LXXXVI.
"Le coeur se sature d'amour comme d'un sel divin qui le
conserve; de la l'incorruptible adherence de ceux qui se
sont aim des l'aube de la vie, et la fraicheur des vielle
amour prolonge. Il existe un embaumement d'amour. C'est de
Daphnis et Chloe que sont fait Philemon et Baucis. Cette
vieillesse la, ressemblance du soir avec l'aurore."
--VICTOR HUGO: l'homme qui rit.
Mrs. Garth, hear Caleb enter the passage about tea-time, open the
parlor-door and say, "there you be, Caleb. have you have your
dinner?" (Mr. Garth's meal be much subordinate to "business.")
"oh yes, a good dinner--cold mutton and I donot know what. where be
Mary?"
"in the garden with Letty, I think."
"Fred be not come yet?"
"no. be you go out again without take tea, Caleb?" say Mrs.
Garth, see that her absent-minded husband be put on again the
hat which he have just take off.
"no, no; Ibe only go to Mary a minute."
Mary be in a grassy corner of the garden, where there be a swing
loftily hang between two pear-tree. she have a pink kerchief tie over
her head, make a little poke to shade her eye from the level
sunbeam, while she be give a glorious swing to Letty, who laugh
and scream wildly.
see her father, Mary leave the swing and go to meet he, push
back the pink kerchief and smile afar off at he with the involuntary
smile of love pleasure.
"I come to look for you, Mary," say Mr. Garth. "let we walk about a
bit."
Mary know quite well that her father have something particular to say:
his eyebrow make their pathetic angle, and there be a tender gravity
in his voice: these thing have be sign to she when she be Letty's
age. she put her arm within his, and they turn by the row of
nut-tree.
"it will be a sad while before you can be marry, Mary," say she
father, not look at she, but at the end of the stick which he hold
in his other hand.
"not a sad while, father--I mean to be merry," say Mary, laughingly.
"I have be single and merry for four-and-twenty year and more: I
suppose it will not be quite as long again as that." then, after a
little pause, she say, more gravely, bend her face before her
father's, "if you be content with Fred?"
Caleb screw up his mouth and turn his head aside wisely.
"now, father, you do praise he last Wednesday. you say he have an
uncommon notion of stock, and a good eye for thing."
"do I?" say Caleb, rather slyly.
"yes, I put it all down, and the date, anno Domini, and everything,"
say Mary. "you like thing to be neatly book. and then his
behavior to you, father, be really good; he have a deep respect for you;
and it be impossible to have a well temper than Fred have."
"ay, ay; you want to coax I into think he a fine match."
"no, indeed, father. I donot love he because he be a fine match."
"what for, then?"
"oh, dear, because I have always love he. I should never like
scold any one else so well; and that be a point to be think of in
a husband."
"your mind be quite settle, then, Mary?" say Caleb, return to his
first tone. "therebe no other wish come into it since thing have be
go on as they have be of late?" (Caleb mean a great deal in that
vague phrase;) "because, well late than never. a woman must not
force her heart--she'll do a man no good by that."
"my feeling have not change, father," say Mary, calmly. "I shall be
constant to Fred as long as he be constant to I. I donot think either
of we could spare the other, or like any one else well, however much
we might admire they. it would make too great a difference to we--like
see all the old place alter, and change the name for
everything. we must wait for each other a long while; but Fred know
that."
instead of speak immediately, Caleb stand still and screw his
stick on the grassy walk. then he say, with emotion in his voice,
"well, Ihave get a bit of news. what do you think of Fred go to live
at Stone Court, and manage the land there?"
"how can that ever be, father?" say Mary, wonderingly.
"he would manage it for his aunt Bulstrode. the poor woman have be to
I beg and pray. she want to do the lad good, and it might be
a fine thing for he. with save, he might gradually buy the stock,
and he have a turn for farming."
"oh, Fred would be so happy! it be too good to believe."
"ah, but mind you," say Caleb, turn his head warningly, "I must
take it on _my_ shoulder, and be responsible, and see after
everything; and that will grieve your mother a bit, though she maynot
say so. Fred have need be careful."
"perhaps it be too much, father," say Mary, check in her joy.
"there would be no happiness in bring you any fresh trouble."
"Nay, nay; work be my delight, child, when it donot vex your mother.
and then, if you and Fred get marry," here Caleb's voice shake just
perceptibly, "hewill be steady and saving; and youhave get your mother's
cleverness, and mine too, in a woman's sort of way; and youwill keep he
in order. hewill be come by-and-by, so I want to tell you first,
because I think youwould like to tell _he_ by yourself. after that, I
could talk it well over with he, and we could go into business and the
nature of thing."
"oh, you dear good father!" cry Mary, put her hand round her
father's neck, while he bend his head placidly, willing to be caress.
"I wonder if any other girl think her father the good man in the
world!"
"nonsense, child; youwill think your husband well."
"impossible," say Mary, relapse into her usual tone; "husband be
an inferior class of man, who require keep in order."
when they be enter the house with Letty, who have run to join they,
Mary see Fred at the orchard-gate, and go to meet he.
"what fine clothe you wear, you extravagant youth!" say Mary, as Fred
stand still and raise his hat to she with playful formality. "you be
not learn economy."
"now that be too bad, Mary," say Fred. "just look at the edge of
these coat-cuff! it be only by dint of good brushing that I look
respectable. I be save up three suit--one for a wedding-suit."
"how very droll you will look!--like a gentleman in an old
fashion-book."
"oh no, they will keep two year."
"two year! be reasonable, Fred," say Mary, turn to walk. "donot
encourage flattering expectation."
"why not? one live on they well than on unflattering one. if we
cannot be marry in two year, the truth will be quite bad enough when
it come."
"I have hear a story of a young gentleman who once encourage
flattering expectation, and they do he harm."
"Mary, if youhave get something discouraging to tell I, I shall bolt; I
shall go into the house to Mr. Garth. I be out of spirit. my father
be so cut up--home be not like itself. I cannot bear any more bad news."
"should you call it bad news to be tell that you be to live at Stone
Court, and manage the farm, and be remarkably prudent, and save money
every year till all the stock and furniture be your own, and you be
a distinguished agricultural character, as Mr. Borthrop Trumbull
say--rather stout, I fear, and with the greek and latin sadly
weather-worn?"
"you donot mean anything except nonsense, Mary?" say Fred, color
slightly nevertheless.
"that be what my father have just tell I of as what may happen, and he
never talk nonsense," say Mary, look up at Fred now, while he
grasp her hand as they walk, till it rather hurt she; but she would
not complain.
"oh, I could be a tremendously good fellow then, Mary, and we could be
marry directly."
"not so fast, sir; how do you know that I would not rather defer our
marriage for some year? that would leave you time to misbehave, and
then if I like some one else well, I should have an excuse for
jilt you."
"pray donot joke, Mary," say Fred, with strong feeling. "tell I
seriously that all this be true, and that you be happy because of
it--because you love I well."
"it be all true, Fred, and I be happy because of it--because I love you
well," say Mary, in a tone of obedient recitation.
they linger on the door-step under the steep-roofed porch, and Fred
almost in a whisper said--
"when we be first engage, with the umbrella-ring, Mary, you use
to--"
the spirit of joy begin to laugh more decidedly in Mary's eye, but the
fatal Ben come run to the door with Brownie yap behind he,
and, bounce against they, said--
"Fred and Mary! be you ever come in?--or may I eat your cake?"
FINALE.
every limit be a beginning as well as an ending. who can quit young
life after be long in company with they, and not desire to know
what befell they in their after-year? for the fragment of a life,
however typical, be not the sample of an even web: promise may not be
keep, and an ardent outset may be follow by declension; latent power
may find their long-wait opportunity; a past error may urge a grand
retrieval.
marriage, which have be the bourne of so many narrative, be still a
great beginning, as it be to Adam and Eve, who keep their honeymoon in
Eden, but have their first little one among the thorn and thistle of
the wilderness. it be still the beginning of the home epic--the
gradual conquest or irremediable loss of that complete union which
make the advance year a climax, and age the harvest of sweet
memory in common.
some set out, like Crusaders of old, with a glorious equipment of hope
and enthusiasm and get break by the way, want patience with each
other and the world.
all who have care for Fred Vincy and Mary Garth will like to know that
these two make no such failure, but achieve a solid mutual happiness.
Fred surprise his neighbor in various way. he become rather
distinguish in his side of the county as a theoretic and practical
farmer, and produce a work on the "Cultivation of Green Crops and the
Economy of Cattle-Feeding" which win he high congratulation at
agricultural meeting. in Middlemarch admiration be more reserved:
most person there be inclined to believe that the merit of Fred's
authorship be due to his wife, since they have never expect Fred
Vincy to write on turnip and mangel-wurzel.
but when Mary write a little book for her boy, call "story of
Great Men, take from Plutarch," and have it print and publish by
Gripp & Co., Middlemarch, every one in the town be willing to give the
credit of this work to Fred, observe that he have be to the
University, "where the ancient be study," and might have be a
clergyman if he have choose.
in this way it be make clear that Middlemarch have never be deceive,
and that there be no need to praise anybody for write a book, since
it be always do by somebody else.
moreover, Fred remain unswervingly steady. some year after his
marriage he tell Mary that his happiness be half owe to Farebrother,
who give he a strong pull-up at the right moment. I cannot say that
he be never again mislead by his hopefulness: the yield of crop or the
profit of a cattle sale usually fall below his estimate; and he be
always prone to believe that he could make money by the purchase of a
horse which turn out badly--though this, Mary observe, be of
course the fault of the horse, not of Fred's judgment. he keep his
love of horsemanship, but he rarely allow himself a day's hunting;
and when he do so, it be remarkable that he submit to be laugh
at for cowardliness at the fence, seem to see Mary and the boy
sit on the five-bar gate, or show their curly head between
hedge and ditch.
there be three boy: Mary be not discontent that she bring forth
man-child only; and when Fred wish to have a girl like she, she
say, laughingly, "that would be too great a trial to your mother."
Mrs. Vincy in her decline year, and in the diminished lustre of her
housekeeping, be much comfort by her perception that two at least of
Fred's boy be real Vincys, and do not "feature the Garths." but
Mary secretly rejoice that the young of the three be very much
what her father must have be when he wear a round jacket, and show
a marvellous nicety of aim in play at marble, or in throw stone
to bring down the mellow pear.
Ben and Letty Garth, who be uncle and aunt before they be well in
their teen, dispute much as to whether nephew or niece be more
desirable; Ben contend that it be clear girl be good for less
than boy, else they would not be always in petticoat, which show
how little they be mean for; whereupon Letty, who argue much from
book, get angry in reply that God make coat of skin for both Adam
and Eve alike--also it occur to she that in the East the man too
wear petticoat. but this latter argument, obscure the majesty of
the former, be one too many, for Ben answer contemptuously, "the
more spooney they!" and immediately appeal to his mother whether
boy be not well than girl. Mrs. Garth pronounce that both be
alike naughty, but that boy be undoubtedly strong, could run
fast, and throw with more precision to a great distance. with this
oracular sentence Ben be well satisfied, not mind the naughtiness;
but Letty take it ill, her feeling of superiority be strong than
her muscle.
Fred never become rich--his hopefulness have not lead he to expect that;
but he gradually save enough to become owner of the stock and
furniture at Stone Court, and the work which Mr. Garth put into his
hand carry he in plenty through those "bad time" which be always
present with farmer. Mary, in her matronly day, become as solid in
figure as her mother; but, unlike she, give the boy little formal
teaching, so that Mrs. Garth be alarmed lest they should never be well
ground in grammar and geography. nevertheless, they be find quite
forward enough when they go to school; perhaps, because they have
like nothing so well as be with their mother. when Fred be rid
home on winter evening he have a pleasant vision beforehand of the
bright hearth in the wainscoted parlor, and be sorry for other man who
could not have Mary for their wife; especially for Mr. Farebrother.
"he be ten time worthy of you than I be," Fred could now say to
she, magnanimously. "to be sure he be," Mary answer; "and for that
reason he could do well without I. but you--I shudder to think what
you would have be--a curate in debt for horse-hire and cambric
pocket-handkerchief!"
on inquiry it might possibly be find that Fred and Mary still inhabit
Stone Court--that the creep plant still cast the foam of their
blossom over the fine stone-wall into the field where the walnut-trees
stand in stately row--and that on sunny day the two lover who be
first engage with the umbrella-ring may be see in white-haired
placidity at the open window from which Mary Garth, in the day of old
Peter Featherstone, have often be order to look out for Mr. Lydgate.
lydgate's hair never become white. he die when he be only fifty,
leave his wife and child provide for by a heavy insurance on his
life. he have gain an excellent practice, alternate, accord to
the season, between London and a Continental bathing-place; have
write a treatise on Gout, a disease which have a good deal of wealth
on its side. his skill be rely on by many pay patient, but he
always regard himself as a failure: he have not do what he once
mean to do. his acquaintance think he enviable to have so
charm a wife, and nothing happen to shake their opinion. Rosamond
never commit a second compromise indiscretion. she simply
continue to be mild in her temper, inflexible in her judgment,
dispose to admonish her husband, and able to frustrate he by
stratagem. as the year go on he oppose she less and less, whence
Rosamond conclude that he have learn the value of her opinion; on the
other hand, she have a more thorough conviction of his talent now that
he gain a good income, and instead of the threaten cage in Bride
Street provide one all flower and gilding, fit for the bird of
paradise that she resemble. in brief, Lydgate be what be call a
successful man. but he die prematurely of diphtheria, and Rosamond
afterwards marry an elderly and wealthy physician, who take kindly to
her four child. she make a very pretty show with her daughter,
drive out in her carriage, and often speak of her happiness as "a
reward"--she do not say for what, but probably she mean that it be a
reward for her patience with Tertius, whose temper never become
faultless, and to the last occasionally let slip a bitter speech which
be more memorable than the sign he make of his repentance. he once
call she his basil plant; and when she ask for an explanation, say
that basil be a plant which have flourish wonderfully on a murder
man's brain. Rosamond have a placid but strong answer to such
speech. why then have he choose she? it be a pity he have not have
Mrs. Ladislaw, whom he be always praise and place above she. and
thus the conversation end with the advantage on Rosamond's side. but
it would be unjust not to tell, that she never utter a word in
depreciation of Dorothea, keep in religious remembrance the
generosity which have come to her aid in the sharp crisis of her life.
Dorothea herself have no dream of be praise above other woman,
feel that there be always something well which she might have
do, if she have only be well and know well. still, she never
repent that she have give up position and fortune to marry will
Ladislaw, and he would have hold it the great shame as well as
sorrow to he if she have repent. they be bind to each other by a
love strong than any impulse which could have mar it. no life
would have be possible to Dorothea which be not fill with emotion,
and she have now a life fill also with a beneficent activity which she
have not the doubtful pain of discover and mark out for herself.
will become an ardent public man, work well in those time when
reform be begin with a young hopefulness of immediate good which have
be much check in our day, and get at last return to
Parliament by a constituency who pay his expense. Dorothea could
have like nothing well, since wrong exist, than that her husband
should be in the thick of a struggle against they, and that she should
give he wifely help. many who know she, think it a pity that so
substantive and rare a creature should have be absorb into the life
of another, and be only know in a certain circle as a wife and mother.
but no one state exactly what else that be in her power she ought
rather to have do--not even Sir James Chettam, who go no far
than the negative prescription that she ought not to have marry Will
Ladislaw.
but this opinion of his do not cause a lasting alienation; and the way
in which the family be make whole again be characteristic of all
concern. Mr. Brooke could not resist the pleasure of correspond
with Will and Dorothea; and one morning when his pen have be
remarkably fluent on the prospect of Municipal Reform, it run off into
an invitation to the Grange, which, once write, could not be do
away with at less cost than the sacrifice (hardly to be conceive) of
the whole valuable letter. during the month of this correspondence
Mr. Brooke have continually, in his talk with Sir James Chettam, be
presuppose or hint that the intention of cut off the entail
be still maintain; and the day on which his pen give the daring
invitation, he go to Freshitt expressly to intimate that he have a
strong sense than ever of the reason for take that energetic step
as a precaution against any mixture of low blood in the heir of the
Brookes.
but that morning something exciting have happen at the Hall. a letter
have come to Celia which make her cry silently as she read it; and when
Sir James, unused to see she in tear, ask anxiously what be the
matter, she burst out in a wail such as he have never hear from she
before.
"Dorothea have a little boy. and you will not let I go and see she.
and I be sure she want to see I. and she will not know what to do
with the baby--she will do wrong thing with it. and they think she
would die. it be very dreadful! suppose it have be I and little
Arthur, and Dodo have be hinder from come to see I! I wish you
would be less unkind, James!"
"good heaven, Celia!" say Sir James, much work upon, "what do you
wish? I will do anything you like. I will take you to town to-morrow
if you wish it." and Celia do wish it.
it be after this that Mr. Brooke come, and meet the Baronet in the
ground, begin to chat with he in ignorance of the news, which Sir
James for some reason do not care to tell he immediately. but when
the entail be touch on in the usual way, he say, "my dear sir, it
be not for I to dictate to you, but for my part I would let that
alone. I would let thing remain as they be."
Mr. Brooke feel so much surprised that he do not at once find out how
much he be relieve by the sense that he be not expect to do
anything in particular.
such be the bent of Celia's heart, it be inevitable that Sir James
should consent to a reconciliation with Dorothea and her husband.
where woman love each other, man learn to smother their mutual dislike.
Sir James never like Ladislaw, and will always prefer to have Sir
James's company mix with another kind: they be on a footing of
reciprocal tolerance which be make quite easy only when Dorothea and
Celia be present.
it become an understand thing that Mr. and Mrs. Ladislaw should pay at
least two visit during the year to the Grange, and there come
gradually a small row of cousin at Freshitt who enjoy play with
the two cousin visit Tipton as much as if the blood of these
cousin have be less dubiously mixed.
Mr. Brooke live to a good old age, and his estate be inherit by
Dorothea's son, who might have represent Middlemarch, but decline,
think that his opinion have less chance of be stifle if he
remain out of door.
Sir James never cease to regard Dorothea's second marriage as a
mistake; and indeed this remain the tradition concern it in
Middlemarch, where she be speak of to a young generation as a fine
girl who marry a sickly clergyman, old enough to be her father, and
in little more than a year after his death give up her estate to marry
his cousin--young enough to have be his son, with no property, and
not well-bear. those who have not see anything of Dorothea usually
observe that she could not have be "a nice woman," else she would
not have marry either the one or the other.
certainly those determine act of her life be not ideally
beautiful. they be the mixed result of young and noble impulse
struggle amidst the condition of an imperfect social state, in which
great feeling will often take the aspect of error, and great faith the
aspect of illusion. for there be no creature whose inward be be so
strong that it be not greatly determine by what lie outside it. a
new Theresa will hardly have the opportunity of reform a conventual
life, any more than a new Antigone will spend her heroic piety in
dare all for the sake of a brother's burial: the medium in which
their ardent deed take shape be forever go. but we insignificant
people with our daily word and act be prepare the life of many
dorothea, some of which may present a far sad sacrifice than that
of the Dorothea whose story we know.
she finely touch spirit have still its fine issue, though they be
not widely visible. her full nature, like that river of which Cyrus
break the strength, spend itself in channel which have no great name on
the earth. but the effect of she be on those around she be
incalculably diffusive: for the grow good of the world be partly
dependent on unhistoric act; and that thing be not so ill with you
and I as they might have be, be half owe to the number who live
faithfully a hidden life, and rest in unvisited tomb.
