the Mill on the Floss
George Eliot
Table of Contents
Book I: boy and girl
1. outside Dorlcote Mill
2. Mr. Tulliver, of Dorlcote Mill, declare his Resolution about Tom
3. Mr. Riley give his advice concern a School for Tom
4. Tom be expect
5. Tom come home
6. the Aunts and Uncles be come
7. enter the Aunts and Uncles
8. Mr. Tulliver show his weak side
9. to Garum Firs
10. Maggie behave worse than she expect
11. Maggie try to run away from her Shadow
12. Mr. and Mrs. Glegg at Home
13. Mr. Tulliver Further Entangles the Skein of Life
Book II: School-Time
1. Tom's "First half"
2. the Christmas Holidays
3. the New Schoolfellow
4. "the Young Idea"
5. Maggie's Second Visit
6. a Love-scene
7. the Golden Gates be pass
Book III: the Downfall
1. what have happen at home
2. Mrs. Tulliver's Teraphim, or Household Gods
3. the Family Council
4. a Vanishing Gleam
5. Tom apply his Knife to the Oyster
6. tend to Refute the Popular Prejudice against the Present of a
Pocket-Knife
7. how a hen take to Stratagem
8. daylight on the wreck
9. an Item add to the Family Register
Book IV: the Valley of Humiliation
1. a Variation of Protestantism Unknown to Bossuet
2. the Torn Nest be pierce by the Thorns
3. a Voice from the Past
Book v: Wheat and Tares
1. in the Red Deeps
2. Aunt Glegg learn the Breadth of Bob's Thumb
3. the Wavering Balance
4. another Love-Scene
5. the Cloven Tree
6. the Hard-Won Triumph
7. a day of Reckoning
Book VI: the Great Temptation
1. a Duet in Paradise
2. First impression
3. Confidential Moments
4. brother and Sister
5. show that Tom have open the Oyster
6. illustrate the Laws of Attraction
7. Philip Re-enter
8. Wakem in a New Light
9. charity in full-Dress
10. the Spell seem Broken
11. in the Lane
12. a Family Party
13. Borne along by the Tide
14. wake
Book VII: the Final Rescue
1. the Return to the Mill
2. St. Ogg's Passes Judgment
3. show that Old acquaintance be capable of Surprising Us
4. Maggie and Lucy
5. the last conflict
Book I
_boy and Girl_
chapter I
outside Dorlcote Mill
a wide plain, where the broaden Floss hurry on between its green
bank to the sea, and the love tide, rush to meet it, check its
passage with an impetuous embrace. on this mighty tide the black
ship--laden with the fresh-scented fir-plank, with rounded sack of
oil-bear seed, or with the dark glitter of coal--be bear along to
the town of St. Ogg's, which show its age, flute red roof and the
broad gable of its wharf between the low woode hill and the
river-brink, tinge the water with a soft purple hue under the
transient glance of this February sun. far away on each hand stretch
the rich pasture, and the patch of dark earth make ready for the
seed of broad-leave green crop, or touch already with the tint of
the tender-bladed autumn-sow corn. there be a remnant still of last
year's golden cluster of beehive-rick rise at interval beyond the
hedgerow; and everywhere the hedgerow be stud with tree; the
distant ship seem to be lift their mast and stretch their
red-brown sail close among the branch of the spread ash. just by
the red-roof town the tributary Ripple flow with a lively current
into the Floss. how lovely the little river be, with its dark change
wavelet! it seem to I like a live companion while I wander along
the bank, and listen to its low, placid voice, as to the voice of one
who be deaf and loving. I remember those large dip willow. I
remember the stone bridge.
and this be Dorlcote Mill. I must stand a minute or two here on the
bridge and look at it, though the cloud be threaten, and it be
far on in the afternoon. even in this leafless time of depart
February it be pleasant to look at,--perhaps the chill, damp season
add a charm to the trimly kept, comfortable dwelling-house, as old as
the elm and chestnut that shelter it from the northern blast. the
stream be brimful now, and lie high in this little withy plantation,
and half drown the grassy fringe of the croft in front of the house.
as I look at the full stream, the vivid grass, the delicate
bright-green powder soften the outline of the great trunk and
branch that gleam from under the bare purple bough, I be in love
with moistness, and envy the white duck that be dip their head
far into the water here among the withe, unmindful of the awkward
appearance they make in the dry world above.
the rush of the water and the booming of the mill bring a dreamy
deafness, which seem to heighten the peacefulness of the scene. they
be like a great curtain of sound, shut one out from the world
beyond. and now there be the thunder of the huge cover wagon come
home with sack of grain. that honest wagoner be think of his
dinner, get sadly dry in the oven at this late hour; but he will
not touch it till he have feed his horses,--the strong, submissive,
meek-eyed beast, who, I fancy, be look mild reproach at he from
between their blinker, that he should crack his whip at they in that
awful manner as if they need that hint! see how they stretch their
shoulder up the slope toward the bridge, with all the more energy
because they be so near home. look at their grand shaggy foot that
seem to grasp the firm earth, at the patient strength of their neck,
bow under the heavy collar, at the mighty muscle of their
struggle haunch! I should like well to hear they neigh over their
hardly earn feed of corn, and see they, with their moist neck free
from the harness, dip their eager nostril into the muddy pond.
now they be on the bridge, and down they go again at a swifter pace,
and the arch of the cover wagon disappear at the turning behind the
tree.
now I can turn my eye toward the mill again, and watch the unreste
wheel send out its diamond jet of water. that little girl be
watch it too; she have be stand on just the same spot at the
edge of the water ever since I pause on the bridge. and that queer
white cur with the brown ear seem to be leap and bark in
ineffectual remonstrance with the wheel; perhaps he be jealous because
his playfellow in the beaver bonnet be so rapt in its movement. it be
time the little playfellow go in, I think; and there be a very
bright fire to tempt she: the red light shin out under the deepening
gray of the sky. it be time, too, for I to leave off rest my arm
on the cold stone of this bridge....
ah, my arm be really benumb. I have be press my elbow on the
arm of my chair, and dream that I be stand on the bridge in
front of Dorlcote Mill, as it look one February afternoon many year
ago. before I doze off, I be go to tell you what Mr. and Mrs.
Tulliver be talk about, as they sit by the bright fire in the
leave-hand parlor, on that very afternoon I have be dream of.
Chapter II
Mr. Tulliver, of Dorlcote Mill, declare his Resolution about Tom
"what I want, you know," say Mr. Tulliver,--"what I want be to give
Tom a good eddication; an eddication as'll be a bread to he. that be
what I be think of when I give notice for he to leave the academy
at Lady-day. I mean to put he to a downright good school at
Midsummer. the two year at th' academy 'ud ha' do well enough, if
Ihave mean to make a miller and farmer of he, for hebe have a fine
sight more schoolin' nor _i_ ever get. all the learnin' _my_ father
ever pay for be a bit o' birch at one end and the alphabet at th'
other. but I should like Tom to be a bit of a scholard, so as he might
be up to the trick o' these fellow as talk fine and write with a
flourish. it 'ud be a help to I wi' these lawsuit, and arbitration,
and thing. I wouldnot make a downright lawyer o' the lad,--I should
be sorry for he to be a raskill,--but a sort o' engineer, or a
surveyor, or an auctioneer and vallyer, like Riley, or one o' they
smartish business as be all profit and no outlay, only for a big
watch-chain and a high stool. theybe pretty nigh all one, and theybe
not far off be even wi' the law, _i_ believe; for Riley look
Lawyer Wakem I' the face as hard as one cat look another. _hebe_ none
frighten at he."
Mr. Tulliver be speak to his wife, a blond comely woman in a
fan-shape cap (I be afraid to think how long it be since fan-shape
cap be wear, they must be so near come in again. at that time,
when Mrs. Tulliver be nearly forty, they be new at St. Ogg's, and
consider sweet thing).
"well, Mr. Tulliver, you know well: _Ihave_ no objection. but havenot I
well kill a couple o' fowl, and have th' aunt and uncle to dinner
next week, so as you may hear what sister Glegg and sister Pullet have
get to say about it? therebe a couple o' fowl _want_ kill!"
"you may kill every fowl I' the yard if you like, Bessy; but I shall
ask neither aunt nor uncle what Ibe to do wi' my own lad," say Mr.
Tulliver, defiantly.
"dear heart!" say Mrs. Tulliver, shock at this sanguinary rhetoric,
"how can you talk so, Mr. Tulliver? but itbe your way to speak
disrespectful o' my family; and sister Glegg throw all the blame
upo'me, though Ibe sure Ibe as innocent as the babe unborn. for
nobodybe ever hear I say as it benot lucky for my child to have
aunt and uncle as can live independent. Howiver, if Tombe to go to a
new school, I should like he to go where I can wash he and mend he;
else he might as well have calico as linen, for theywould be one as
yallow as th' other before theyhave be wash half-a-dozen time. and
then, when the box be go back'ard and forrard, I could send the lad
a cake, or a pork-pie, or an apple; for he can do with an extry bit,
bless he! whether they stint he at the meal or no. my child can
eat as much victual as most, thank God!"
"well, well, we willnot send he out o' reach o' the carrier's cart, if
other thing fit in," say Mr. Tulliver. "but you mustnot put a spoke
I' the wheel about the washin,' if we cannot get a school near enough.
thatbe the fault I have to find wi' you, Bessy; if you see a stick I'
the road, yoube allay thinkin' you cannot step over it. youwould want I
not to hire a good wagoner, 'cause hewould got a mole on his face."
"dear heart!" say Mrs. Tulliver, in mild surprise, "when do I iver
make objection to a man because hewould get a mole on his face? Ibe sure
Ibe rether fond o' the mole; for my brother, as be dead an' gone, have
a mole on his brow. but I cannot remember your iver offering to hire a
wagoner with a mole, Mr. Tulliver. there be John Gibbs havenot a mole
on his face no more nor you have, an' I be all for have you hire
_he_; an' so you do hire he, an' if he havenot die o' th'
inflammation, as we pay Dr. Turnbull for attend he, hewould very
like ha' be drivin' the wagon now. he might have a mole somewhere
out o' sight, but how be I to know that, Mr. Tulliver?"
"no, no, Bessy; I donot mean justly the mole; I mean it to stand for
summat else; but niver mind--itbe puzzle work, talk be. what Ibe
think on, be how to find the right sort o' school to send Tom to,
for I might be ta'en in again, as Ihave be wi' th' academy. Iwill have
nothing to do wi' a 'cademy again: whativer school I send Tom to, it
sha'n't be a 'cademy; it shall be a place where the lad spend their
time I' summat else besides black the family's shoe, and get
up the potato. itbe an uncommon puzzle thing to know what school
to pick."
Mr. Tulliver pause a minute or two, and dive with both hand into
his breech pocket as if he hop to find some suggestion there.
apparently he be not disappointed, for he presently say, "I know
what Iwill do: Iwill talk it over wi' Riley; hebe come to-morrow, t'
arbitrate about the dam."
"well, Mr. Tulliver, Ihave put the sheet out for the good bed, and
Kezia's get them hang at the fire. they benot the good sheet, but
theybe good enough for anybody to sleep in, be he who he will; for as
for they good Holland sheet, I should repent buy them, only theywill
do to lay we out in. an' if you be to die to-morrow, Mr. Tulliver,
theybe mangle beautiful, an' all ready, an' smell o' lavender as it
'ud be a pleasure to lay them out; an' they lie at the left-hand corner
o' the big oak linen-chest at the back: not as I should trust anybody
to look them out but myself."
as Mrs. Tulliver utter the last sentence, she draw a bright bunch of
key from her pocket, and single out one, rub her thumb and
finger up and down it with a placid smile while she look at the
clear fire. if Mr. Tulliver have be a susceptible man in his conjugal
relation, he might have suppose that she draw out the key to aid her
imagination in anticipate the moment when he would be in a state to
justify the production of the good Holland sheet. happily he be not
so; he be only susceptible in respect of his right to water-power;
moreover, he have the marital habit of not listen very closely, and
since his mention of Mr. Riley, have be apparently occupy in a
tactile examination of his woollen stocking.
"I think Ihave hit it, Bessy," be his first remark after a short
silence. "Riley's as likely a man as any to know o' some school; hebe
have school himself, an' go about to all sort o' place,
arbitratin' and vallyin' and that. and we shall have time to talk it
over to-morrow night when the business be do. I want Tom to be such
a sort o' man as Riley, you know,--as can talk pretty nigh as well as
if it be all write out for he, and know a good lot o' word as
donot mean much, so as you cannot lay hold of them I' law; and a good
solid knowledge o' business too."
"well," say Mrs. Tulliver, "so far as talk proper, and know
everything, and walk with a bend in his back, and set his hair
up, I shouldnot mind the lad be bring up to that. but they
fine-talk man from the big town mostly wear the false
shirt-front; they wear a frill till itbe all a mess, and then hide it
with a bib; I know Riley do. and then, if Tombe to go and live at
Mudport, like Riley, hewill have a house with a kitchen hardly big
enough to turn in, an' niver get a fresh egg for his breakfast, an'
sleep up three pair o' stairs,--or four, for what I know,--and be
burn to death before he can get down."
"no, no," say Mr. Tulliver, "Ihave no thought of his go to
Mudport: I mean he to set up his office at St. Ogg's, close by we,
an' live at home. but," continue Mr. Tulliver after a pause, "what
Ibe a bit afraid on be, as Tom havenot get the right sort o' brain for
a smart fellow. I doubt hebe a bit slowish. he take after your
family, Bessy."
"yes, that he do," say Mrs. Tulliver, accept the last
proposition entirely on its own merit; "hebe wonderful for like a
deal o' salt in his broth. that be my brother's way, and my father's
before he."
"it seem a bit a pity, though," say Mr. Tulliver, "as the lad should
take after the mother's side instead o' the little wench. thatbe the
bad on't wi' crossing o' breed: you can never justly calkilate
whatwill come on't. the little un take after my side, now: shebe twice
as 'cute as Tom. too 'cute for a woman, Ibe afraid," continue Mr.
Tulliver, turn his head dubiously first on one side and then on the
other. "itbe no mischief much while shebe a little un; but an
over-'cute woman's no well nor a long-tail sheep,--she'll fetch
none the big price for that."
"yes, it _be_ a mischief while shebe a little un, Mr. Tulliver, for it
run to naughtiness. how to keep she in a clean pinafore two hour
together pass my cunning. an' now you put I I' mind," continue
Mrs. Tulliver, rise and go to the window, "I donot know where she
be now, an' itbe pretty nigh tea-time. ah, I think so,--wanderin' up
an' down by the water, like a wild thing: shewill tumble in some day."
Mrs. Tulliver rap the window sharply, beckon, and shake she
head,--a process which she repeat more than once before she return
to her chair.
"you talk o' 'cuteness, Mr. Tulliver," she observe as she sit down,
"but Ibe sure the child's half an idiot I' some thing; for if I send
her upstairs to fetch anything, she forget what shebe go for, an'
perhaps 'ull sit down on the floor I' the sunshine an' plait her hair
an' sing to herself like a Bedlam creatur', all the while Ibe wait
for her downstair. that niver run I' my family, thank God! no more
nor a brown skin as make she look like a mulatter. I donot like to
fly I' the face o' providence, but it seem hard as I should have but
one gell, an' her so comical."
"Pooh, nonsense!" say Mr. Tulliver; "shebe a straight, black-eye
wench as anybody need wish to see. I donot know I' what shebe behind
other folk's child; and she can read almost as well as the
parson."
"but her hair willnot curl all I can do with it, and shebe so franzy
about have it put I' paper, and Ihave such work as never be to make
her stand and have it pinch with th' iron."
"cut it off--cut it off short," say the father, rashly.
"how can you talk so, Mr. Tulliver? shebe too big a gell--go nine,
and tall of her age--to have her hair cut short; an' therebe her
cousin Lucy's get a row o' curl round her head, an' not a hair out o'
place. it seem hard as my sister Deane should have that pretty child;
Ibe sure Lucy take more after I nor my own child do. Maggie,
Maggie," continue the mother, in a tone of half-coax fretfulness,
as this small mistake of nature enter the room, "wherebe the use o'
my tell you to keep away from the water? youwill tumble in and be
drownde some day, an' then youwill be sorry you donot do as mother
tell you."
Maggie's hair, as she throw off her bonnet, painfully confirm she
mother's accusation. Mrs. Tulliver, desire her daughter to have a
curl crop, "like other folk's child," have have it cut too short
in front to be push behind the ear; and as it be usually straight
an hour after it have be take out of paper, Maggie be incessantly
toss her head to keep the dark, heavy lock out of her gleaming
black eyes,--an action which give she very much the air of a small
Shetland pony.
"oh, dear, oh, dear, Maggie, what be you thinkin'of, to throw your
bonnet down there? take it upstairs, therebe a good gell, an' let your
hair be brush, an' put your other pinafore on, an' change your
shoe, do, for shame; an' come an' go on with your patchwork, like a
little lady."
"oh, mother," say Maggie, in a vehemently cross tone, "I donot _want_
to do my patchwork."
"what! not your pretty patchwork, to make a counterpane for your aunt
Glegg?"
"itbe foolish work," say Maggie, with a toss of her mane,--"tearing
thing to piece to sew them together again. and I donot want to do
anything for my aunt Glegg. I donot like she."
Exit Maggie, drag her bonnet by the string, while Mr. Tulliver
laugh audibly.
"I wonder at you, as youwill laugh at she, Mr. Tulliver," say the
mother, with feeble fretfulness in her tone. "you encourage she I'
naughtiness. an' her aunt will have it as itbe I spoil she."
Mrs. Tulliver be what be call a good-temper person,--never cry,
when she be a baby, on any slighter ground than hunger and pin; and
from the cradle upward have be healthy, fair, plump, and dull-witted;
in short, the flower of her family for beauty and amiability. but milk
and mildness be not the good thing for keeping, and when they turn
only a little sour, they may disagree with young stomach seriously. I
have often wonder whether those early Madonnas of Raphael, with the
blond face and somewhat stupid expression, keep their placidity
undisturbed when their strong-limbe, strong-willed boy get a little
too old to do without clothing. I think they must have be give to
feeble remonstrance, get more and more peevish as it become more
and more ineffectual.
Chapter III
Mr. Riley give his advice concern a School for Tom
the gentleman in the ample white cravat and shirt-frill, take his
brandy-and-water so pleasantly with his good friend Tulliver, be Mr.
Riley, a gentleman with a waxen complexion and fat hand, rather
highly educate for an auctioneer and appraiser, but large-hearted
enough to show a great deal of _bonhomie_ toward simple country
acquaintance of hospitable habit. Mr. Riley speak of such
acquaintance kindly as "people of the old school."
the conversation have come to a pause. Mr. Tulliver, not without a
particular reason, have abstain from a seventh recital of the cool
retort by which Riley have show himself too many for Dix, and how
Wakem have have his comb cut for once in his life, now the business of
the dam have be settle by arbitration, and how there never would
have be any dispute at all about the height of water if everybody
be what they should be, and Old Harry havenot make the lawyer.
Mr. Tulliver be, on the whole, a man of safe traditional opinion;
but on one or two point he have trust to his unassisted intellect,
and have arrive at several questionable conclusion; amongst the rest,
that rat, weevil, and lawyer be create by Old Harry. unhappily
he have no one to tell he that this be rampant Manichaeism, else he
might have see his error. but to-day it be clear that the good
principle be triumphant: this affair of the water-power have be a
tangle business somehow, for all it seem--look at it one way--as
plain as water's water; but, big a puzzle as it be, it havenot get the
well of Riley. Mr. Tulliver take his brandy-and-water a little
strong than usual, and, for a man who might be suppose to have a
few hundred lie idle at his banker's, be rather incautiously open
in express his high estimate of his friend's business talent.
but the dam be a subject of conversation that would keep; it could
always be take up again at the same point, and exactly in the same
condition; and there be another subject, as you know, on which Mr.
Tulliver be in press want of Mr. Riley's advice. this be his
particular reason for remain silent for a short space after his
last draught, and rub his knee in a meditative manner. he be not
a man to make an abrupt transition. this be a puzzling world, as he
often say, and if you drive your wagon in a hurry, you may light on
an awkward corner. Mr. Riley, meanwhile, be not impatient. why should
he be? even Hotspur, one would think, must have be patient in his
slipper on a warm hearth, take copious snuff, and sip
gratuitous brandy-and-water.
"therebe a thing Ihave get I' my head," say Mr. Tulliver at last, in
rather a low tone than usual, as he turn his head and look
steadfastly at his companion.
"ah!" say Mr. Riley, in a tone of mild interest. he be a man with
heavy waxen eyelid and high-arched eyebrow, look exactly the same
under all circumstance. this immovability of face, and the habit of
take a pinch of snuff before he give an answer, make he trebly
oracular to Mr. Tulliver.
"itbe a very particular thing," he go on; "itbe about my boy Tom."
at the sound of this name, Maggie, who be seat on a low stool close
by the fire, with a large book open on her lap, shake her heavy hair
back and look up eagerly. there be few sound that rouse Maggie
when she be dream over her book, but Tom's name serve as well as
the shrill whistle; in an instant she be on the watch, with
gleam eye, like a skye terri suspecting mischief, or at all
event determine to fly at any one who threaten it toward Tom.
"you see, I want to put he to a new school at Midsummer," say Mr.
Tulliver; "hebe comin' away from the 'cademy at Lady-day, an' I shall
let he run loose for a quarter; but after that I want to send he to
a downright good school, where theywill make a scholard of he."
"well," say Mr. Riley, "therebe no great advantage you can give he
than a good education. not," he add, with polite significance,--"not
that a man cannot be an excellent miller and farmer, and a shrewd,
sensible fellow into the bargain, without much help from the
schoolmaster."
"I believe you," say Mr. Tulliver, wink, and turn his head on
one side; "but thatbe where it be. I donot _mean_ Tom to be a miller
and farmer. I see no fun I' that. why, if I make he a miller an'
farmer, hewould be expectin' to take to the mill an' the land, an'
a-hinting at I as it be time for I to lay by an' think o' my latter
end. Nay, nay, Ihave see enough o' that wi' son. Iwill never pull my
coat off before I go to bed. I shall give Tom an eddication an' put
he to a business, as he may make a nest for himself, an' not want to
push I out o' mine. pretty well if he get it when Ibe dead an' go.
I sha'n't be put off wi' spoon-meat afore Ihave lose my tooth."
this be evidently a point on which Mr. Tulliver feel strongly; and
the impetus which have give unusual rapidity and emphasis to his
speech show itself still unexhausted for some minute afterward in a
defiant motion of the head from side to side, and an occasional "nay,
nay," like a subside growl.
these angry symptom be keenly observe by Maggie, and cut she to
the quick. Tom, it appear, be suppose capable of turn his
father out of door, and of make the future in some way tragic by
his wickedness. this be not to be bear; and Maggie jump up from
her stool, forget all about her heavy book, which fall with a bang
within the fender, and go up between her father's knee, say, in a
half-cry, half-indignant voice,--
"Father, Tom wouldnot be naughty to you ever; I know he wouldnot."
Mrs. Tulliver be out of the room superintend a choice supper-dish,
and Mr. Tulliver's heart be touch; so Maggie be not scold about
the book. Mr. Riley quietly pick it up and look at it, while the
father laugh, with a certain tenderness in his hard-line face, and
pat his little girl on the back, and then hold her hand and keep
she between his knee.
"what! they mustnot say any harm o' Tom, eh?" say Mr. Tulliver,
look at Maggie with a twinkle eye. then, in a low voice,
turn to Mr. Riley, as though Maggie couldnot hear, "she understand
what onebe talk about so as never be. and you should hear she
read,--straight off, as if she know it all beforehand. and allay at
her book! but itbe bad--itbe bad," Mr. Tulliver add sadly, check
this blamable exultation. "a woman's no business wi' be so clever;
itwill turn to trouble, I doubt. but bless you!"--here the exultation
be clearly recover the mastery,--"she'll read the book and
understand them well nor half the folk as be grow up."
Maggie's cheek begin to flush with triumphant excitement. she think
Mr. Riley would have a respect for she now; it have be evident that
he think nothing of she before.
Mr. Riley be turn over the leaf of the book, and she could make
nothing of his face, with its high-arched eyebrow; but he presently
look at she, and said,--
"come, come and tell I something about this book; here be some
pictures,--i want to know what they mean."
Maggie, with deepening color, go without hesitation to Mr. Riley's
elbow and look over the book, eagerly seize one corner, and
toss back her mane, while she said,--
"oh, Iwill tell you what that mean. itbe a dreadful picture, benot it?
but I cannot help look at it. that old woman in the water's a
witch,--they've put she in to find out whether shebe a witch or no;
and if she swim shebe a witch, and if shebe drown--and kill, you
know--shebe innocent, and not a witch, but only a poor silly old
woman. but what good would it do she then, you know, when she be
drown? only, I suppose, shewould go to heaven, and God would make it up
to she. and this dreadful blacksmith with his arm akimbo,
laughing,--oh, benot he ugly?--I'll tell you what he be. hebe the
Devil _really_" (here Maggie's voice become loud and more emphatic),
"and not a right blacksmith; for the Devil take the shape of wicked
man, and walk about and set people do wicked thing, and hebe
oftener in the shape of a bad man than any other, because, you know,
if people see he be the Devil, and he roar at them, theywould run away,
and he couldnot make them do what he please."
Mr. Tulliver have listen to this exposition of Maggie's with
petrify wonder.
"why, what book be it the wench have get hold on?" he burst out at
last.
"the 'history of the Devil,' by Daniel Defoe,--not quite the right
book for a little girl," say Mr. Riley. "how come it among your
book, Mr. Tulliver?"
Maggie look hurt and discourage, while her father said,--
"why, itbe one o' the book I buy at Partridge's sale. they be all
bind alike,--it's a good binding, you see,--and I think theywould be
all good book. therebe Jeremy Taylor's 'Holy Living and Dying' among
them. I read in it often of a Sunday" (Mr. Tulliver feel somehow a
familiarity with that great writer, because his name be Jeremy); "and
therebe a lot more of 'em,--sermons mostly, I think,--but theyhave all
get the same cover, and I think they be all o' one sample, as you
may say. but it seem one mustnot judge by th' outside. this be a
puzzlin' world."
"well," say Mr. Riley, in an admonitory, patronize tone as he
pat Maggie on the head, "I advise you to put by the 'history of the
Devil,' and read some pretty book. have you no pretty book?"
"oh, yes," say Maggie, revive a little in the desire to vindicate
the variety of her reading. "I know the reading in this book benot
pretty; but I like the picture, and I make story to the picture
out of my own head, you know. but Ihave get 'AEsop's fable,' and a book
about Kangaroos and thing, and the 'Pilgrim's Progress.'"
"ah, a beautiful book," say Mr. Riley; "you cannot read a well."
"well, but therebe a great deal about the Devil in that," say Maggie,
triumphantly, "and Iwill show you the picture of he in his true shape,
as he fight with Christian."
Maggie run in an instant to the corner of the room, jump on a chair,
and reach down from the small bookcase a shabby old copy of Bunyan,
which open at once, without the least trouble of search, at the
picture she want.
"here he be," she say, run back to Mr. Riley, "and Tom color
he for I with his paint when he be at home last holidays,--the
body all black, you know, and the eye red, like fire, because hebe
all fire inside, and it shin out at his eye."
"go, go!" say Mr. Tulliver, peremptorily, begin to feel rather
uncomfortable at these free remark on the personal appearance of a
be powerful enough to create lawyer; "shut up the book, and letus
hear no more o' such talk. it be as I think--the child 'ull learn
more mischief nor good wi' the book. go, go and see after your
mother."
Maggie shut up the book at once, with a sense of disgrace, but not
be incline to see after her mother, she compromise the matter by
go into a dark corner behind her father's chair, and nursing her
doll, toward which she have an occasional fit of fondness in Tom's
absence, neglect its toilet, but lavish so many warm kiss on
it that the waxen cheek have a waste, unhealthy appearance.
"do you ever hear the like on't?" say Mr. Tulliver, as Maggie
retire. "itbe a pity but what shehave be the lad,--she'd ha' be a
match for the lawyer, _she_ would. itbe the wonderful'st thing"--here
he lower his voice--"a I pick the mother because she benot o'er
'cute--bein' a good-look woman too, an' come of a rare family for
manage; but I pick she from her sister o' purpose, 'cause she be
a bit weak like; for I benot agoin' to be tell the right o' thing
by my own fireside. but you see when a man's get brain himself,
therebe no knowing where theywill run to; an' a pleasant sort o' soft
woman may go on breed you stupid lad and 'cute wench, till itbe
like as if the world be turn topsy-turvy. itbe an uncommon puzzlin'
thing."
Mr. Riley's gravity give way, and he shake a little under the
application of his pinch of snuff before he said,--
"but your lad's not stupid, be he? I see he, when I be here last,
busy make fishing-tackle; he seem quite up to it."
"well, he benot not to say stupid,--he's get a notion o' thing out o'
door, an' a sort o' common sense, as hewould lay hold o' thing by the
right handle. but hebe slow with his tongue, you see, and he read but
poorly, and cannot abide the book, and spell all wrong, they tell I,
an' as shy as can be wi' stranger, an' you never hear he say 'cute
thing like the little wench. now, what I want be to send he to a
school where theywill make he a bit nimble with his tongue and his
pen, and make a smart chap of he. I want my son to be even wi' these
fellow as have get the start o' I with have well schooling. not
but what, if the world have be leave as God make it, I could ha' see
my way, and hold my own wi' the good of them; but thing have get so
twisted round and wrap up I' unreasonable word, as benot a bit
like them, as Ibe clean at fault, often an' often. everything wind
about so--the more straightforrad you be, the more yoube puzzle."
Mr. Tulliver take a draught, swallow it slowly, and shake his head
in a melancholy manner, conscious of exemplify the truth that a
perfectly sane intellect be hardly at home in this insane world.
"yoube quite in the right of it, Tulliver," observe Mr. Riley.
"well spend an extra hundred or two on your son's education, than
leave it he in your will. I know I should have try to do so by a
son of mine, if Ihave have one, though, God know, I havenot your ready
money to play with, Tulliver; and I have a houseful of daughter into
the bargain."
"I dare say, now, you know of a school as 'ud be just the thing for
Tom," say Mr. Tulliver, not divert from his purpose by any sympathy
with Mr. Riley's deficiency of ready cash.
Mr. Riley take a pinch of snuff, and keep Mr. Tulliver in suspense by
a silence that seem deliberative, before he said,--
"I know of a very fine chance for any one thatbe get the necessary
money and thatbe what you have, Tulliver. the fact be, I wouldnot
recommend any friend of mine to send a boy to a regular school, if he
could afford to do well. but if any one want his boy to get
superior instruction and training, where he would be the companion of
his master, and that master a first rate fellow, I know his man. I
wouldnot mention the chance to everybody, because I donot think
everybody would succeed in get it, if he be to try; but I
mention it to you, Tulliver, between ourselves."
the fixed inquire glance with which Mr. Tulliver have be watch
his friend's oracular face become quite eager.
"ay, now, letus hear," he say, adjust himself in his chair with
the complacency of a person who be think worthy of important
communication.
"hebe an Oxford man," say Mr. Riley, sententiously, shut his
mouth close, and look at Mr. Tulliver to observe the effect of this
stimulate information.
"what! a parson?" say Mr. Tulliver, rather doubtfully.
"yes, and an M.A. the bishop, I understand, think very highly of he:
why, it be the bishop who get he his present curacy."
"ah?" say Mr. Tulliver, to whom one thing be as wonderful as another
concern these unfamiliar phenomenon. "but what can he want wi' Tom,
then?"
"why, the fact be, hebe fond of teaching, and wish to keep up his
study, and a clergyman have but little opportunity for that in his
parochial duty. hebe willing to take one or two boy as pupil to
fill up his time profitably. the boy would be quite of the
family,--the fine thing in the world for they; under Stelling's eye
continually."
"but do you think theywould give the poor lad twice o' pudding?" say
Mrs. Tulliver, who be now in her place again. "hebe such a boy for
pudding as never be; an' a grow boy like that,--it's dreadful to
think o' their stintin' he."
"and what money 'ud he want?" say Mr. Tulliver, whose instinct tell
he that the service of this admirable M.A. would bear a high price.
"why, I know of a clergyman who ask a hundred and fifty with his
young pupil, and hebe not to be mention with Stelling, the man I
speak of. I know, on good authority, that one of the chief people at
Oxford say, Stelling might get the high honor if he choose. but he
donot care about university honor; hebe a quiet man--not noisy."
"ah, a deal well--a deal well," say Mr. Tulliver; "but a hundred
and fiftybe an uncommon price. I never think o' pay so much as
that."
"a good education, let I tell you, Tulliver,--a good education be
cheap at the money. but Stelling be moderate in his term; hebe not a
grasp man. Ihave no doubt hewould take your boy at a hundred, and
thatbe what you wouldnot get many other clergyman to do. Iwill write to
he about it, if you like."
Mr. Tulliver rub his knee, and look at the carpet in a
meditative manner.
"but belike hebe a bachelor," observe Mrs. Tulliver, in the interval;
"an' Ihave no opinion o' housekeeper. there be my brother, as be dead
an' gone, have a housekeeper once, an' she take half the feather out
o' the good bed, an' pack them up an' send them away. an' itbe unknown
the linen she make away with--stott her name be. it 'ud break my
heart to send Tom where therebe a housekeeper, an' I hope you willnot
think of it, Mr. Tulliver."
"you may set your mind at rest on that score, Mrs. Tulliver," say Mr.
Riley, "for Stelling be married to as nice a little woman as any man
need wish for a wife. there benot a kind little soul in the world; I
know her family well. she have very much your complexion,--light curly
hair. she come of a good Mudport family, and itbe not every offer
that would have be acceptable in that quarter. but Stelling's not an
every-day man; rather a particular fellow as to the people he choose
to be connect with. but I _think_ he would have no objection to take
your son; I _think_ he would not, on my representation."
"I donot know what he could have _against_ the lad," say Mrs.
Tulliver, with a slight touch of motherly indignation; "a nice
fresh-skinned lad as anybody need wish to see."
"but therebe one thing Ibe think on," say Mr. Tulliver, turn
his head on one side and look at Mr. Riley, after a long perusal of
the carpet. "wouldnot a parson be almost too high-learn to bring up a
lad to be a man o' business? my notion o' the parson be as theywould
get a sort o' learning as lie mostly out o' sight. and that benot what
I want for Tom. I want he to know figure, and write like print, and
see into thing quick, and know what folk mean, and how to wrap
thing up in word as benot actionable. itbe an uncommon fine thing,
that be," conclude Mr. Tulliver, shake his head, "when you can let
a man know what you think of he without pay for it."
"oh, my dear Tulliver," say Mr. Riley, "yoube quite under a mistake
about the clergy; all the good schoolmaster be of the clergy. the
schoolmaster who be not clergyman be a very low set of man
generally."
"ay, that Jacobs be, at the 'cademy," interpose Mr. Tulliver.
"to be sure,--man who have fail in other trade, most likely. now, a
clergyman be a gentleman by profession and education; and besides
that, he have the knowledge that will ground a boy, and prepare he for
enter on any career with credit. there may be some clergyman who
be mere bookman; but you may depend upon it, Stelling be not one of
them,--a man thatbe wide awake, let I tell you. drop he a hint, and
thatbe enough. you talk of figure, now; you have only to say to
Stelling, 'I want my son to be a thorough arithmetician,' and you may
leave the rest to he."
Mr. Riley pause a moment, while Mr. Tulliver, some-what reassure as
to clerical tutorship, be inwardly rehearse to an imaginary Mr.
Stelling the statement, "I want my son to know 'rethmetic."
"you see, my dear Tulliver," Mr. Riley continue, "when you get a
thoroughly educate man, like Stelling, hebe at no loss to take up any
branch of instruction. when a workman know the use of his tool, he
can make a door as well as a window."
"ay, thatbe true," say Mr. Tulliver, almost convince now that the
clergy must be the good of schoolmaster.
"well, Iwill tell you what Iwill do for you," say Mr. Riley, "and I
wouldnot do it for everybody. Iwill see Stelling's father-in-law, or
drop he a line when I get back to Mudport, to say that you wish to
place your boy with his son-in-law, and I dare say Stelling will write
to you, and send you his term."
"but therebe no hurry, be there?" say Mrs. Tulliver; "for I hope, Mr.
Tulliver, you willnot let Tom begin at his new school before Midsummer.
he begin at the 'cademy at the Lady-day quarter, and you see what
good's come of it."
"ay, ay, Bessy, never brew wi' bad malt upo' Michael-masday, else
youwill have a poor tap," say Mr. Tulliver, wink and smile at Mr.
Riley, with the natural pride of a man who have a buxom wife
conspicuously his inferior in intellect. "but itbe true therebe no
hurry; youhave hit it there, Bessy."
"it might be as well not to defer the arrangement too long," say Mr.
Riley, quietly, "for Stelling may have proposition from other
party, and I know he would not take more than two or three boarder,
if so many. if I be you, I think I would enter on the subject with
Stelling at once: therebe no necessity for send the boy before
Midsummer, but I would be on the safe side, and make sure that nobody
forestall you."
"ay, therebe summat in that," say Mr. Tulliver.
"Father," break in Maggie, who have steal unperceived to her father's
elbow again, listen with part lip, while she hold her doll
topsy-turvy, and crush its nose against the wood of the
chair,--"father, be it a long way off where Tom be to go? sha'n't we
ever go to see he?"
"I donot know, my wench," say the father, tenderly. "ask Mr. Riley;
he know."
Maggie come round promptly in front of Mr. Riley, and say, "how far
be it, please, sir?"
"oh, a long, long way off," that gentleman answer, be of opinion
that child, when they be not naughty, should always be speak to
jocosely. "you must borrow the seven-league boot to get to he."
"thatbe nonsense!" say Maggie, toss her head haughtily, and
turn away, with the tear spring in her eye. she begin to
dislike Mr. Riley; it be evident he think she silly and of no
consequence.
"Hush, Maggie! for shame of you, ask question and chattering,"
say her mother. "come and sit down on your little stool, and hold
your tongue, do. but," add Mrs. Tulliver, who have her own alarm
awaken, "be it so far off as I couldnot wash he and mend he?"
"about fifteen mile; thatbe all," say Mr. Riley. "you can drive
there and back in a day quite comfortably. or--Stelling be a
hospitable, pleasant man--he'd be glad to have you stay."
"but itbe too far off for the linen, I doubt," say Mrs. Tulliver,
sadly.
the entrance of supper opportunely adjourn this difficulty, and
relieve Mr. Riley from the labor of suggest some solution or
compromise,--a labor which he would otherwise doubtless have
undertake; for, as you perceive, he be a man of very obliging
manner. and he have really give himself the trouble of recommend
Mr. Stelling to his friend Tulliver without any positive expectation
of a solid, definite advantage result to himself, notwithstanding
the subtle indication to the contrary which might have mislead a
too-sagacious observer. for there be nothing more widely misleading
than sagacity if it happen to get on a wrong scent; and sagacity,
persuade that man usually act and speak from distinct motif, with a
consciously propose end in view, be certain to waste its energy on
imaginary game.
plot covetousness and deliberate contrivance, in order to compass
a selfish end, be nowhere abundant but in the world of the dramatist:
they demand too intense a mental action for many of our
fellow-parishioner to be guilty of they. it be easy enough to spoil
the life of our neighbor without take so much trouble; we can do
it by lazy acquiescence and lazy omission, by trivial falsity for
which we hardly know a reason, by small fraud neutralize by small
extravagance, by maladroit flattery, and clumsily improvise
insinuation. we live from hand to mouth, most of we, with a small
family of immediate desire; we do little else than snatch a morsel to
satisfy the hungry brood, rarely think of seed-corn or the next
year's crop.
Mr. Riley be a man of business, and not cold toward his own interest,
yet even he be more under the influence of small prompting than of
far-sighted design. he have no private understanding with the Rev.
Walter Stelling; on the contrary, he know very little of that M.A. and
his acquirements,--not quite enough, perhaps, to warrant so strong a
recommendation of he as he have give to his friend Tulliver. but he
believe Mr. Stelling to be an excellent classic, for Gadsby have say
so, and Gadsby's first cousin be an Oxford tutor; which be well
ground for the belief even than his own immediate observation would
have be, for though Mr. Riley have receive a tincture of the
classic at the great Mudport Free School, and have a sense of
understand Latin generally, his comprehension of any particular
Latin be not ready. Doubtless there remain a subtle aroma from his
juvenile contact with the "De Senectute" and the fourth book of the
"AEneid," but it have cease to be distinctly recognizable as classical,
and be only perceive in the high finish and force of his
auctioneering style. then, Stelling be an Oxford man, and the Oxford
man be always--no, no, it be the Cambridge man who be always good
mathematician. but a man who have have a university education could
teach anything he like; especially a man like Stelling, who have make
a speech at a Mudport dinner on a political occasion, and have
acquit himself so well that it be generally remark, this
son-in-law of Timpson's be a sharp fellow. it be to be expect of a
Mudport man, from the parish of St. Ursula, that he would not omit to
do a good turn to a son-in-law of Timpson's, for Timpson be one of
the most useful and influential man in the parish, and have a good deal
of business, which he know how to put into the right hand. Mr. Riley
like such man, quite apart from any money which might be divert,
through their good judgment, from less worthy pocket into his own;
and it would be a satisfaction to he to say to Timpson on his return
home, "Ihave secure a good pupil for your son-in-law." Timpson have a
large family of daughter; Mr. Riley feel for he; besides, Louisa
Timpson's face, with its light curl, have be a familiar object to
he over the pew wainscot on a Sunday for nearly fifteen year; it be
natural her husband should be a commendable tutor. moreover, Mr. Riley
know of no other schoolmaster whom he have any ground for recommend
in preference; why, then, should be not recommend Stelling? his friend
Tulliver have ask he for an opinion; it be always chill, in
friendly intercourse, to say you have no opinion to give. and if you
deliver an opinion at all, it be mere stupidity not to do it with an
air of conviction and well-found knowledge. you make it your own in
utter it, and naturally get fond of it. thus Mr. Riley, know no
harm of Stelling to begin with, and wish he well, so far as he have
any wish at all concern he, have no soon recommend he than
he begin to think with admiration of a man recommend on such high
authority, and would soon have gather so warm an interest on the
subject, that if Mr. Tulliver have in the end decline to send Tom to
Stelling, Mr. Riley would have think his "friend of the old school"
a thoroughly pig-head fellow.
if you blame Mr. Riley very severely for give a recommendation on
such slight ground, I must say you be rather hard upon he. why
should an auctioneer and appraiser thirty year ago, who have as good
as forget his free-school Latin, be expect to manifest a delicate
scrupulosity which be not always exhibit by gentleman of the learned
profession, even in our present advanced stage of morality?
besides, a man with the milk of human kindness in he can scarcely
abstain from do a good-natured action, and one cannot be
good-natured all round. nature herself occasionally quarter an
inconvenient parasite on an animal toward whom she have otherwise no
ill will. what then? we admire her care for the parasite. if Mr. Riley
have shrink from give a recommendation that be not base on valid
evidence, he would not have help Mr. Stelling to a pay pupil, and
that would not have be so well for the reverend gentleman. consider,
too, that all the pleasant little dim idea and complacency--of
stand well with Timpson, of dispense advice when he be ask for
it, of impress his friend Tulliver with additional respect, of
say something, and say it emphatically, with other inappreciably
minute ingredient that go along with the warm hearth and the
brandy-and-water to make up Mr. Riley's consciousness on this
occasion--would have be a mere blank.
Chapter IV
Tom be expect
it be a heavy disappointment to Maggie that she be not allow to go
with her father in the gig when he go to fetch Tom home from the
academy; but the morning be too wet, Mrs. Tulliver say, for a little
girl to go out in her good bonnet. Maggie take the opposite view very
strongly, and it be a direct consequence of this difference of
opinion that when her mother be in the act of brush out the
reluctant black crop Maggie suddenly rush from under her hand and
dip her head in a basin of water stand near, in the vindictive
determination that there should be no more chance of curl that day.
"Maggie, Maggie!" exclaim Mrs. Tulliver, sit stout and helpless
with the brush on her lap, "what be to become of you if yoube so
naughty? Iwill tell your aunt Glegg and your aunt pullet when they come
next week, and theywill never love you any more. oh dear, oh dear! look
at your clean pinafore, wet from top to bottom. folk 'ull think itbe
a judgment on I as Ihave get such a child,--they'll think Ihave do
summat wicked."
before this remonstrance be finish, Maggie be already out of
hearing, make her way toward the great attic that run under the old
high-pitch roof, shake the water from her black lock as she run,
like a skye terrier escape from his bath. this attic be Maggie's
favorite retreat on a wet day, when the weather be not too cold; here
she fret out all her ill humor, and talk aloud to the worm-eat
floor and the worm-eat shelf, and the dark rafter festoon with
cobwebs; and here she keep a Fetish which she punish for all her
misfortune. this be the trunk of a large wooden doll, which once
star with the roundest of eye above the reddest of cheek; but be
now entirely deface by a long career of vicarious suffering. three
nail drive into the head commemorate as many crisis in Maggie's
nine year of earthly struggle; that luxury of vengeance have be
suggest to she by the picture of Jael destroy Sisera in the old
Bible. the last nail have be drive in with a fiercer stroke than
usual, for the Fetish on that occasion represent aunt Glegg. but
immediately afterward Maggie have reflect that if she drive many
nail in she would not be so well able to fancy that the head be hurt
when she knock it against the wall, nor to comfort it, and make
believe to poultice it, when her fury be abate; for even aunt Glegg
would be pitiable when she have be hurt very much, and thoroughly
humiliate, so as to beg her niece's pardon. since then she have drive
no more nail in, but have soothe herself by alternately grind and
beat the wooden head against the rough brick of the great chimney
that make two square pillar support the roof. that be what she
do this morning on reach the attic, sob all the while with a
passion that expel every other form of consciousness,--even the
memory of the grievance that have cause it. as at last the sob be
get quieter, and the grind less fierce, a sudden beam of
sunshine, fall through the wire lattice across the worm-eat
shelf, make she throw away the Fetish and run to the window. the sun
be really break out; the sound of the mill seem cheerful again;
the granary door be open; and there be Yap, the queer
white-and-brown terrier, with one ear turn back, trot about and
sniff vaguely, as if he be in search of a companion. it be
irresistible. Maggie toss her hair back and run downstairs, seize
her bonnet without put it on, peep, and then dash along the
passage lest she should encounter her mother, and be quickly out in
the yard, whirl round like a Pythoness, and singing as she whirl,
"Yap, Yap, Tom's come home!" while Yap dance and bark round she,
as much as to say, if there be any noise want he be the dog for
it.
"Hegh, hegh, Miss! youwill make yourself giddy, an' tumble down I' the
dirt," say Luke, the head miller, a tall, broad-shoulder man of
forty, black-eyed and black-haired, subdue by a general mealiness,
like an auricula.
Maggie pause in her whirling and say, stagger a little, "oh no,
it donot make I giddy, Luke; may I go into the mill with you?"
Maggie love to linger in the great space of the mill, and often come
out with her black hair powder to a soft whiteness that make she
dark eye flash out with new fire. the resolute din, the unreste
motion of the great stone, give she a dim, delicious awe as at the
presence of an uncontrollable force; the meal forever pour,
pour; the fine white powder soften all surface, and make the
very spidernet look like a faery lace-work; the sweet, pure scent of
the meal,--all help to make Maggie feel that the mill be a little
world apart from she outside every-day life. the spider be
especially a subject of speculation with she. she wonder if they have
any relative outside the mill, for in that case there must be a
painful difficulty in their family intercourse,--a fat and floury
spider, accustom to take his fly well dust with meal, must suffer
a little at a cousin's table where the fly be _au naturel_, and the
lady spider must be mutually shock at each other's appearance. but
the part of the mill she like well be the topmost story,--the
corn-hutch, where there be the great heap of grain, which she could
sit on and slide down continually. she be in the habit of take this
recreation as she converse with Luke, to whom she be very
communicative, wish he to think well of her understanding, as she
father do.
perhaps she feel it necessary to recover her position with he on the
present occasion for, as she sit slide on the heap of grain near
which he be busy himself, she say, at that shrill pitch which be
requisite in mill-society,--
"I think you never read any book but the Bible, do you, Luke?"
"Nay, Miss, an' not much o' that," say Luke, with great frankness.
"Ibe no reader, I benot."
"but if I lend you one of my book, Luke? Ihave not get any _very_
pretty book that would be easy for you to read; but therebe 'Pug's
Tour of Europe,'--that would tell you all about the different sort of
people in the world, and if you donot understand the reading, the
picture would help you; they show the look and way of the people,
and what they do. there be the Dutchmen, very fat, and smoking, you
know, and one sit on a barrel."
"Nay, Miss, i'n no opinion o' Dutchmen. there ben't much good I'
knowin' about _they_."
"but theybe our fellow-creature, Luke; we ought to know about our
fellow-creature."
"not much o' fellow-creatur, I think, Miss; all I know--my old
master, as war a knowin' man, use to say, say he, 'if e'er I sow my
wheat wi'out brinin', Ibe a Dutchman,' say he; an' that war as much
as to say as a Dutchman war a fool, or next door. Nay, nay, I benot
go to bother mysen about Dutchmen. there's fool enoo, an' rogue
enoo, wi'out lookin' I' book for them."
"oh, well," say Maggie, rather foil by Luke's unexpectedly decide
view about Dutchmen, "perhaps you would like 'Animated nature'
well; thatbe not Dutchmen, you know, but elephant and kangaroo,
and the civet-cat, and the sunfish, and a bird sit on its tail,--i
forget its name. there be country full of those creature, instead
of horse and cow, you know. shouldnot you like to know about they,
Luke?"
"Nay, Miss, I'n get to keep count o' the flour an' corn; I cannot do
wi' knowin' so many thing besides my work. thatbe what bring folk
to the gallows,--knowin' everything but what they'n get to get their
bread by. an' theybe mostly lie, I think, whatbe print I' the
book: they print sheet be, anyhow, as the man cry I' the
street."
"why, yoube like my brother Tom, Luke," say Maggie, wish to turn
the conversation agreeably; "Tombe not fond of reading. I love Tom so
dearly, luke,--better than anybody else in the world. when he grow up
I shall keep his house, and we shall always live together. I can tell
he everything he donot know. but I think Tom's clever, for all he
donot like book; he make beautiful whipcord and rabbit-pen."
"ah," say Luke, "but hewill be fine an' vex, as the rabbit be all
dead."
"dead!" scream Maggie, jump up from her slide seat on the corn.
"oh dear, Luke! what! the lop-eared one, and the spot doe that Tom
spend all his money to buy?"
"as dead as mole," say Luke, fetch his comparison from the
unmistakable corps nail to the stable wall.
"oh dear, Luke," say Maggie, in a piteous tone, while the big tear
roll down her cheek; "Tom tell I to take care of them, and I forget.
what _shall_ I do?"
"well, you see, Miss, they be in that far tool-house, an' it be
nobody's business to see to them. I reckon Master Tom tell Harry to
feed them, but therebe no countin' on Harry; _hebe_ an offal creatur as
iver come about the primise, he be. he remember nothing but his own
inside--an' I wish it'ud gripe he."
"oh, Luke, Tom tell I to be sure and remember the rabbit every day;
but how could I, when they donot come into my head, you know? oh, he
will be so angry with I, I know he will, and so sorry about his
rabbit, and so be I sorry. oh, what _shall_ I do?"
"donot you fret, Miss," say Luke, soothingly; "theybe nash thing,
they lop-eared rabbit; theywould happen ha' die, if theyhave be feed.
thing out o' natur niver thrive: God A'mighty donot like them. he
make the rabbit' ear to lie back, an' itbe nothing but contrairiness
to make them he down like a mastiff dog's. Master Tom 'ull know
well nor buy such thing another time. donot you fret, Miss. will
you come along home wi' I, and see my wife? Ibe a-go this minute."
the invitation offer an agreeable distraction to Maggie's grief, and
her tear gradually subside as she trot along by Luke's side to
his pleasant cottage, which stand with its apple and pear tree, and
with the add dignity of a lean-to pigsty, at the other end of the
Mill field. Mrs. Moggs, Luke's wife, be a decidely agreeable
acquaintance. she exhibit her hospitality in bread and treacle, and
possess various work of art. Maggie actually forget that she have
any special cause of sadness this morning, as she stand on a chair to
look at a remarkable series of picture represent the Prodigal Son
in the costume of Sir Charles Grandison, except that, as might have
be expect from his defective moral character, he have not, like
that accomplished hero, the taste and strength of mind to dispense
with a wig. but the indefinable weight the dead rabbit have leave on
her mind cause she to feel more than usual pity for the career of
this weak young man, particularly when she look at the picture where
he lean against a tree with a flaccid appearance, his knee-breech
unbuttoned and his wig awry, while the swine apparently of some
foreign breed, seem to insult he by their good spirit over their
feast of husk.
"Ibe very glad his father take he back again, benot you, Luke?" she
say. "for he be very sorry, you know, and wouldnot do wrong again."
"eh, Miss," say Luke, "hewould be no great shake, I doubt, letus
feyther do what he would for he."
that be a painful thought to Maggie, and she wish much that the
subsequent history of the young man have not be leave a blank.
chapter V
Tom come home
Tom be to arrive early in the afternoon, and there be another
flutter heart besides Maggie's when it be late enough for the
sound of the gig-wheel to be expect; for if Mrs. Tulliver have a
strong feeling, it be fondness for her boy. at last the sound
came,--that quick light bowling of the gig-wheels,--and in spite of
the wind, which be blow the cloud about, and be not likely to
respect Mrs. Tulliver's curl and cap-string, she come outside the
door, and even hold her hand on Maggie's offend head, forget
all the grief of the morning.
"there he be, my sweet lad! but, Lord ha' mercy! hebe get never a
collar on; itbe be lose on the road, Iwill be bind, and spoilt the
set."
Mrs. Tulliver stand with her arm open; Maggie jump first on one leg
and then on the other; while Tom descend from the gig, and say,
with masculine reticence as to the tender emotion, "Hallo! Yap--what!
be you there?"
nevertheless he submit to be kiss willingly enough, though Maggie
hang on his neck in rather a strangle fashion, while his blue-gray
eye wander toward the croft and the lamb and the river, where he
promise himself that he would begin to fish the first thing to-morrow
morning. he be one of those lad that grow everywhere in England, and
at twelve or thirteen year of age look as much alike as goslings,--a
lad with light-brown hair, cheek of cream and rose, full lip,
indeterminate nose and eyebrows,--a physiognomy in which it seem
impossible to discern anything but the generic character to boyhood;
as different as possible from poor Maggie's phiz, which Nature seem
to have mould and color with the most decide intention. but that
same nature have the deep cunning which hide itself under the
appearance of openness, so that simple people think they can see
through her quite well, and all the while she be secretly prepare a
refutation of their confident prophecy. under these average boyish
physiognomy that she seem to turn off by the gross, she conceal
some of her most rigid, inflexible purpose, some of her most
unmodifiable character; and the dark-eye, demonstrative, rebellious
girl may after all turn out to be a passive being compare with this
pink-and-white bit of masculinity with the indeterminate feature.
"Maggie," say Tom, confidentially, take she into a corner, as soon
as his mother be go out to examine his box and the warm parlor have
take off the chill he have feel from the long drive, "you donot know
what Ihave get in _my_ pocket," nod his head up and down as a
mean of rouse her sense of mystery.
"no," say Maggie. "how stodgy they look, Tom! be it marl (marble)
or cobnut?" Maggie's heart sink a little, because Tom always say it
be "no good" play with _she_ at those game, she play so badly.
"Marls! no; Ihave swap all my marl with the little fellow, and
cobnut be no fun, you silly, only when the nut be green. but see
here!" he draw something half out of his right-hand pocket.
"what be it?" say Maggie, in a whisper. "I can see nothing but a bit
of yellow."
"why, it's--a--new--guess, Maggie!"
"oh, I _cannot_ guess, Tom," say Maggie, impatiently.
"donot be a spitfire, else I willnot tell you," say Tom, thrust his
hand back into his pocket and look determine.
"no, Tom," say Maggie, imploringly, lay hold of the arm that be
hold stiffly in the pocket. "Ibe not cross, Tom; it be only because I
cannot bear guess. _please_ be good to I."
Tom's arm slowly relax, and he say, "well, then, itbe a new
fish-line--two new uns,--one for you, Maggie, all to yourself. I
wouldnot go half in the toffee and gingerbread on purpose to save
the money; and Gibson and Spouncer fight with I because I wouldnot.
and here's hook; see here--I say, _willnot_ we go and fish to-morrow
down by the Round Pool? and you shall catch your own fish, Maggie and
put the worm on, and everything; willnot it be fun?"
Maggie's answer be to throw her arm round Tom's neck and hug he,
and hold her cheek against his without speak, while he slowly
unwound some of the line, say, after a pause,--
"benot I a good brother, now, to buy you a line all to yourself? you
know, I neednot have buy it, if I havenot like."
"yes, very, very good--I _do_ love you, Tom."
Tom have put the line back in his pocket, and be look at the hook
one by one, before he speak again.
"and the fellow fight I, because I wouldnot give in about the
toffee."
"oh, dear! I wish they wouldnot fight at your school, Tom. donot it
hurt you?"
"hurt I? no," say Tom, put up the hook again, take out a
large pocket-knife, and slowly open the large blade, which he
look at meditatively as he rub his finger along it. then he
added,--
"I give Spouncer a black eye, I know; thatbe what he get by want to
leather _I;_ I benot go to go half because anybody leather
I."
"oh, how brave you be, Tom! I think yoube like Samson. if there come
a lion roar at I, I think youwould fight he, wouldnot you, Tom?"
"how can a lion come roar at you, you silly thing? therebe no
lion, only in the show."
"no; but if we be in the lion country--I mean in Africa, where
itbe very hot; the lion eat people there. I can show it you in the
book where I read it."
"well, I should get a gun and shoot he."
"but if you havenot get a gun,--we might have go out, you know, not
think, just as we go fish; and then a great lion might run
toward we roar, and we couldnot get away from he. what should you
do, Tom?"
Tom pause, and at last turn away contemptuously, say, "but the
lion _benot_ come. whatbe the use of talk?"
"but I like to fancy how it would be," say Maggie, follow he.
"just think what you would do, Tom."
"oh, donot bother, Maggie! yoube such a silly. I shall go and see my
rabbit."
Maggie's heart begin to flutter with fear. she dare not tell the sad
truth at once, but she walk after Tom in tremble silence as he
go out, think how she could tell he the news so as to soften at
once his sorrow and his anger; for Maggie dread Tom's anger of all
thing; it be quite a different anger from her own.
"Tom," she say, timidly, when they be out of door, "how much money
do you give for your rabbit?"
"two half-crown and a sixpence," say Tom, promptly.
"I think Ihave get a great deal more than that in my steel purse
upstairs. Iwill ask mother to give it you."
"what for?" say Tom. "I donot want _your_ money, you silly thing.
Ihave get a great deal more money than you, because Ibe a boy. I always
have half-sovereign and sovereign for my Christmas box because I
shall be a man, and you only have five-shilling piece, because yoube
only a girl."
"well, but, Tom--if mother would let I give you two half-crown and a
sixpence out of my purse to put into your pocket and spend, you know,
and buy some more rabbit with it?"
"More rabbit? I donot want any more."
"oh, but, Tom, theybe all dead."
Tom stop immediately in his walk and turn round toward Maggie.
"you forgot to feed them, then, and Harry forget?" he say, his color
heighten for a moment, but soon subside. "Iwill pitch into Harry.
Iwill have he turn away. and I donot love you, Maggie. you sha'n't
go fish with I to-morrow. I tell you to go and see the rabbit
every day." he walk on again.
"yes, but I forget--and I couldnot help it, indeed, Tom. Ibe so very
sorry," say Maggie, while the tear rush fast.
"yoube a naughty girl," say Tom, severely, "and Ibe sorry I buy
you the fish-line. I donot love you."
"oh, Tom, itbe very cruel," sob Maggie. "Iwould forgive you, if _you_
forget anything--I wouldnot mind what you do--I'd forgive you and
love you."
"yes, yoube silly; but I never _do_ forget thing, _i_ donot."
"oh, please forgive I, Tom; my heart will break," say Maggie,
shake with sob, cling to Tom's arm, and lay her wet cheek on
his shoulder.
Tom shake she off, and stop again, say in a peremptory tone,
"now, Maggie, you just listen. benot I a good brother to you?"
"ye-ye-es," sob Maggie, her chin rise and fall convulsedly.
"donot I think about your fish-line all this quarter, and mean to buy
it, and save my money o' purpose, and wouldnot go half in the
toffee, and Spouncer fight I because I wouldnot?"
"ye-ye-es--and I--lo-lo-love you so, Tom."
"but yoube a naughty girl. last holiday you lick the paint off my
lozenge-box, and the holiday before that you let the boat drag my
fish-line down when Iwould set you to watch it, and you push your head
through my kite, all for nothing."
"but I donot mean," say Maggie; "I couldnot help it."
"yes, you could," say Tom, "if youwould minded what you be do. and
yoube a naughty girl, and you sha'n't go fish with I to-morrow."
with this terrible conclusion, Tom run away from Maggie toward the
mill, mean to greet Luke there, and complain to he of Harry.
Maggie stand motionless, except from her sob, for a minute or two;
then she turn round and run into the house, and up to her attic,
where she sit on the floor and lay her head against the worm-eat
shelf, with a crush sense of misery. Tom be come home, and she have
think how happy she should be; and now he be cruel to she. what use
be anything if Tom donot love she? oh, he be very cruel! hadnot she
want to give he the money, and say how very sorry she be? she
know she be naughty to her mother, but she have never be naughty to
Tom--have never _mean_ to be naughty to he.
"oh, he be cruel!" Maggie sob aloud, find a wretched pleasure in
the hollow resonance that come through the long empty space of the
attic. she never think of beat or grind she Fetish; she be
too miserable to be angry.
these bitter sorrow of childhood! when sorrow be all new and strange,
when hope have not yet get wing to fly beyond the day and week, and
the space from summer to summer seem measureless.
Maggie soon think she have be hour in the attic, and it must be
tea-time, and they be all have their tea, and not think of she.
well, then, she would stay up there and starve herself,--hide herself
behind the tub, and stay there all night,--and then they would all be
frightened, and Tom would be sorry. thus Maggie think in the pride
of her heart, as she creep behind the tub; but presently she begin to
cry again at the idea that they donot mind she be there. if she
go down again to Tom now--would he forgive she? perhaps her father
would be there, and he would take her part. but then she want Tom to
forgive she because he love she, not because his father tell he. no,
she would never go down if Tom donot come to fetch she. this
resolution last in great intensity for five dark minute behind the
tub; but then the need of be love--the strong need in poor
Maggie's nature--begin to wrestle with her pride, and soon throw it.
she creep from behind her tub into the twilight of the long attic, but
just then she hear a quick foot-step on the stair.
Tom have be too much interested in his talk with Luke, in go the
round of the premise, walk in and out where he please, and
whittle stick without any particular reason,--except that he donot
whittle stick at school,--to think of Maggie and the effect his anger
have produce on she. he mean to punish she, and that business have
be perform, he occupy himself with other matter, like a
practical person. but when he have be call in to tea, his father
say, "why, wherebe the little wench?" and Mrs. Tulliver, almost at
the same moment, say, "wherebe your little sister?"--both of they
have suppose that Maggie and Tom have be together all the
afternoon.
"I donot know," say Tom. he donot want to "tell" of Maggie, though
he be angry with she; for Tom Tulliver be a lad of honor.
"what! havenot she be play with you all this while?" say the
father. "shehave be think o' nothing but your come home."
"I havenot see she this two hour," say Tom, commence on the
plumcake.
"goodness heart; shebe get drownde!" exclaim Mrs. Tulliver, rise
from her seat and run to the window.
"how could you let she do so?" she add, as become a fearful woman,
accuse she donot know whom of she donot know what.
"Nay, nay, shebe none drownde," say Mr. Tulliver. "youhave be
naughty to she, I doubt, Tom?"
"Ibe sure I havenot, father," say Tom, indignantly. "I think shebe in
the house."
"perhaps up in that attic," say Mrs. Tulliver, "a-singing and talk
to herself, and forget all about meal-time."
"you go and fetch she down, Tom," say Mr. Tulliver, rather
sharply,--his perspicacity or his fatherly fondness for Maggie make
he suspect that the lad have be hard upon "the little un," else she
would never have leave his side. "and be good to she, do you hear? else
Iwill let you know well."
Tom never disobey his father, for Mr. Tulliver be a peremptory man,
and, as he say, would never let anybody get hold of his whip-hand;
but he go out rather sullenly, carry his piece of plumcake, and
not intend to reprieve Maggie's punishment, which be no more than
she deserve. Tom be only thirteen, and have no decide view in
grammar and arithmetic, regard they for the most part as open
question, but he be particularly clear and positive on one
point,--namely, that he would punish everybody who deserve it. why,
he wouldnot have minded be punish himself if he deserve it; but,
then, he never _do_ deserve it.
it be Tom's step, then, that Maggie hear on the stair, when she
need of love have triumph over her pride, and she be go down with
her swollen eye and dishevel hair to beg for pity. at least her
father would stroke her head and say, "never mind, my wench." it be a
wonderful subduer, this need of love,--this hunger of the heart,--as
peremptory as that other hunger by which nature force we to submit to
the yoke, and change the face of the world.
but she know Tom's step, and her heart begin to beat violently with
the sudden shock of hope. he only stand still at the top of the stair
and say, "Maggie, yoube to come down." but she rush to he and
clung round his neck, sobbing, "oh, Tom, please forgive I--I cannot
bear it--I will always be good--always remember thing--do love
I--please, dear Tom!"
we learn to restrain ourselves as we get old. we keep apart when we
have quarrel, express ourselves in well-breed phrase, and in this
way preserve a dignified alienation, show much firmness on one
side, and swallow much grief on the other. we no long approximate
in our behavior to the mere impulsiveness of the low animal, but
conduct ourselves in every respect like member of a highly civilized
society. Maggie and Tom be still very much like young animal, and
so she could rub her cheek against his, and kiss his ear in a random
sob way; and there be tender fibre in the lad that have be
use to answer to Maggie's fondling, so that he behave with a
weakness quite inconsistent with his resolution to punish she as much
as she deserve. he actually begin to kiss she in return, and say,--
"donot cry, then, Magsie; here, eat a bit o' cake."
Maggie's sob begin to subside, and she put out her mouth for the cake
and bit a piece; and then Tom bite a piece, just for company, and they
eat together and rub each other's cheek and brow and nose
together, while they eat, with a humiliating resemblance to two
friendly pony.
"come along, Magsie, and have tea," say Tom at last, when there be
no more cake except what be down-stair.
so end the sorrow of this day, and the next morning Maggie be
trot with her own fishing-rod in one hand and a handle of the
basket in the other, step always, by a peculiar gift, in the
muddy place, and look darkly radiant from under her
beaver-bonnet because Tom be good to she. she have tell Tom, however,
that she should like he to put the worm on the hook for she,
although she accept his word when he assure she that worm couldnot
feel (it be Tom's private opinion that it donot much matter if they
do). he know all about worm, and fish, and those thing; and what
bird be mischievous, and how padlock open, and which way the
handle of the gate be to be lift. Maggie think this sort of
knowledge be very wonderful,--much more difficult than remember
what be in the book; and she be rather in awe of Tom's superiority,
for he be the only person who call her knowledge "stuff," and do
not feel surprised at her cleverness. Tom, indeed, be of opinion that
Maggie be a silly little thing; all girl be silly,--they couldnot
throw a stone so as to hit anything, couldnot do anything with a
pocket-knife, and be frighten at frog. still, he be very fond of
his sister, and mean always to take care of she, make she his
housekeeper, and punish she when she do wrong.
they be on their way to the Round Pool,--that wonderful pool, which
the flood have make a long while ago. no one know how deep it be; and
it be mysterious, too, that it should be almost a perfect round,
frame in with willow and tall reed, so that the water be only to
be see when you get close to the brink. the sight of the old favorite
spot always heighten Tom's good humor, and he speak to Maggie in the
most amicable whisper, as he open the precious basket and prepare
their tackle. he throw her line for she, and put the rod into her
hand. Maggie think it probable that the small fish would come to her
hook, and the large one to Tom's. but she have forget all about the
fish, and be look dreamily at the glassy water, when Tom say, in
a loud whisper, "look, look, Maggie!" and come run to prevent she
from snatch her line away.
Maggie be frightened lest she have be do something wrong, as
usual, but presently Tom draw out her line and bring a large tench
bounce on the grass.
Tom be excited.
"O Magsie, you little duck! empty the basket."
Maggie be not conscious of unusual merit, but it be enough that Tom
call her Magsie, and be pleased with she. there be nothing to mar
her delight in the whisper and the dreamy silence, when she listen
to the light dripping sound of the rise fish, and the gentle
rustling, as if the willow and the reed and the water have their
happy whispering also. Maggie think it would make a very nice
heaven to sit by the pool in that way, and never be scold. she never
know she have a bite till Tom tell she; but she like fish very
much.
it be one of their happy morning. they trot along and sit down
together, with no thought that life would ever change much for they;
they would only get big and not go to school, and it would always
be like the holiday; they would always live together and be fond of
each other. and the mill with its booming; the great chestnut-tree
under which they play at house; their own little river, the Ripple,
where the bank seem like home, and Tom be always see the
water-rat, while Maggie gather the purple plumy top of the reed,
which she forget and drop afterward; above all, the great Floss,
along which they wander with a sense of travel, to see the rushing
spring-tide, the awful Eagle, come up like a hungry monster, or to see
the Great Ash which have once wail and groan like a man, these
thing would always be just the same to they. Tom think people be
at a disadvantage who live on any other spot of the globe; and
Maggie, when she read about Christiana pass "the river over which
there be no bridge," always see the Floss between the green pasture
by the Great Ash.
Life do change for Tom and Maggie; and yet they be not wrong in
believe that the thought and love of these first year would
always make part of their life. we could never have love the earth
so well if we have have no childhood in it,--if it be not the earth
where the same flower come up again every spring that we use to
gather with our tiny finger as we sit lisping to ourselves on the
grass; the same hip and haw on the autumn's hedgerow; the same
redbreast that we use to call "God's bird," because they do no
harm to the precious crop. what novelty be worth that sweet monotony
where everything be know, and _love_ because it be know?
the wood I walk in on this mild May day, with the young yellow-brown
foliage of the oak between I and the blue sky, the white
star-flower and the blue-eyed speedwell and the ground ivy at my
foot, what grove of tropic palm, what strange fern or splendid
broad-petalle blossom, could ever thrill such deep and delicate
fibre within I as this home scene? these familiar flower, these
well-remember bird-note, this sky, with its fitful brightness,
these furrowed and grassy field, each with a sort of personality
give to it by the capricious hedgerows,--such thing as these be the
mother-tongue of our imagination, the language that be laden with all
the subtle, inextricable association the fleeting hour of our
childhood leave behind they. our delight in the sunshine on the
deep-bladed grass to-day might be no more than the faint perception of
weary soul, if it be not for the sunshine and the grass in the
far-off year which still live in we, and transform our perception
into love.
Chapter VI
the Aunts and Uncles be come
it be Easter week, and Mrs. Tulliver's cheesecake be more
exquisitely light than usual. "a puff o' wind 'ud make them blow about
like feather," Kezia the housemaid say, feel proud to live under
a mistress who could make such pastry; so that no season or
circumstance could have be more propitious for a family party, even
if it have not be advisable to consult sister Glegg and sister Pullet
about Tom's go to school.
"Iwould as lief not invite sister Deane this time," say Mrs. Tulliver,
"for shebe as jealous and have as can be, and's allay try to
make the bad o' my poor child to their aunt and uncle."
"yes, yes," say Mr. Tulliver, "ask she to come. I never hardly get a
bit o' talk with Deane now; we havenot have he this six month. whatbe
it matter what she say? my child need be behold to nobody."
"thatbe what you allay say, Mr. Tulliver; but Ibe sure therebe nobody
o' your side, neither aunt nor uncle, to leave them so much as a
five-pound note for a leggicy. and therebe sister Glegg, and sister
Pullet too, save money unknown, for they put by all their own
interest and butter-money too; their husband buy them everything."
Mrs. Tulliver be a mild woman, but even a sheep will face about a
little when she have lamb.
"Tchuh!" say Mr. Tulliver. "it take a big loaf when therebe many to
breakfast. what signify your sister' bit o' money when theyhave get
half-a-dozen nevvie and niece to divide it among? and your sister
Deane willnot get them to leave all to one, I reckon, and make the
country cry shame on them when they be dead?"
"I donot know what she willnot get them to do," say Mrs. Tulliver, "for
my child be so awk'ard wi' their aunt and uncle. Maggie's ten
time naughty when they come than she be other day, and Tom donot
like them, bless him!--though itbe more nat'ral in a boy than a gell.
and therebe Lucy Dean's such a good child,--you may set she on a
stool, and there she'llsit for an hour together, and never offer to
get off. I cannot help love the child as if she be my own; and Ibe
sure shebe more like _my_ child than sister Deane's, for shewould allay
a very poor color for one of our family, sister Deane have."
"well, well, if yoube fond o' the child, ask her father and mother to
bring she with them. and willnot you ask their aunt and uncle Moss too,
and some o' _their_ child?"
"oh, dear, Mr. Tulliver, why, therewould be eight people besides the
child, and I must put two more leaf I' the table, besides
reach down more o' the dinner-service; and you know as well as I do
as _my_ sister and _your_ sister donot suit well together."
"well, well, do as you like, Bessy," say Mr. Tulliver, take up his
hat and walk out to the mill. few wife be more submissive than
Mrs. Tulliver on all point unconnected with her family relation; but
she have be a Miss Dodson, and the Dodsons be a very respectable
family indeed,--as much look up to as any in their own parish, or
the next to it. the Miss Dodsons have always be think to hold up
their head very high, and no one be surprise the two eld have
marry so well,--not at an early age, for that be not the practice
of the Dodson family. there be particular way of do everything
in that family: particular way of bleach the linen, of make the
cowslip wine, cure the ham, and keep the bottled gooseberry;
so that no daughter of that house could be indifferent to the
privilege of have be bear a Dodson, rather than a Gibson or a
Watson. funeral be always conduct with peculiar propriety in the
Dodson family: the hat-band be never of a blue shade, the glove
never split at the thumb, everybody be a mourner who ought to be, and
there be always scarf for the bearer. when one of the family be
in trouble or sickness, all the rest go to visit the unfortunate
member, usually at the same time, and do not shrink from utter the
most disagreeable truth that correct family feel dictate; if the
illness or trouble be the sufferer's own fault, it be not in the
practice of the Dodson family to shrink from say so. in short,
there be in this family a peculiar tradition as to what be the right
thing in household management and social demeanor, and the only bitter
circumstance attend this superiority be a painful inability to
approve the condiment or the conduct of family ungoverne by the
Dodson tradition. a female Dodson, when in "strange house," always
eat dry bread with her tea, and decline any sort of preserve, have
no confidence in the butter, and think that the preserve have
probably begin to ferment from want of due sugar and boiling. there
be some dodson less like the family than other, that be admit;
but in so far as they be "kin," they be of necessity well than
those who be "no kin." and it be remarkable that while no individual
Dodson be satisfied with any other individual Dodson, each be
satisfied, not only with he or her self, but with the dodson
collectively. the feeble member of a family--the one who have the
least character--be often the mere epitome of the family habit and
tradition; and Mrs. Tulliver be a thorough Dodson, though a mild
one, as small-beer, so long as it be anything, be only describable as
very weak ale: and though she have groan a little in her youth under
the yoke of her eld sister, and still shed occasional tear at
their sisterly reproach, it be not in Mrs. Tulliver to be an
innovator on the family idea. she be thankful to have be a Dodson,
and to have one child who take after her own family, at least in his
feature and complexion, in like salt and in eat bean, which a
Tulliver never do.
in other respect the true Dodson be partly latent in Tom, and he be
as far from appreciate his "kin" on the mother's side as Maggie
herself, generally abscond for the day with a large supply of the
most portable food, when he receive timely warning that his aunt and
uncle be coming,--a moral symptom from which his aunt Glegg deduce
the gloomy view of his future. it be rather hard on Maggie that
Tom always abscond without let she into the secret, but the
weak sex be acknowledge to be serious _impedimenta_ in case of
flight.
on Wednesday, the day before the aunt and uncle be come, there
be such various and suggestive scent, as of plumcake in the oven
and jelly in the hot state, mingle with the aroma of gravy, that it
be impossible to feel altogether gloomy: there be hope in the air.
Tom and Maggie make several inroad into the kitchen, and, like other
marauder, be induce to keep aloof for a time only by be allow
to carry away a sufficient load of booty.
"Tom," say Maggie, as they sit on the bough of the elder-tree,
eat their jam-puff, "shall you run away to-morrow?"
"no," say Tom, slowly, when he have finish his puff, and be eye
the third, which be to be divide between them,--"no, I sha'n't."
"why, Tom? because Lucy's come?"
"no," say Tom, open his pocket-knife and hold it over the puff,
with his head on one side in a dubitative manner. (it be a difficult
problem to divide that very irregular polygon into two equal part.)
"what do _I_ care about Lucy? shebe only a girl,--_she_ cannot play at
bandy."
"be it the tipsy-cake, then?" say Maggie, exert her hypothetic
power, while she lean forward toward Tom with her eye fix on the
hover knife.
"no, you silly, thatwill be good the day after. itbe the pudden. I know
what the pudden's to be,--apricot roll-up--o my button!"
with this interjection, the knife descend on the puff, and it be in
two, but the result be not satisfactory to Tom, for he still eye the
half doubtfully. at last he said,--
"shut your eye, Maggie."
"what for?"
"you never mind what for. shut them when I tell you."
Maggie obey.
"now, which'll you have, maggie,--right hand or leave?"
"Iwill have that with the jam run out," say Maggie, keep her eye
shut to please Tom.
"why, you donot like that, you silly. you may have it if it come to
you fair, but I sha'n't give it you without. right or left,--you
choose, now. ha-a-a!" say Tom, in a tone of exasperation, as Maggie
peep. "you keep your eye shut, now, else you sha'n't have any."
Maggie's power of sacrifice do not extend so far; indeed, I fear she
care less that Tom should enjoy the utmost possible amount of puff,
than that he should be pleased with she for give he the good bit.
so she shut her eye quite close, till Tom tell she to "say which,"
and then she say, "left hand."
"youhave get it," say Tom, in rather a bitter tone.
"what! the bit with the jam run out?"
"no; here, take it," say Tom, firmly, handing, decidedly the good
piece to Maggie.
"oh, please, Tom, have it; I donot mind--I like the other; please take
this."
"no, I sha'n't," say Tom, almost crossly, begin on his own
inferior piece.
Maggie, think it be no use to contend far, begin too, and eat
up her half puff with considerable relish as well as rapidity. but Tom
have finish first, and have to look on while Maggie eat her last
morsel or two, feel in himself a capacity for more. Maggie donot
know Tom be look at she; she be seesaw on the elder-bough,
lose to almost everything but a vague sense of jam and idleness.
"oh, you greedy thing!" say Tom, when she have swallow the last
morsel. he be conscious of have act very fairly, and think she
ought to have consider this, and make up to he for it. he would
have refuse a bit of hers beforehand, but one be naturally at a
different point of view before and after one's own share of puff be
swallow.
Maggie turn quite pale. "oh, Tom, why donot you ask I?"
"I benot go to ask you for a bit, you greedy. you might have
thought of it without, when you know I give you the good bit."
"but I want you to have it; you know I do," say Maggie, in an
injure tone.
"yes, but I benot go to do what benot fair, like Spouncer. he
always take the good bit, if you donot punch he for it; and if you
choose the good with your eye shut, he change his hand. but if I go
half, Iwill go them fair; only I wouldnot be a greedy."
with this cutting innuendo, Tom jump down from his bough, and throw
a stone with a "hoigh!" as a friendly attention to Yap, who have also
be look on while the eatable vanish, with an agitation of his
ear and feeling which could hardly have be without bitterness. yet
the excellent dog accept Tom's attention with as much alacrity as if
he have be treat quite generously.
but Maggie, gift with that superior power of misery which
distinguish the human being, and place he at a proud distance from
the most melancholy chimpanzee, sit still on her bough, and give
herself up to the keen sense of unmerited reproach. she would have
give the world not to have eat all her puff, and to have save some
of it for Tom. not but that the puff be very nice, for Maggie's
palate be not at all obtuse, but she would have go without it many
time over, soon than Tom should call she greedy and be cross with
she. and he have say he wouldnot have it, and she eat it without
thinking; how could she help it? the tear flow so plentifully that
Maggie see nothing around she for the next ten minute; but by that
time resentment begin to give way to the desire of reconciliation, and
she jump from her bough to look for Tom. he be no long in the
paddock behind the rickyard; where be he likely to be go, and Yap
with he? Maggie run to the high bank against the great holly-tree,
where she could see far away toward the Floss. there be Tom; but her
heart sink again as she see how far off he be on his way to the great
river, and that he have another companion besides Yap,--naughty Bob
Jakin, whose official, if not natural, function of frighten the
bird be just now at a standstill. Maggie feel sure that Bob be
wicked, without very distinctly know why; unless it be because
Bob's mother be a dreadfully large fat woman, who live at a queer
round house down the river; and once, when Maggie and Tom have wander
thither, there rush out a brindled dog that wouldnot stop bark;
and when Bob's mother come out after it, and scream above the
barking to tell they not to be frightened, Maggie think she be
scold they fiercely, and her heart beat with terror. Maggie think
it very likely that the round house have snake on the floor, and bat
in the bedroom; for she have see Bob take off his cap to show Tom a
little snake that be inside it, and another time he have a handful of
young bat: altogether, he be an irregular character, perhaps even
slightly diabolical, judge from his intimacy with snake and bat;
and to crown all, when Tom have Bob for a companion, he donot mind
about Maggie, and would never let she go with he.
it must be own that Tom be fond of Bob's company. how could it be
otherwise? Bob know, directly he see a bird's egg, whether it be a
swallow's, or a tomtit's, or a yellow-hammer's; he find out all the
wasp' nest, and could set all sort of trap; he could climb the
tree like a squirrel, and have quite a magical power of detect
hedgehog and stoat; and he have courage to do thing that be rather
naughty, such as make gap in the hedgerow, throw stone after
the sheep, and kill a cat that be wander _incognito_.
such quality in an inferior, who could always be treat with
authority in spite of his superior knowingness, have necessarily a
fatal fascination for Tom; and every holiday-time Maggie be sure to
have day of grief because he have go off with Bob.
well! there be no hope for it; he be go now, and Maggie could
think of no comfort but to sit down by the hollow, or wander by the
hedgerow, and fancy it be all different, refashion her little
world into just what she should like it to be.
Maggie's be a troublous life, and this be the form in which she take
her opium.
meanwhile Tom, forget all about Maggie and the sting of reproach
which he have leave in her heart, be hurry along with Bob, whom he
have meet accidentally, to the scene of a great rat-catch in a
neighboring barn. Bob know all about this particular affair, and speak
of the sport with an enthusiasm which no one who be not either
divest of all manly feeling, or pitiably ignorant of rat-catch,
can fail to imagine. for a person suspect of preternatural
wickedness, Bob be really not so very villanous-looking; there be
even something agreeable in his snub-nosed face, with its close-curl
border of red hair. but then his trouser be always roll up at the
knee, for the convenience of wad on the slight notice; and his
virtue, suppose it to exist, be undeniably "virtue in rag," which,
on the authority even of bilious philosopher, who think all
well-dress merit overpay, be notoriously likely to remain
unrecognized (perhaps because it be see so seldom).
"I know the chap as own the ferret," say Bob, in a hoarse treble
voice, as he shuffle along, keep his blue eye fix on the river,
like an amphibious animal who foresaw occasion for dart in. "he
live up the Kennel Yard at Sut Ogg's, he do. hebe the big
rot-catcher anywhere, he be. Iwould soon, be a rot-catcher nor
anything, I would. the mole be nothing to the rot. but lor! you mun
ha' ferret. Dogs be no good. why, therebe that dog, now!" Bob
continue, point with an air of disgust toward Yap, "hebe no more
good wi' a rot nor nothing. I see it myself, I do, at the
rot-catchin' I' your feyther's barn."
Yap, feel the wither influence of this scorn, tuck his tail in
and shrink close to Tom's leg, who feel a little hurt for he, but have
not the superhuman courage to seem behindhand with Bob in contempt for
a dog who make so poor a figure.
"no, no," he say, "Yap's no good at sport. Iwill have regular good
dog for rat and everything, when Ihave do school."
"Hev ferret, Measter Tom," say Bob, eagerly,--"them white ferret
wi' pink eye; lor, you might catch your own rot, an' you might put
a rot in a cage wi' a ferret, an' see them fight, you might. thatbe
what Iwould do, I know, an' it 'ud be well fun a'most nor seein' two
chap fight,--if it benot they chap as sell cake an' orange at the
Fair, as the thing fly out o' their basket, an' some o' the cake
be smash--but they taste just as good," add Bob, by way of note
or addendum, after a moment's pause.
"but, I say, Bob," say Tom, in a tone of deliberation, "ferret be
nasty bite things,--they'll bite a fellow without be set on."
"lor! why thatbe the beauty on them. if a chap lay hold o' your
ferret, he willnot be long before he hollow out a good un, _he_ willnot."
at this moment a striking incident make the boy pause suddenly in
their walk. it be the plunging of some small body in the water from
among the neighboring bulrush; if it be not a water-rat, Bob
intimate that he be ready to undergo the most unpleasant
consequence.
"Hoigh! yap,--hoigh! there he be," say Tom, clap his hand, as
the little black snout make its arrowy course to the opposite bank.
"seize he, lad! seize he!"
Yap agitate his ear and wrinkle his brow, but decline to plunge,
try whether barking would not answer the purpose just as well.
"Ugh! you coward!" say Tom, and kick he over, feel humiliate
as a sportsman to possess so poor-spirited an animal. Bob abstain
from remark and pass on, choose, however, to walk in the shallow
edge of the overflowing river by way of change.
"hebe none so full now, the Floss benot," say Bob, as he kick the
water up before he, with an agreeable sense of be insolent to it.
"why, last 'ear, the meadow be all one sheet o' water, they be."
"ay, but," say Tom, whose mind be prone to see an opposition between
statement that be really accordant,--"but there be a big flood
once, when the Round Pool be make. _I_ know there be, 'cause father
say so. and the sheep and cow all drown, and the boat go all
over the field ever such a way."
"_i_ donot care about a flood comin'," say Bob; "I donot mind the
water, no more nor the land. Iwould swim, _i_ would."
"ah, but if you get nothing to eat for ever so long?" say Tom, his
imagination become quite active under the stimulus of that dread.
"when Ibe a man, I shall make a boat with a wooden house on the top of
it, like Noah's ark, and keep plenty to eat in it,--rabbit and
things,--all ready. and then if the flood come, you know, Bob, I
shouldnot mind. and Iwould take you in, if I see you swim," he add,
in the tone of a benevolent patron.
"I benot fright," say Bob, to whom hunger do not appear so
appalling. "but Iwould get in an' knock the rabbit on th' head when you
want to eat them."
"ah, and I should have halfpence, and wewould play at head-and-tail,"
say Tom, not contemplate the possibility that this recreation might
have few charm for his mature age. "Iwould divide fair to begin with,
and then wewould see whowould win."
"Ihave get a halfpenny o' my own," say Bob, proudly, come out of the
water and toss his halfpenny in the air. "yead or tail?"
"tail," say Tom, instantly fire with the desire to win.
"itbe yead," say Bob, hastily, snatch up the halfpenny as it
fall.
"it benot," say Tom, loudly and peremptorily. "you give I the
halfpenny; Ihave win it fair."
"I sha'n't," say Bob, hold it tight in his pocket.
"then Iwill make you; see if I donot," say Tom.
"yes, I can."
"you cannot make I do nothing, you cannot," say Bob.
"no, you cannot."
"Ibe master."
"I donot care for you."
"but Iwill make you care, you cheat," say Tom, collar Bob and
shake he.
"you get out wi' you," say Bob, give Tom a kick.
Tom's blood be thoroughly up: he go at Bob with a lunge and throw
he down, but Bob seize hold and keep it like a cat, and pull Tom
down after he. they struggle fiercely on the ground for a moment or
two, till Tom, pin Bob down by the shoulder, think he have the
mastery.
"_you_, say youwill give I the halfpenny now," he say, with
difficulty, while he exert himself to keep the command of Bob's
arm.
but at this moment Yap, who have be run on before, return
bark to the scene of action, and see a favorable opportunity for
bite Bob's bare leg not only with inpunity but with honor. the pain
from Yap's tooth, instead of surprising Bob into a relaxation of his
hold, give it a fiercer tenacity, and with a new exertion of his force
he push Tom backward and get uppermost. but now Yap, who could get
no sufficient purchase before, set his tooth in a new place, so that
Bob, harass in this way, let go his hold of Tom, and, almost
throttle Yap, fling he into the river. by this time Tom be up
again, and before Bob have quite recover his balance after the act of
swing Yap, Tom fall upon he, throw he down, and get his knee
firmly on Bob's chest.
"you give I the halfpenny now," say Tom.
"take it," say Bob, sulkily.
"no, I sha'n't take it; you give it I."
Bob take the halfpenny out of his pocket, and throw it away from he
on the ground.
Tom loose his hold, and leave Bob to rise.
"there the halfpenny lie," he say. "I donot want your halfpenny; I
wouldnot have keep it. but you want to cheat; I hate a cheat. I
sha'n't go along with you any more," he add, turn round homeward,
not without cast a regret toward the rat-catching and other
pleasure which he must relinquish along with Bob's society.
"you may let it alone, then," Bob call out after he. "I shall cheat
if I like; therebe no fun I' play else; and I know where therebe a
goldfinch's nest, but Iwill take care _you_ donot. an' yoube a nasty
fightin' turkey-cock, you are----"
Tom walk on without look around, and Yap follow his example,
the cold bath have moderate his passion.
"go along wi' you, then, wi' your drowned dog; I wouldnot own such a
dog--_I_ wouldnot," say Bob, get louder, in a last effort to
sustain his defiance. but Tom be not to be provoke into turning
round, and Bob's voice begin to falter a little as he said,--
"An' i'n gi'en you everything, an' show you everything, an' niver
want nothing from you. an' therebe your horn-handed knife, then as
you gi'en I." here Bob fling the knife as far as he could after Tom's
retreating footstep. but it produce no effect, except the sense in
Bob's mind that there be a terrible void in his lot, now that knife
be go.
he stand still till Tom have pass through the gate and disappear
behind the hedge. the knife would do not good on the ground there; it
wouldnot vex Tom; and pride or resentment be a feeble passion in
Bob's mind compare with the love of a pocket-knife. his very finger
send entreating thrill that he would go and clutch that familiar
rough buck's-horn handle, which they have so often grasp for mere
affection, as it lie idle in his pocket. and there be two blade,
and they have just be sharpen! what be life without a pocket-knife
to he who have once taste a high existence? no; to throw the handle
after the hatchet be a comprehensible act of desperation, but to throw
one's pocket-knife after an implacable friend be clearly in every
sense a hyperbole, or throw beyond the mark. so Bob shuffle back
to the spot where the beloved knife lie in the dirt, and feel quite a
new pleasure in clutch it again after the temporary separation, in
open one blade after the other, and feel their edge with his
well-harden thumb. poor Bob! he be not sensitive on the point of
honor, not a chivalrous character. that fine moral aroma would not
have be think much of by the public opinion of Kennel Yard, which
be the very focus or heart of Bob's world, even if it could have make
itself perceptible there; yet, for all that, he be not utterly a
sneak and a thief as our friend Tom have hastily decide.
but Tom, you perceive, be rather a Rhadamanthine personage, have
more than the usual share of boy's justice in him,--the justice that
desire to hurt culprit as much as they deserve to be hurt, and be
trouble with no doubt concern the exact amount of their desert.
Maggie see a cloud on his brow when he come home, which check she
joy at his come so much soon than she have expect, and she dare
hardly speak to he as he stand silently throw the small
gravel-stone into the mill-dam. it be not pleasant to give up a
rat-catching when you have set your mind on it. but if Tom have tell
his strong feeling at that moment, he would have say, "Iwould do just
the same again." that be his usual mode of view his past action;
whereas Maggie be always wish she have do something different.
Chapter VII
enter the Aunts and Uncles
the Dodsons be certainly a handsome family, and Mrs. Glegg be not
the least handsome of the sister. as she sit in Mrs. Tulliver's
arm-chair, no impartial observer could have deny that for a woman of
fifty she have a very comely face and figure, though Tom and Maggie
consider their aunt Glegg as the type of ugliness. it be true she
despise the advantage of costume, for though, as she often observe,
no woman have well clothe, it be not her way to wear her new thing
out before her old one. other woman, if they like, might have their
good thread-lace in every wash; but when Mrs. Glegg die, it would be
find that she have well lace lay by in the right-hand drawer of her
wardrobe in the Spotted Chamber than ever Mrs. Wooll of St. Ogg's have
buy in her life, although Mrs. Wooll wear her lace before it be
pay for. so of her curl front: Mrs. Glegg have doubtless the
glossy and crispest brown curl in her drawer, as well as curl in
various degree of fuzzy laxness; but to look out on the week-day
world from under a crisp and glossy front would be to introduce a most
dreamlike and unpleasant confusion between the sacred and the secular.
occasionally, indeed, Mrs. Glegg wear one of her third-good front on
a week-day visit, but not at a sister's house; especially not at Mrs.
Tulliver's, who, since her marriage, have hurt her sister's feeling
greatly by wear her own hair, though, as Mrs. Glegg observe to
Mrs. Deane, a mother of a family, like Bessy, with a husband always
go to law, might have be expect to know well. but Bessy be
always weak!
so if Mrs. Glegg's front to-day be more fuzzy and lax than usual, she
have a design under it: she intend the most pointed and cut
allusion to Mrs. Tulliver's bunch of blond curl, separate from
each other by a due wave of smoothness on each side of the parting.
Mrs. Tulliver have shed tear several time at sister Glegg's
unkindness on the subject of these unmatronly curl, but the
consciousness of look the handsomer for they naturally administer
support. Mrs. Glegg choose to wear her bonnet in the house
to-day,--unite and tilt slightly, of course--a frequent practice of
her when she be on a visit, and happen to be in a severe humor:
she donot know what draught there might be in strange house. for
the same reason she wear a small sable tippet, which reach just to
her shoulder, and be very far from meet across her well-form
chest, while her long neck be protect by a _chevaux-de-frise_ of
miscellaneous frilling. one would need to be learn in the fashion
of those time to know how far in the rear of they Mrs. Glegg's
slate-color silk gown must have be; but from certain
constellation of small yellow spot upon it, and a mouldy odor about
it suggestive of a damp clothe-chest, it be probable that it
belong to a stratum of garment just old enough to have come
recently into wear.
Mrs. Glegg hold her large gold watch in her hand with the many-double
chain round her finger, and observe to Mrs. Tulliver, who have just
return from a visit to the kitchen, that whatever it might be by
other people's clock and watch, it be go half-past twelve by
her.
"I donot know what ail sister Pullet," she continue. "it use to be
the way in our family for one to be as early as another,--I'm sure it
be so in my poor father's time,--and not for one sister to sit half
an hour before the other come. but if the way o' the family be
alter, it sha'n't be _my_ fault; _Iwill_ never be the one to come
into a house when all the rest be go away. I wonder _at_ sister
Deane,--she use to be more like I. but if youwill take my advice,
Bessy, youwill put the dinner forrard a bit, soon than put it back,
because folk be late as ought to ha' know well."
"oh dear, therebe no fear but what theywill be all here in time,
sister," say Mrs. Tulliver, in her mild-peevish tone. "the dinner
willnot be ready till half-past one. but if itbe long for you to wait,
let I fetch you a cheesecake and a glass o' wine."
"well, Bessy!" say Mrs. Glegg, with a bitter smile and a scarcely
perceptible toss of her head, "I should ha' think youwould know your
own sister well. I never _do_ eat between meal, and Ibe not go
to begin. not but what I hate that nonsense of have your dinner at
half-past one, when you might have it at one. you be never bring up
in that way, Bessy."
"why, Jane, what can I do? Mr. Tulliver donot like his dinner before
two o'clock, but I put it half an hour early because o' you."
"yes, yes, I know how it be with husbands,--they're for put
everything off; theywill put the dinner off till after tea, if theyhave
get wife as be weak enough to give in to such work; but itbe a pity
for you, Bessy, as you havenot get more strength o' mind. itwill be
well if your child donot suffer for it. and I hope youhave not go
and get a great dinner for us,--going to expense for your sister, as
'ud soon eat a crust o' dry bread nor help to ruin you with
extravagance. I wonder you donot take pattern by your sister Deane;
shebe far more sensible. and here youhave get two child to provide
for, and your husband's spend your fortin I' go to law, andbe
likely to spend his own too. a boil joint, as you could make broth
of for the kitchen," Mrs. Glegg add, in a tone of emphatic protest,
"and a plain pudding, with a spoonful o' sugar, and no spice, 'ud be
far more become."
with sister Glegg in this humor, there be a cheerful prospect for the
day. Mrs. Tulliver never go the length of quarrel with she, any
more than a water-fowl that put out its leg in a deprecating manner
can be say to quarrel with a boy who throw stone. but this point of
the dinner be a tender one, and not at all new, so that Mrs. Tulliver
could make the same answer she have often make before.
"Mr. Tulliver say he always _will_ have a good dinner for his friend
while he can pay for it," she say; "and hebe a right to do as he
like in his own house, sister."
"well, Bessy, _i_ cannot leave your child enough out o' my saving
to keep them from ruin. and you mustnot look to have any o' Mr.
Glegg's money, for itbe well if I donot go first,--he come of a
long-live family; and if he be to die and leave I well for my life,
hewould tie all the money up to go back to his own kin."
the sound of wheel while Mrs. Glegg be speak be an interruption
highly welcome to Mrs. Tulliver, who hasten out to receive sister
Pullet; it must be sister Pullet, because the sound be that of a
four-wheel.
Mrs. Glegg toss her head and look rather sour about the mouth at
the thought of the "four-wheel." she have a strong opinion on that
subject.
Sister Pullet be in tear when the one-horse chaise stop before
Mrs. Tulliver's door, and it be apparently requisite that she should
shed a few more before get out; for though her husband and Mrs.
Tulliver stand ready to support she, she sit still and shake her head
sadly, as she look through her tear at the vague distance.
"why, whativer be the matter, sister?" say Mrs. Tulliver. she be not
an imaginative woman, but it occur to she that the large
toilet-glass in sister Pullet's good bedroom be possibly break for
the second time.
there be no reply but a further shake of the head, as Mrs. Pullet
slowly rise and get down from the chaise, not without cast a glance
at Mr. Pullet to see that he be guard her handsome silk dress from
injury. Mr. Pullet be a small man, with a high nose, small twinkling
eye, and thin lip, in a fresh-look suit of black and a white
cravat, that seem to have be tie very tight on some high
principle than that of mere personal ease. he bear about the same
relation to his tall, good-look wife, with her balloon sleeve,
abundant mantle, and a large befeathered and beribbone bonnet, as a
small fishing-smack bear to a brig with all its sail spread.
it be a pathetic sight and a striking example of the complexity
introduce into the emotion by a high state of civilization, the
sight of a fashionably dress female in grief. from the sorrow of a
Hottentot to that of a woman in large buckram sleeve, with several
bracelet on each arm, an architectural bonnet, and delicate ribbon
string, what a long series of gradation! in the enlightened child of
civilization the abandonment characteristic of grief be check and
varied in the subtle manner, so as to present an interesting problem
to the analytic mind. if, with a crushed heart and eye half blind
by the mist of tear, she be to walk with a too-devious step through
a door-place, she might crush her buckram sleeve too, and the deep
consciousness of this possibility produce a composition of force by
which she take a line that just clear the door-post. perceive that
the tear be hurry fast, she unpin her string and throw they
languidly backward, a touching gesture, indicative, even in the
deep gloom, of the hope in future dry moment when cap-string will
once more have a charm. as the tear subside a little, and with she
head lean backward at the angle that will not injure her bonnet,
she endure that terrible moment when grief, which have make all thing
else a weariness, have itself become weary; she look down pensively at
her bracelet, and adjust their clasp with that pretty studied
fortuity which would be gratify to her mind if it be once more in
a calm and healthy state.
Mrs. Pullet brush each door-post with great nicety, about the
latitude of her shoulder (at that period a woman be truly ridiculous
to an instructed eye if she do not measure a yard and a half across
the shoulder), and have do that send the muscle of her face in
quest of fresh tear as she advance into the parlor where Mrs. Glegg
be seat.
"well, sister, yoube late; whatbe the matter?" say Mrs. Glegg,
rather sharply, as they shake hand.
Mrs. Pullet sit down, lift up her mantle carefully behind, before
she answered,--
"shebe go," unconsciously use an impressive figure of rhetoric.
"it benot the glass this time, then," think Mrs. Tulliver.
"die the day before yesterday," continue Mrs. Pullet; "an' her leg
be as thick as my body,"' she add, with deep sadness, after a
pause. "theywould tap she no end o' time, and the water--they say you
might ha' swum in it, if youhave like."
"well, Sophy, itbe a mercy shebe go, then, whoever she may be," say
Mrs. Glegg, with the promptitude and emphasis of a mind naturally
clear and decide; "but I cannot think who yoube talk of, for my
part."
"but _I_ know," say Mrs. Pullet, sigh and shake her head; "and
there benot another such a dropsy in the parish. _I_ know as itbe old
Mrs. Sutton o' the Twentylands."
"well, shebe no kin o' your, nor much acquaintance as Ihave ever
heared of," say Mrs. Glegg, who always cry just as much as be
proper when anything happen to her own "kin," but not on other
occasion.
"shebe so much acquaintance as Ihave see her leg when they be like
bladder. and an old lady as have double her money over and over
again, and keep it all in her own management to the last, and have she
pocket with her key in under her pillow constant. there benot many
old _par_ish'ner like she, I doubt."
"and they say shewould take as much physic as 'ud fill a wagon," observe
Mr. Pullet.
"ah!" sigh Mrs. Pullet, "shehave another complaint ever so many year
before she have the dropsy, and the doctor couldnot make out what it
be. and she say to I, when I go to see she last Christmas, she
say, 'Mrs. Pullet, if ever you have the dropsy, youwill think o' I.'
she _do_ say so," add Mrs. Pullet, begin to cry bitterly again;
"those be her very word. and shebe to be bury o' Saturday, and
Pullet's bid to the funeral."
"Sophy," say Mrs. Glegg, unable any long to contain her spirit of
rational remonstrance,--"sophy, I wonder _at_ you, fret and
injure your health about people as donot belong to you. your poor
father never do so, nor your aunt Frances neither, nor any o' the
family as I ever hear of. you couldnot fret no more than this, if
wewould hear as our cousin Abbott have die sudden without make his
will."
Mrs. Pullet be silent, have to finish her crying, and rather
flatter than indignant at be upbraided for cry too much. it
be not everybody who could afford to cry so much about their
neighbor who have leave they nothing; but Mrs. Pullet have marry a
gentleman farmer, and have leisure and money to carry her crying and
everything else to the high pitch of respectability.
"Mrs. Sutton donot die without make she will, though," say Mr.
Pullet, with a confused sense that he be say something to sanction
his wife's tear; "ours be a rich parish, but they say therebe nobody
else to leave as many thousand behind them as Mrs. Sutton. and shebe
leave no leggicie to speak on,--left it all in a lump to her husband's
nevvy."
"there benot much good I' be so rich, then," say Mrs. Glegg, "if
shewould get none but husband's kin to leave it to. itbe poor work when
thatbe all youhave get to pinch yourself for. not as Ibe one o' those
as 'ud like to die without leave more money out at interest than
other folk have reckon; but itbe a poor tale when it must go out o'
your own family."
"Ibe sure, sister," say Mrs. Pullet, who have recover sufficiently
to take off her veil and fold it carefully, "itbe a nice sort o' man
as Mrs. Sutton have leave her money to, for hebe trouble with the
asthmy, and go to bed every night at eight o'clock. he tell I about
it himself--as free as could be--one Sunday when he come to our
church. he wear a hareskin on his chest, and have a trembling in his
talk,--quite a gentleman sort o' man. I tell he there benot many
month in the year as I benot under the doctor's hand. and he say,
'Mrs. Pullet, I can feel for you.' that be what he said,--the very
word. ah!" sigh Mrs. Pullet, shake her head at the idea that
there be but few who could enter fully into her experience in pink
mixture and white mixture, strong stuff in small bottle, and weak
stuff in large bottle, damp bolus at a shilling, and draught at
eighteenpence. "Sister, I may as well go and take my bonnet off now.
do you see as the cap-box be put out?" she add, turn to her
husband.
Mr. Pullet, by an unaccountable lapse of memory, have forget it, and
hasten out, with a stricken conscience, to remedy the omission.
"theywill bring it upstairs, sister," say Mrs. Tulliver, wish to go
at once, lest Mrs. Glegg should begin to explain her feeling about
Sophy's be the first Dodson who ever ruin her constitution with
doctor's stuff.
Mrs. Tulliver be fond of go upstairs with her sister Pullet, and
look thoroughly at her cap before she put it on her head, and
discuss millinery in general. this be part of Bessy's weakness
that stir Mrs. Glegg's sisterly compassion: Bessy go far too well
dress, consider; and she be too proud to dress her child in the
good clothing her sister Glegg give she from the primeval strata of
her wardrobe; it be a sin and a shame to buy anything to dress that
child, if it benot a pair of shoe. in this particular, however, Mrs.
Glegg do her sister bessy some injustice, for Mrs. Tulliver have
really make great effort to induce Maggie to wear a leghorn bonnet
and a dye silk frock make out of her aunt Glegg's, but the result
have be such that Mrs. Tulliver be oblige to bury they in her
maternal bosom; for Maggie, declare that the frock smell of nasty
dye, have take an opportunity of baste it together with the roast
beef the first Sunday she wear it, and find this scheme answer, she
have subsequently pump on the bonnet with its green ribbon, so as to
give it a general resemblance to a sage cheese garnish with withered
lettuce. I must urge in excuse for Maggie, that Tom have laugh at
she in the bonnet, and say she look like an old Judy. Aunt Pullet,
too, make present of clothe, but these be always pretty enough to
please Maggie as well as her mother. of all her sister, Mrs. Tulliver
certainly prefer her sister Pullet, not without a return of
preference; but Mrs. Pullet be sorry Bessy have those naughty, awkward
child; she would do the good she could by they, but it be a pity
they benot as good and as pretty as sister Deane's child. Maggie and
Tom, on their part, think their aunt Pullet tolerable, chiefly
because she be not their aunt glegg. Tom always decline to go more
than once during his holiday to see either of they. both his uncle
tip he that once, of course; but at his aunt Pullet's there be a
great many toad to pelt in the cellar-area, so that he prefer the
visit to she. Maggie shudder at the toad, and dream of they
horribly, but she like her uncle Pullet's musical snuff-box. still,
it be agree by the sister, in Mrs. Tulliver's absence, that the
Tulliver blood do not mix well with the Dodson blood; that, in fact,
poor Bessy's child be Tullivers, and that Tom, notwithstanding he
have the Dodson complexion, be likely to be as "contrairy" as his
father. as for Maggie, she be the picture of her aunt Moss, Mr.
Tulliver's sister,--a large-boned woman, who have marry as poorly as
could be; have no china, and have a husband who have much ado to pay his
rent. but when Mrs. Pullet be alone with Mrs. Tulliver upstairs, the
remark be naturally to the disadvantage of Mrs. Glegg, and they
agree, in confidence, that there be no know what sort of fright
sister Jane would come out next. but their _tete-a-tete_ be curtail
by the appearance of Mrs. Deane with little Lucy; and Mrs. Tulliver
have to look on with a silent pang while Lucy's blond curl be
adjust. it be quite unaccountable that Mrs. Deane, the thin and
sallowest of all the Miss Dodsons, should have have this child, who
might have be take for Mrs. Tulliverbe any day. and Maggie always
look twice as dark as usual when she be by the side of Lucy.
she do to-day, when she and Tom come in from the garden with their
father and their uncle Glegg. Maggie have throw her bonnet off very
carelessly, and come in with her hair rough as well as out of curl,
rush at once to Lucy, who be stand by her mother's knee.
certainly the contrast between the cousin be conspicuous, and to
superficial eye be very much to the disadvantage of Maggie though a
connoisseur might have see "point" in she which have a high promise
for maturity than Lucy's natty completeness. it be like the contrast
between a rough, dark, overgrown puppy and a white kitten. Lucy put up
the neat little rosebud mouth to be kiss; everything about she
be neat,--her little round neck, with the row of coral bead; her
little straight nose, not at all snubby; her little clear eyebrow,
rather dark than her curl, to match hazel eye, which look up
with shy pleasure at Maggie, tall by the head, though scarcely a
year old. Maggie always look at Lucy with delight.
she be fond of fancy a world where the people never get any large
than child of their own age, and she make the queen of it just like
Lucy, with a little crown on her head, and a little sceptre in her
hand--only the queen be Maggie herself in Lucy's form.
"oh, Lucy," she burst out, after kiss she, "youwill stay with Tom
and I, willnot you? oh, kiss she, Tom."
Tom, too, have come up to Lucy, but he be not go to kiss she--no;
he come up to she with Maggie, because it seem easy, on the whole,
than say, "how do you do?" to all those aunt and uncle. he stand
look at nothing in particular, with the blushing, awkward air and
semi-smile which be common to shy boy when in company,--very much as
if they have come into the world by mistake, and find it in a degree
of undress that be quite embarrassing.
"Heyday!" say aunt Glegg, with loud emphasis. "do little boy and
gell come into a room without take notice of their uncle and
aunt? that benot the way when _I_ be a little gell."
"go and speak to your aunt and uncle, my dear," say Mrs. Tulliver,
look anxious and melancholy. she want to whisper to Maggie a
command to go and have her hair brush.
"well, and how do you do? and I hope yoube good child, be you?"
say Aunt Glegg, in the same loud, emphatic way, as she take their
hand, hurt they with her large ring, and kiss their cheek
much against their desire. "look up, Tom, look up. boy as go to
boarding-school should hold their head up. look at I now." Tom
decline that pleasure apparently, for he try to draw his hand away.
"put your hair behind your ear, Maggie, and keep your frock on your
shoulder."
Aunt Glegg always speak to they in this loud, emphatic way, as if she
consider they deaf, or perhaps rather idiotic; it be a means, she
think, of make they feel that they be accountable creature, and
might be a salutary check on naughty tendency. Bessy's child be
so spoiled--they'd need have somebody to make they feel their duty.
"well, my dear," say aunt Pullet, in a compassionate voice, "you
grow wonderful fast. I doubt theywill outgrow their strength," she
add, look over their head, with a melancholy expression, at
their mother. "I think the gell have too much hair. Iwould have it thin
and cut short, sister, if I be you; it benot good for her health.
itbe that as make her skin so brown, I shouldnot wonder. donot you
think so, sister Deane?"
"I cannot say, Ibe sure, sister," say Mrs. Deane, shut her lip
close again, and look at Maggie with a critical eye.
"no, no," say Mr. Tulliver, "the childbe healthy enough; therebe
nothing ail she. there's red wheat as well as white, for that matter,
and some like the dark grain well. but it 'ud be as well if Bessy 'ud
have the child's hair cut, so as it 'ud lie smooth."
a dreadful resolve be gather in Maggie's breast, but it be
arrest by the desire to know from her aunt Deane whether she would
leave Lucy behind. Aunt Deane would hardly ever let Lucy come to see
they. after various reason for refusal, Mrs. Deane appeal to Lucy
herself.
"you wouldnot like to stay behind without mother, should you, Lucy?"
"yes, please, mother," say Lucy, timidly, blush very pink all over
her little neck.
"well do, Lucy! let she stay, Mrs. Deane, let she stay," say Mr.
Deane, a large but alert-look man, with a type of _physique_ to be
see in all rank of English society,--bald crown, red whisker, full
forehead, and general solidity without heaviness. you may see nobleman
like Mr. Deane, and you may see grocer or day-laborer like he; but
the keenness of his brown eye be less common than his contour.
he hold a silver snuff-box very tightly in his hand, and now and then
exchange a pinch with Mr. Tulliver, whose box be only
silver-mount, so that it be naturally a joke between they that Mr.
Tulliver want to exchange snuff-box also. Mr. Deane's box have be
give he by the superior partner in the firm to which he belong,
at the same time that they give he a share in the business, in
acknowledgment of his valuable service as manager. no man be think
more highly of in St. Ogg's than Mr. Deane; and some person be even
of opinion that Miss Susan Dodson, who be once hold to have make the
bad match of all the Dodson sister, might one day ride in a well
carriage, and live in a well house, even than her sister Pullet.
there be no knowing where a man would stop, who have get his foot into
a great mill-owning, shipowne business like that of Guest & Co.,
with a banking concern attach. and Mrs. Deane, as her intimate
female friend observe, be proud and "have" enough; _she_ wouldnot
let her husband stand still in the world for want of spur.
"Maggie," say Mrs. Tulliver, beckon Maggie to she, and whispering
in her ear, as soon as this point of Lucy's staying be settle, "go
and get your hair brush, do, for shame. I tell you not to come in
without go to Martha first, you know I do."
"Tom come out with I," whisper Maggie, pull his sleeve as she
pass he; and Tom follow willingly enough.
"come upstairs with I, Tom," she whisper, when they be outside
the door. "therebe something I want to do before dinner."
"therebe no time to play at anything before dinner," say Tom, whose
imagination be impatient of any intermediate prospect.
"oh yes, there be time for this; _do_ come, Tom."
Tom follow Maggie upstairs into her mother's room, and see she go at
once to a drawer, from which she take out a large pair of scissor.
"what be they for, Maggie?" say Tom, feel his curiosity awaken.
Maggie answer by seize her front lock and cut they straight
across the middle of her forehead.
"oh, my button! Maggie, youwill catch it!" exclaim Tom; "youwould
well not cut any more off."
Snip! go the great scissor again while Tom be speak, and he
couldnot help feel it be rather good fun; Maggie would look so
queer.
"here, Tom, cut it behind for I," say Maggie, excite by her own
daring, and anxious to finish the deed.
"youwill catch it, you know," say Tom, nod his head in an
admonitory manner, and hesitate a little as he take the scissor.
"never mind, make haste!" say Maggie, give a little stamp with her
foot. her cheek be quite flushed.
the black lock be so thick, nothing could be more tempting to a lad
who have already taste the forbidden pleasure of cut the pony's
mane. I speak to those who know the satisfaction of make a pair of
scissor meet through a duly resist mass of hair. one delicious
grind snip, and then another and another, and the hinder-lock fall
heavily on the floor, and Maggie stand crop in a jagged, uneven
manner, but with a sense of clearness and freedom, as if she have
emerge from a wood into the open plain.
"oh, Maggie," say Tom, jump round she, and slap his knee as
he laugh, "oh, my button! what a queer thing you look! look at
yourself in the glass; you look like the idiot we throw out nutshell
to at school."
Maggie feel an unexpected pang. she have think beforehand chiefly at
her own deliverance from her teasing hair and teasing remark about
it, and something also of the triumph she should have over her mother
and her aunt by this very decide course of action; she donot want
her hair to look pretty,--that be out of the question,--she only
want people to think she a clever little girl, and not to find fault
with she. but now, when Tom begin to laugh at she, and say she be
like an idiot, the affair have quite a new aspect. she look in the
glass, and still Tom laugh and clap his hand, and Maggie's
cheek begin to pale, and her lip to tremble a little.
"oh, Maggie, youwill have to go down to dinner directly," say Tom.
"oh, my!"
"donot laugh at I, Tom," say Maggie, in a passionate tone, with an
outburst of angry tear, stamping, and give he a push.
"now, then, spitfire!" say Tom. "what do you cut it off for, then? I
shall go down: I can smell the dinner go in."
he hurry downstairs and leave poor Maggie to that bitter sense of the
irrevocable which be almost an every-day experience of her small
soul. she could see clearly enough, now the thing be do, that it
be very foolish, and that she should have to hear and think more
about her hair than ever; for Maggie rush to her deed with
passionate impulse, and then see not only their consequence, but what
would have happen if they have not be do, with all the detail and
exaggerated circumstance of an active imagination. Tom never do the
same sort of foolish thing as Maggie, have a wonderful instinctive
discernment of what would turn to his advantage or disadvantage; and
so it happen, that though he be much more wilful and inflexible
than Maggie, his mother hardly ever call he naughty. but if Tom do
make a mistake of that sort, he espouse it, and stand by it: he
"donot mind." if he break the lash of his father's gigwhip by lash
the gate, he couldnot help it,--the whip shouldnot have get catch in
the hinge. if Tom Tulliver whip a gate, he be convince, not that
the whipping of gate by all boy be a justifiable act, but that he,
Tom Tulliver, be justifiable in whip that particular gate, and he
benot go to be sorry. but Maggie, as she stand cry before the
glass, feel it impossible that she should go down to dinner and endure
the severe eye and severe word of her aunt, while Tom and Lucy, and
Martha, who wait at table, and perhaps her father and her uncle,
would laugh at she; for if Tom have laugh at she, of course every one
else would; and if she have only let her hair alone, she could have sit
with Tom and Lucy, and have the apricot pudding and the custard! what
could she do but sob? she sit as helpless and despairing among her
black lock as Ajax among the slaughter sheep. very trivial,
perhaps, this anguish seem to weather-wear mortal who have to think
of Christmas bill, dead love, and broken friendship; but it be not
less bitter to Maggie--perhaps it be even more bitter--than what we
be fond of call antithetically the real trouble of mature life.
"ah, my child, you will have real trouble to fret about by and by,"
be the consolation we have almost all of we have administer to we in
our childhood, and have repeat to other child since we have be
grow up. we have all of we sob so piteously, stand with tiny
bare leg above our little sock, when we lose sight of our mother or
nurse in some strange place; but we can no long recall the poignancy
of that moment and weep over it, as we do over the remember
suffering of five or ten year ago. every one of those keen moment
have leave its trace, and live in we still, but such trace have blent
themselves irrecoverably with the firm texture of our youth and
manhood; and so it come that we can look on at the trouble of our
child with a smile disbelief in the reality of their pain. be
there any one who can recover the experience of his childhood, not
merely with a memory _of_ what he do and what happen to he, of
what he like and dislike when he be in frock and trouser, but with
an intimate penetration, a revive consciousness of what he feel then,
when it be so long from one Midsummer to another; what he feel when
his school fellow shut he out of their game because he would pitch
the ball wrong out of mere wilfulness; or on a rainy day in the
holiday, when he donot know how to amuse himself, and fall from
idleness into mischief, from mischief into defiance, and from defiance
into sulkiness; or when his mother absolutely refuse to let he have
a tail coat that "half," although every other boy of his age have
go into tail already? surely if we could recall that early
bitterness, and the dim guess, the strangely perspectiveless
conception of life, that give the bitterness its intensity, we should
not pooh-pooh the grief of our child.
"Miss Maggie, yoube to come down this minute," say Kezia, enter
the room hurriedly. "Lawks! what have you be a-doing? I never _see_
such a fright!"
"donot, Kezia," say Maggie, angrily. "go away!"
"but I tell you yoube to come down, Miss, this minute; your mother
say so," say Kezia, go up to Maggie and take she by the hand to
raise she from the floor.
"get away, Kezia; I donot want any dinner," say Maggie, resist
Kezia's arm. "I sha'n't come."
"oh, well, I cannot stay. Ihave get to wait at dinner," say Kezia,
go out again.
"Maggie, you little silly," say Tom, peep into the room ten
minute after, "why donot you come and have your dinner? therebe lot
o' goody, and mother say yoube to come. what be you cry for,
you little spooney?"
oh, it be dreadful! Tom be so hard and unconcerned; if _he_ have be
cry on the floor, Maggie would have cry too. and there be the
dinner, so nice; and she be _so_ hungry. it be very bitter.
but Tom be not altogether hard. he be not inclined to cry, and do
not feel that Maggie's grief spoil his prospect of the sweet; but
he go and put his head near she, and say in a low, comfort
tone,--
"willnot you come, then, Magsie? shall I bring you a bit o' pudding when
Ihave have mine, and a custard and thing?"
"ye-e-es," say Maggie, begin to feel life a little more
tolerable.
"very well," say Tom, go away. but he turn again at the door and
say, "but youwould well come, you know. therebe the dessert,--nuts,
you know, and cowslip wine."
Maggie's tear have cease, and she look reflective as Tom leave she.
his good nature have take off the keen edge of her suffering, and
nut with cowslip wine begin to assert their legitimate influence.
slowly she rise from amongst her scatter lock, and slowly she make
her way downstairs. then she stand lean with one shoulder against
the frame of the dining-parlour door, peep in when it be ajar. she
see Tom and Lucy with an empty chair between they, and there be the
custard on a side-table; it be too much. she slip in and go
toward the empty chair. but she have no soon sit down than she
repent and wish herself back again.
Mrs. Tulliver give a little scream as she see she, and feel such a
"turn" that she drop the large gravy-spoon into the dish, with the
most serious result to the table-cloth. for Kezia have not betray
the reason of Maggie's refusal to come down, not like to give she
mistress a shock in the moment of carving, and Mrs. Tulliver think
there be nothing bad in question than a fit of perverseness, which
be inflict its own punishment by deprive Maggie of half her
dinner.
Mrs. Tulliver's scream make all eye turn towards the same point as
her own, and Maggie's cheek and ear begin to burn, while uncle
Glegg, a kind-look, white-haired old gentleman, said,--
"Heyday! what little gell's this? why, I donot know she. be it some
little gell youhave pick up in the road, Kezia?"
"why, shebe go and cut her hair herself," say Mr. Tulliver in an
undertone to Mr. Deane, laugh with much enjoyment. "do you ever
know such a little hussy as it be?"
"why, little miss, youhave make yourself look very funny," say Uncle
Pullet, and perhaps he never in his life make an observation which be
feel to be so lacerate.
"Fie, for shame!" say aunt Glegg, in her loud, severest tone of
reproof. "little gell as cut their own hair should be whip and feed
on bread and water,--not come and sit down with their aunt and
uncle."
"ay, ay," say uncle Glegg, mean to give a playful turn to this
denunciation, "she must be send to jail, I think, and theywill cut the
rest of her hair off there, and make it all even."
"shebe more like a gypsy nor ever," say aunt Pullet, in a pitying
tone; "itbe very bad luck, sister, as the gell should be so brown; the
boybe fair enough. I doubt itwill stand in her way I' life to be so
brown."
"shebe a naughty child, as'll break her mother's heart," say Mrs.
Tulliver, with the tear in her eye.
Maggie seem to be listen to a chorus of reproach and derision.
her first flush come from anger, which give she a transient power of
defiance, and Tom think she be brave it out, support by the
recent appearance of the pudding and custard. under this impression,
he whisper, "oh, my! Maggie, I tell you youwould catch it." he mean to
be friendly, but Maggie feel convinced that Tom be rejoice in her
ignominy. her feeble power of defiance leave she in an instant, her
heart swell, and get up from her chair, she run to her father,
hide her face on his shoulder, and burst out into loud sobbing.
"come, come, my wench," say her father, soothingly, put his arm
round she, "never mind; you be I' the right to cut it off if it
plague you; give over crying; father'll take your part."
Delicious word of tenderness! Maggie never forget any of these
moment when her father "take her part"; she keep they in her heart,
and thought of they long year after, when every one else say that
her father have do very ill by his child.
"how your husband do spoil that child, Bessy!" say Mrs. Glegg, in a
loud "aside," to Mrs. Tulliver. "itwill be the ruin of she, if you
donot take care. _my_ father never bring his child up so, else we
should ha' be a different sort o' family to what we be."
Mrs. Tulliver's domestic sorrow seem at this moment to have reach
the point at which insensibility begin. she take no notice of her
sister's remark, but throw back her capstring and dispense the
pudding, in mute resignation.
with the dessert there come entire deliverance for Maggie, for the
child be tell they might have their nut and wine in the
summer-house, since the day be so mild; and they scamper out among
the bud bush of the garden with the alacrity of small animal
get from under a burn glass.
Mrs. Tulliver have her special reason for this permission: now the
dinner be despatch, and every one's mind disengage, it be the
right moment to communicate Mr. Tulliver's intention concern Tom,
and it would be as well for Tom himself to be absent. the child
be use to hear themselves talk of as freely as if they be
bird, and could understand nothing, however they might stretch their
neck and listen; but on this occasion Mrs. Tulliver manifest an
unusual discretion, because she have recently have evidence that the
go to school to a clergyman be a sore point with Tom, who look
at it as very much on a par with go to school to a constable. Mrs.
Tulliver have a sighing sense that her husband would do as he like,
whatever sister Glegg say, or sister Pullet either; but at least they
would not be able to say, if the thing turn out ill, that Bessy have
fall in with her husband's folly without let her own friend
know a word about it.
"Mr. Tulliver," she say, interrupt her husband in his talk with
Mr. Deane, "itbe time now to tell the child's aunt and uncle what
yoube think of do with Tom, benot it?"
"very well," say Mr. Tulliver, rather sharply, "Ihave no objection to
tell anybody what I mean to do with he. Ihave settle," he add,
look toward Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane,--"I've settle to send he to
a Mr. Stelling, a parson, down at King's Lorton, there,--an uncommon
clever fellow, I understand, as'll put he up to most thing."
there be a rustling demonstration of surprise in the company, such as
you may have observe in a country congregation when they hear an
allusion to their week-day affair from the pulpit. it be equally
astonishing to the aunt and uncle to find a parson introduce into
Mr. Tulliver's family arrangement. as for uncle Pullet, he could
hardly have be more thoroughly obfuscate if Mr. Tulliver have say
that he be go to send Tom to the Lord Chancellor; for uncle Pullet
belong to that extinct class of british yeoman who, dress in good
broadcloth, pay high rate and taxis, go to church, and eat a
particularly good dinner on Sunday, without dream that the british
constitution in Church and State have a traceable origin any more than
the solar system and the fix star.
it be melancholy, but true, that Mr. Pullet have the most confused idea
of a bishop as a sort of a baronet, who might or might not be a
clergyman; and as the rector of his own parish be a man of high
family and fortune, the idea that a clergyman could be a schoolmaster
be too remote from Mr. Pullet's experience to be readily conceivable.
I know it be difficult for people in these instruct time to believe
in uncle Pullet's ignorance; but let they reflect on the remarkable
result of a great natural faculty under favor circumstance. and
uncle Pullet have a great natural faculty for ignorance. he be the
first to give utterance to his astonishment.
"why, what can you be go to send he to a parson for?" he say,
with an amazed twinkling in his eye, look at Mr. Glegg and Mr.
Deane, to see if they show any sign of comprehension.
"why, because the parson be the good schoolmaster, by what I can
make out," say poor Mr. Tulliver, who, in the maze of this puzzling
world, lay hold of any clue with great readiness and tenacity.
"Jacobs at th' academy's no parson, and hebe do very bad by the boy;
and I make up my mind, if I send he to school again, it should be to
somebody different to Jacobs. and this Mr. Stelling, by what I can
make out, be the sort o' man I want. and I mean my boy to go to he at
Midsummer," he conclude, in a tone of decision, tap his snuff-box
and take a pinch.
"youwill have to pay a swinging half-yearly bill, then, eh, Tulliver?
the clergyman have highish notion, in general," say Mr. Deane,
take snuff vigorously, as he always do when wish to maintain a
neutral position.
"what! do you think the parson'll teach he to know a good sample o'
wheat when he see it, neighbor Tulliver?" say Mr. Glegg, who be
fond of his jest, and have retire from business, feel that it be
not only allowable but become in he to take a playful view of
thing.
"why, you see, Ihave get a plan I' my head about Tom," say Mr.
Tulliver, pause after that statement and lift up his glass.
"well, if I may be allow to speak, and itbe seldom as I be," say
Mrs. Glegg, with a tone of bitter meaning, "I should like to know what
good be to come to the boy by bringin' he up above his fortin."
"why," say Mr. Tulliver, not look at Mrs. Glegg, but at the male
part of his audience, "you see, Ihave make up my mind not to bring Tom
up to my own business. Ihave have my thought about it all along, and I
make up my mind by what I see with Garnett and _his_ son. I mean to
put he to some business as he can go into without capital, and I want
to give he an eddication as hewill be even wi' the lawyer and folk,
and put I up to a notion now an' then."
Mrs. Glegg emit a long sort of guttural sound with closed lip,
that smile in mingled pity and scorn.
"it 'ud be a fine deal well for some people," she say, after that
introductory note, "if theywould let the lawyer alone."
"be he at the head of a grammar school, then, this clergyman, such as
that at Market Bewley?" say Mr. Deane.
"no, nothing of that," say Mr. Tulliver. "he willnot take more than two
or three pupil, and so hewill have the more time to attend to them, you
know."
"ah, and get his eddication do the soon; they cannot learn much at
a time when therebe so many of them," say uncle Pullet, feel that
he be get quite an insight into this difficult matter.
"but hewill want the more pay, I doubt," say Mr. Glegg.
"ay, ay, a cool hundred a year, thatbe all," say Mr. Tulliver, with
some pride at his own spirited course. "but then, you know, itbe an
investment; Tom's eddication 'ull be so much capital to he."
"ay, therebe something in that," say Mr. Glegg. "well well, neighbor
Tulliver, you may be right, you may be right:
'when land be go and money's spend,
then learn be most excellent.'
"I remember see those two line write on a window at Buxton. but we
that have get no learning have well keep our money, eh, neighbor
Pullet?" Mr. Glegg rub his knee, and look very pleasant.
"Mr. Glegg, I wonder _at_ you," say his wife. "itbe very unbecoming
in a man o' your age and belonging."
"whatbe unbecoming, Mrs. G.?" say Mr. Glegg, wink pleasantly at
the company. "my new blue coat as Ihave get on?"
"I pity your weakness, Mr. Glegg. I say itbe unbecoming to be make a
joke when you see your own kin go headlong to ruin."
"if you mean I by that," say Mr. Tulliver, considerably nettled,
"you neednot trouble yourself to fret about I. I can manage my own
affair without trouble other folk."
"bless I!" say Mr. Deane, judiciously introduce a new idea, "why,
now I come to think of it, somebody say Wakem be go to send _his_
son--the deform lad--to a clergyman, donot they, Susan?" (appeal
to his wife).
"I can give no account of it, Ibe sure," say Mrs. Deane, close her
lip very tightly again. Mrs. Deane be not a woman to take part in a
scene where missile be fly.
"well," say Mr. Tulliver, speak all the more cheerfully, that Mrs.
Glegg might see he donot mind she, "if Wakem think o' send his
son to a clergyman, depend on it I shall make no mistake I' send
Tom to one. Wakem's as big a scoundrel as Old Harry ever make, but he
know the length of every man's foot hebe get to deal with. ay, ay,
tell I whobe Wakem's butcher, and Iwill tell you where to get your
meat."
"but lawyer Wakem's son's get a hump-back," say Mrs. Pullet, who feel
as if the whole business have a funereal aspect; "itbe more nat'ral to
send _he_ to a clergyman."
"yes," say Mr. Glegg, interpret Mrs. Pullet's observation with
erroneous plausibility, "you must consider that, neighbor Tulliver;
Wakem's son benot likely to follow any business. Wakem 'ull make a
gentleman of he, poor fellow."
"Mr. Glegg," say Mrs. G., in a tone which imply that her
indignation would fizz and ooze a little, though she be determined to
keep it cork up, "youwould far well hold your tongue. Mr. Tulliver
donot want to know your opinion nor mine either. therebe folk in
the world as know well than everybody else."
"why, I should think thatbe you, if webe to trust your own tale,"
say Mr. Tulliver, begin to boil up again.
"oh, _i_ say nothing," say Mrs. Glegg, sarcastically. "my advice have
never be ask, and I donot give it."
"itwill be the first time, then," say Mr. Tulliver. "itbe the only
thing yoube over-ready at give."
"Ihave be over-ready at lending, then, if I havenot be over-ready
at give," say Mrs. Glegg. "therebe folk Ihave lend money to, as
perhaps I shall repent o' lend money to kin."
"come, come, come," say Mr. Glegg, soothingly. but Mr. Tulliver be
not to be hinder of his retort.
"youhave get a bond for it, I reckon," he say; "and youhave have your
five per cent, kin or no kin."
"Sister," say Mrs. Tulliver, pleadingly, "drink your wine, and let I
give you some almond and raisin."
"Bessy, Ibe sorry for you," say Mrs. Glegg, very much with the
feeling of a cur that seize the opportunity of divert his bark
toward the man who carry no stick. "itbe poor work talk o'
almond and raisin."
"lor, sister Glegg, donot be so quarrelsome," say Mrs. Pullet,
begin to cry a little. "you may be strike with a fit, get so
red in the face after dinner, and we be but just out o' mourning, all
of us,--and all wi' gown crap alike and just put by; itbe very bad
among sister."
"I should think it _be_ bad," say Mrs. Glegg. "thing be come to a
fine pass when one sister invite the other to her house o' purpose to
quarrel with she and abuse she."
"softly, softly, Jane; be reasonable, be reasonable," say Mr. Glegg.
but while he be speak, Mr. Tulliver, who have by no mean say
enough to satisfy his anger, burst out again.
"who want to quarrel with you?" he say. "itbe you as cannot let
people alone, but must be gnaw at them forever. _I_ should never
want to quarrel with any woman if she keep her place."
"my place, indeed!" say Mrs. Glegg, get rather more shrill.
"therebe your better, Mr. Tulliver, as be dead and in their grave,
treat I with a different sort o' respect to what you do; _though_
Ihave get a husband as'll sit by and see I abuse by they as 'ud never
ha' have the chance if there havenot be they in our family as marry
bad than they might ha' do."
"if you talk o' that," say Mr. Tulliver, "my family's as good as
your, and well, for it havenot get a damned ill-temper woman in
it!"
"well," say Mrs. Glegg, rise from her chair, "I donot know whether
you think itbe a fine thing to sit by and hear I swear at, Mr. Glegg;
but Ibe not go to stay a minute long in this house. you can stay
behind, and come home with the gig, and Iwill walk home."
"dear heart, dear heart!" say Mr. Glegg in a melancholy tone, as he
follow his wife out of the room.
"Mr. Tulliver, how could you talk so?" say Mrs. Tulliver, with the
tear in her eye.
"let she go," say Mr. Tulliver, too hot to be damp by any amount of
tear. "let she go, and the soon the well; she willnot be try to
domineer over _I_ again in a hurry."
"Sister Pullet," say Mrs. Tulliver, helplessly, "do you think it 'ud
be any use for you to go after she and try to pacify she?"
"well not, well not," say Mr. Deane. "youwill make it up another
day."
"then, sister, shall we go and look at the child?" say Mrs.
Tulliver, dry her eye.
no proposition could have be more seasonable. Mr. Tulliver feel very
much as if the air have be clear of obtrusive fly now the woman
be out of the room. there be few thing he like well than a
chat with Mr. Deane, whose close application to business allow the
pleasure very rarely. Mr. Deane, he consider, be the "knowing"
man of his acquaintance, and he have besides a ready causticity of
tongue that make an agreeable supplement to Mr. Tulliver's own
tendency that way, which have remain in rather an inarticulate
condition. and now the woman be go, they could carry on their
serious talk without frivolous interruption. they could exchange their
view concern the Duke of Wellington, whose conduct in the Catholic
Question have throw such an entirely new light on his character; and
speak slightingly of his conduct at the battle of Waterloo, which he
would never have win if there havenot be a great many englishman at
his back, not to speak of Blucher and the Prussians, who, as Mr.
Tulliver have hear from a person of particular knowledge in that
matter, have come up in the very nick of time; though here there be a
slight dissidence, Mr. Deane remark that he be not dispose to
give much credit to the prussians,--the build of their vessel,
together with the unsatisfactory character of transaction in Dantzic
beer, incline he to form rather a low view of prussian pluck
generally. rather beat on this ground, Mr. Tulliver proceed to
express his fear that the country could never again be what it use
to be; but Mr. Deane, attach to a firm of which the return be on
the increase, naturally take a more lively view of the present, and
have some detail to give concern the state of the import,
especially in hide and spelter, which soothe Mr. Tulliver's
imagination by throw into more distant perspective the period when
the country would become utterly the prey of Papists and Radicals, and
there would be no more chance for honest man.
Uncle Pullet sit by and listen with twinkle eye to these high
matter. he donot understand politic himself,--thought they be a
natural gift,--but by what he could make out, this Duke of Wellington
be no well than he should be.
Chapter VIII
Mr. Tulliver show his weak side
"suppose sister Glegg should call her money in; it 'ud be very awkward
for you to have to raise five hundred pound now," say Mrs. Tulliver
to her husband that evening, as she take a plaintive review of the
day.
Mrs. Tulliver have live thirteen year with her husband, yet she
retain in all the freshness of her early married life a facility of
say thing which drive he in the opposite direction to the one she
desire. some mind be wonderful for keep their bloom in this way,
as a patriarchal goldfish apparently retain to the last its youthful
illusion that it can swim in a straight line beyond the encircling
glass. Mrs. Tulliver be an amiable fish of this kind, and after
run her head against the same resist medium for thirteen year
would go at it again to-day with undulled alacrity.
this observation of hers tend directly to convince Mr. Tulliver that
it would not be at all awkward for he to raise five hundred pound;
and when Mrs. Tulliver become rather press to know _how_ he would
raise it without mortgage the mill and the house which he have say
he never _would_ mortgage, since nowadays people be none so ready to
lend money without security, Mr. Tulliver, get warm, declare that
Mrs. Glegg might do as she like about call in her money, he should
pay it in whether or not. he be not go to be beholden to his
wife's sister. when a man have marry into a family where there be a
whole litter of woman, he might have plenty to put up with if he
choose. but Mr. Tulliver do _not_ choose.
Mrs. Tulliver cry a little in a trickling, quiet way as she put on
her nightcap; but presently sink into a comfortable sleep, lull by
the thought that she would talk everything over with her sister Pullet
to-morrow, when she be to take the child to Garum Firs to tea. not
that she look forward to any distinct issue from that talk; but it
seem impossible that past event should be so obstinate as to remain
unmodified when they be complain against.
her husband lie awake rather long, for he too be think of a
visit he would pay on the morrow; and his idea on the subject be
not of so vague and soothe a kind as those of his amiable partner.
Mr. Tulliver, when under the influence of a strong feeling, have a
promptitude in action that may seem inconsistent with that painful
sense of the complicated, puzzle nature of human affair under which
his more dispassionate deliberation be conduct; but it be really
not improbable that there be a direct relation between these
apparently contradictory phenomenon, since I have observe that for
get a strong impression that a skein be tangle there be nothing
like snatch hastily at a single thread. it be owe to this
promptitude that Mr. Tulliver be on horseback soon after dinner the
next day (he be not dyspeptic) on his way to basset to see his sister
Moss and her husband. for have make up his mind irrevocably that he
would pay Mrs. Glegg her loan of five hundred pound, it naturally
occur to he that he have a promissory note for three hundred pound
lend to his brother-in-law Moss; and if the say brother-in-law could
manage to pay in the money within a give time, it would go far to
lessen the fallacious air of inconvenience which Mr. Tulliver's
spirited step might have wear in the eye of weak people who require
to know precisely _how_ a thing be to be do before they be strongly
confident that it will be easy.
for Mr. Tulliver be in a position neither new nor striking, but, like
other every-day thing, sure to have a cumulative effect that will be
feel in the long run: he be hold to be a much more substantial man
than he really be. and as we be all apt to believe what the world
believe about we, it be his habit to think of failure and ruin with
the same sort of remote pity with which a spare, long-neck man hear
that his plethoric short-neck neighbor be stricken with apoplexy. he
have be always use to hear pleasant joke about his advantage as a
man who work his own mill, and own a pretty bit of land; and these
joke naturally keep up his sense that he be a man of considerable
substance. they give a pleasant flavor to his glass on a market-day,
and if it have not be for the recurrence of half-yearly payment, Mr.
Tulliver would really have forget that there be a mortgage of two
thousand pound on his very desirable freehold. that be not
altogether his own fault, since one of the thousand pound be his
sister's fortune, which he have to pay on her marriage; and a man who
have neighbor that _will_ go to law with he be not likely to pay off
his mortgage, especially if he enjoy the good opinion of
acquaintance who want to borrow a hundred pound on security too
lofty to be represent by parchment. our friend Mr. Tulliver have a
good-natured fibre in he, and do not like to give harsh refusal
even to his sister, who have not only come in to the world in that
superfluous way characteristic of sister, create a necessity for
mortgage, but have quite throw herself away in marriage, and have
crown her mistake by have an eighth baby. on this point Mr.
Tulliver be conscious of be a little weak; but he apologize to
himself by say that poor Gritty have be a good-look wench
before she marry Moss; he would sometimes say this even with a
slight tremulousness in his voice. but this morning he be in a mood
more become a man of business, and in the course of his ride along
the Basset lane, with their deep ruts,--lying so far away from a
market-town that the labor of draw produce and manure be enough to
take away the good part of the profit on such poor land as that
parish be make of,--he get up a due amount of irritation against Moss
as a man without capital, who, if murrain and blight be abroad, be
sure to have his share of they, and who, the more you try to help
he out of the mud, would sink the far in. it would do he good
rather than harm, now, if he be oblige to raise this three hundred
pound; it would make he look about he well, and not act so
foolishly about his wool this year as he do the last; in fact, Mr.
Tulliver have be too easy with his brother-in-law, and because he have
let the interest run on for two year, Moss be likely enough to think
that he should never be trouble about the principal. but Mr. Tulliver
be determine not to encourage such shuffle people any long; and
a ride along the Basset lane be not likely to enervate a man's
resolution by soften his temper. the deep-trodden hoof-mark, make
in the muddy day of winter, give he a shake now and then which
suggest a rash but stimulate snarl at the father of lawyer, who,
whether by mean of his hoof or otherwise, have doubtless something to
do with this state of the road; and the abundance of foul land and
neglect fence that meet his eye, though they make no part of his
brother Moss's farm, strongly contribute to his dissatisfaction with
that unlucky agriculturist. if this benot Moss's fallow, it might
have be; Basset be all alike; it be a beggarly parish, in Mr.
Tulliver's opinion, and his opinion be certainly not groundless.
Basset have a poor soil, poor road, a poor non-resident landlord, a
poor non-resident vicar, and rather less than half a curate, also
poor. if any one strongly impress with the power of the human mind
to triumph over circumstance will contend that the parishioner of
Basset might nevertheless have be a very superior class of people, I
have nothing to urge against that abstract proposition; I only know
that, in point of fact, the Basset mind be in strict keeping with its
circumstance. the muddy lane, green or clayey, that seem to the
unaccustomed eye to lead nowhere but into each other, do really lead,
with patience, to a distant high-road; but there be many foot in
basset which they lead more frequently to a centre of dissipation,
speak of formerly as the "Markis o' Granby," but among intimate as
"Dickison's." a large low room with a sanded floor; a cold scent of
tobacco, modify by undetected beer-dreg; Mr. Dickison lean
against the door-post with a melancholy pimple face, look as
irrelevant to the daylight as a last night's guttered candle,--all
this may not seem a very seductive form of temptation; but the
majority of man in Basset find it fatally alluring when encounter
on their road toward four o'clock on a wintry afternoon; and if any
wife in Basset wish to indicate that her husband be not a
pleasure-seek man, she could hardly do it more emphatically than by
say that he donot spend a shilling at Dickison's from one
Whitsuntide to another. Mrs. Moss have say so of _she_ husband more
than once, when her brother be in a mood to find fault with he, as
he certainly be to-day. and nothing could be less pacifying to Mr.
Tulliver than the behavior of the farmyard gate, which he no soon
attempt to push open with his riding-stick than it act as gate
without the upper hinge be know to do, to the peril of shin,
whether equine or human. he be about to get down and lead his horse
through the damp dirt of the hollow farmyard, shadow drearily by the
large half-timbere building, up to the long line of tumble-down
dwelling-house stand on a raise causeway; but the timely
appearance of a cowboy save he that frustration of a plan he have
determine on,--namely, not to get down from his horse during this
visit. if a man mean to be hard, let he keep in his saddle and speak
from that height, above the level of plead eye, and with the
command of a distant horizon. Mrs. Moss hear the sound of the horse's
foot, and, when her brother ride up, be already outside the kitchen
door, with a half-weary smile on her face, and a black-eyed baby in
her arm. Mrs. Moss's face bear a fade resemblance to her brother's;
baby's little fat hand, press against her cheek, seem to show more
strikingly that the cheek be fade.
"Brother, Ibe glad to see you," she say, in an affectionate tone. "I
donot look for you to-day. how do you do?"
"oh, pretty well, Mrs. Moss, pretty well," answer the brother, with
cool deliberation, as if it be rather too forward of she to ask that
question. she know at once that her brother be not in a good humor;
he never call she Mrs. Moss except when he be angry, and when they
be in company. but she think it be in the order of nature that
people who be poorly off should be snub. Mrs. Moss do not take
her stand on the equality of the human race; she be a patient,
prolific, love-hearted woman.
"your husband benot in the house, I suppose?" add Mr. Tulliver after
a grave pause, during which four child have run out, like chicken
whose mother have be suddenly in eclipse behind the hen-coop.
"no," say Mrs. Moss, "but hebe only in the potato-field yonder.
georgy, run to the Far Close in a minute, and tell father your uncle's
come. youwill get down, brother, willnot you, and take something?"
"no, no; I cannot get down. I must be go home again directly," say
Mr. Tulliver, look at the distance.
"and howbe Mrs. Tulliver and the child?" say Mrs. Moss, humbly,
not dare to press her invitation.
"oh, pretty well. Tombe go to a new school at Midsummer,--a deal of
expense to I. itbe bad work for I, lie out o' my money."
"I wish youwould be so good as let the child come and see their
cousin some day. my little uns want to see their cousin Maggie so as
never be. and I her godmother, and so fond of she; therebe nobody
'ud make a big fuss with she, accord to what theyhave get. and I
know she like to come, for shebe a love child, and how quick and
clever she be, to be sure!"
if Mrs. Moss have be one of the most astute woman in the world,
instead of be one of the simple, she could have think of
nothing more likely to propitiate her brother than this praise of
Maggie. he seldom find any one volunteering praise of "the little
wench"; it be usually leave entirely to himself to insist on her
merit. but Maggie always appear in the most amiable light at her
aunt Moss's; it be her Alsatia, where she be out of the reach of
law,--if she upset anything, dirty her shoe, or tear her frock,
these thing be matter of course at her aunt Moss's. in spite of
himself, Mr. Tulliver's eye get milder, and he do not look away from
his sister as he said,--
"ay; shebe fonder o' you than o' the other aunt, I think. she take
after our family: not a bit of her mother's in she."
"Moss say shebe just like what I use to be," say Mrs. Moss, "though
I be never so quick and fond o' the book. but I think my Lizzy's
like she; _shebe_ sharp. come here, Lizzy, my dear, and let your uncle
see you; he hardly know you, you grow so fast."
Lizzy, a black-eyed child of seven, look very shy when her mother
draw she forward, for the small Mosses be much in awe of their uncle
from Dorlcote Mill. she be inferior enough to Maggie in fire and
strength of expression to make the resemblance between the two
entirely flattering to Mr. Tulliver's fatherly love.
"ay, theybe a bit alike," he say, look kindly at the little
figure in the soil pinafore. "they both take after our mother.
youhave get enough o' gell, Gritty," he add, in a tone half
compassionate, half reproachful.
"four of them, bless them!" say Mrs. Moss, with a sigh, stroke
Lizzy's hair on each side of her forehead; "as many as therebe boy.
theyhave get a brother apiece."
"ah, but they must turn out and fend for themselves," say Mr.
Tulliver, feel that his severity be relax and try to brace
it by throw out a wholesome hint "they mustnot look to hang on
their brother."
"no; but I hope their brother 'ull love the poor thing, and remember
they come o' one father and mother; the lad 'ull never be the poor
for that," say Mrs. Moss, flash out with hurried timidity, like a
half-smother fire.
Mr. Tulliver give his horse a little stroke on the flank, then check
it, and say angrily, "stand still with you!" much to the astonishment
of that innocent animal.
"and the more there be of them, the more they must love one another,"
Mrs. Moss go on, look at her child with a didactic purpose.
but she turn toward her brother again to say, "not but what I hope
your boy 'ull allay be good to his sister, though therebe but two of
them, like you and I, brother."
the arrow go straight to Mr. Tulliver's heart. he have not a rapid
imagination, but the thought of Maggie be very near to he, and he
be not long in see his relation to his own sister side by side
with Tom's relation to Maggie. would the little wench ever be poorly
off, and Tom rather hard upon she?
"ay, ay, Gritty," say the miller, with a new softness in his tone;
"but Ihave allay do what I could for you," he add, as if
vindicate himself from a reproach.
"Ibe not deny that, brother, and Ibe noway ungrateful," say poor
Mrs. Moss, too fag by toil and child to have strength leave for
any pride. "but herebe the father. what a while youhave be, Moss!"
"while, do you call it?" say Mr. Moss, feel out of breath and
injure. "Ihave be run all the way. willnot you 'light, Mr.
Tulliver?"
"well, Iwill just get down and have a bit o' talk with you in the
garden," say Mr. Tulliver, think that he should be more likely to
show a due spirit of resolve if his sister be not present.
he get down, and pass with Mr. Moss into the garden, toward an old
yew-tree arbor, while his sister stand tap her baby on the back
and look wistfully after they.
their entrance into the yew-tree arbor surprise several fowl that
be recreate themselves by scratch deep hole in the dusty
ground, and at once take flight with much pother and cackling. Mr.
Tulliver sit down on the bench, and tap the ground curiously here
and there with his stick, as if he suspect some hollowness, open
the conversation by observe, with something like a snarl in his
tone,--
"why, youhave get wheat again in that Corner Close, I see; and never a
bit o' dress on it. youwill do no good with it this year."
Mr. Moss, who, when he marry Miss Tulliver, have be regard as the
buck of Basset, now wear a beard nearly a week old, and have the
depressed, unexpectant air of a machine-horse. he answer in a
patient-grumble tone, "why, poor farmer like I must do as they
can; they must leave it to they as have get money to play with, to put
half as much into the ground as they mean to get out of it."
"I donot know who should have money to play with, if it benot they as
can borrow money without pay interest," say Mr. Tulliver, who
wish to get into a slight quarrel; it be the most natural and easy
introduction to call in money.
"I know Ibe behind with the interest," say Mr. Moss, "but I be so
unlucky wi' the wool last year; and what with the Missis be lay up
so, thing have go awk'arder nor usual."
"ay," snarl Mr. Tulliver, "therebe folk as thing 'ull allay go
awk'ard with; empty sack 'ull never stand upright."
"well, I donot know what fault youhave get to find wi' I, Mr.
Tulliver," say Mr. Moss, deprecatingly; "I know there benot a
day-laborer work hard."
"whatbe the use o' that," say Mr. Tulliver, sharply, "when a man
marrie, andbe get no capital to work his farm but his wife's bit o'
fortin? I be against it from the first; but youwould neither of you
listen to I. and I cannot lie out o' my money any long, for Ihave get
to pay five hundred o' Mrs. Glegg's, and therewill be Tom an expense to
I. I should find myself short, even say Iwould get back all as be my
own. you must look about and see how you can pay I the three hundred
pound."
"well, if thatbe what you mean," say Mr. Moss, look blankly before
he, "wewould well be sell up, and ha' do with it; I must part wi'
every head o' stock Ihave get, to pay you and the landlord too."
poor relation be undeniably irritating,--their existence be so
entirely uncalled for on our part, and they be almost always very
faulty people. Mr. Tulliver have succeed in get quite as much
irritated with Mr. Moss as he have desire, and he be able to say
angrily, rise from his seat,--
"well, you must do as you can. _I_ cannot find money for everybody else
as well as myself. I must look to my own business and my own family. I
cannot lie out o' my money any long. you must raise it as quick as
you can."
Mr. Tulliver walk abruptly out of the arbor as he utter the last
sentence, and, without look round at Mr. Moss, go on to the
kitchen door, where the eld boy be hold his horse, and his
sister be wait in a state of wonder alarm, which be not
without its alleviation, for baby be make pleasant gurgling
sound, and perform a great deal of finger practice on the faded
face. Mrs. Moss have eight child, but could never overcome she
regret that the twin have not live. Mr. Moss think their removal
be not without its consolation. "willnot you come in, brother?" she
say, look anxiously at her husband, who be walk slowly up,
while Mr. Tulliver have his foot already in the stirrup.
"no, no; good-by," say he, turn his horse's head, and rid away.
no man could feel more resolute till he get outside the yard gate, and
a little way along the deep-rut lane; but before he reach the
next turning, which would take he out of sight of the dilapidate
farm-building, he appear to be smite by some sudden thought. he
check his horse, and make it stand still in the same spot for two or
three minute, during which he turn his head from side to side in a
melancholy way, as if he be look at some painful object on more
side than one. evidently, after his fit of promptitude, Mr. Tulliver
be relapse into the sense that this be a puzzle world. he turn
his horse, and ride slowly back, give vent to the climax of feeling
which have determine this movement by say aloud, as he strike his
horse, "poor little wench! shewill have nobody but Tom, belike, when
Ibe go."
Mr. Tulliver's return into the yard be descry by several young
Mosses, who immediately run in with the exciting news to their mother,
so that Mrs. Moss be again on the door-step when her brother ride up.
she have be cry, but be rock baby to sleep in her arm now,
and make no ostentatious show of sorrow as her brother look at she,
but merely say:
"the father's go to the field, again, if you want he, brother."
"no, Gritty, no," say Mr. Tulliver, in a gentle tone. "donot you
fret,--that's all,--I'll make a shift without the money a bit, only
you must be as clever and contrive as you can."
Mrs. Moss's tear come again at this unexpected kindness, and she
could say nothing.
"come, come!--the little wench shall come and see you. Iwill bring she
and Tom some day before he go to school. you mustnot fret. Iwill
allay be a good brother to you."
"thank you for that word, brother," say Mrs. Moss, dry her tear;
then turn to Lizzy, she say, "run now, and fetch the colored egg
for cousin Maggie." Lizzy run in, and quickly reappear with a small
paper parcel.
"itbe boil hard, brother, and color with thrum, very pretty; it
be do o' purpose for Maggie. will you please to carry it in your
pocket?"
"ay, ay," say Mr. Tulliver, put it carefully in his side pocket.
"good-by."
and so the respectable miller return along the Basset lane rather
more puzzled than before as to way and mean, but still with the
sense of a danger escape. it have come across his mind that if he be
hard upon his sister, it might somehow tend to make Tom hard upon
Maggie at some distant day, when her father be no long there to
take her part; for simple people, like our friend Mr. Tulliver, be
apt to clothe unimpeachable feeling in erroneous idea, and this be
his confused way of explain to himself that his love and anxiety
for "the little wench" have give he a new sensibility toward his
sister.
chapter IX
to Garum Firs
while the possible trouble of Maggie's future be occupy her
father's mind, she herself be taste only the bitterness of the
present. childhood have no foreboding; but then, it be soothe by no
memory of outlived sorrow.
the fact be, the day have begin ill with Maggie. the pleasure of
have Lucy to look at, and the prospect of the afternoon visit to
Garum Firs, where she would hear uncle Pullet's musical box, have be
mar as early as eleven o'clock by the advent of the hair-dresser
from St. Ogg's, who have speak in the severe term of the condition
in which he have find her hair, hold up one jagged lock after
another and say, "see here! tut, tut, tut!" in a tone of mingle
disgust and pity, which to Maggie's imagination be equivalent to the
strong expression of public opinion. Mr. Rappit, the hair-dresser,
with his well-anoint coronal lock tend wavily upward, like the
simulate pyramid of flame on a monumental urn, seem to she at that
moment the most formidable of her contemporary, into whose street at
St. Ogg's she would carefully refrain from enter through the rest
of her life.
moreover, the preparation for a visit be always a serious affair in
the Dodson family, Martha be enjoin to have Mrs. Tulliver's room
ready an hour early than usual, that the lay out of the good
clothe might not be defer till the last moment, as be sometimes
the case in family of lax view, where the ribbon-string be never
roll up, where there be little or no wrapping in silver paper, and
where the sense that the Sunday clothe could be get at quite easily
produce no shock to the mind. already, at twelve o'clock, Mrs.
Tulliver have on her visit costume, with a protective apparatus of
brown holland, as if she have be a piece of satin furniture in danger
of fly; Maggie be frown and twist her shoulder, that she
might if possible shrink away from the prickly of tucker, while
her mother be remonstrate, "donot, Maggie, my dear; donot make
yourself so ugly!" and Tom's cheek be look particularly
brilliant as a relief to his good blue suit, which he wear with
become calmness, have, after a little wrangle, effect what be
always the one point of interest to he in his toilet: he have
transfer all the content of his every-day pocket to those
actually in wear.
as for Lucy, she be just as pretty and neat as she have be
yesterday; no accident ever happen to her clothe, and she be
never uncomfortable in they, so that she look with wonder pity at
Maggie, pouting and writhe under the exasperating tucker. Maggie
would certainly have tear it off, if she have not be check by the
remembrance of her recent humiliation about her hair; as it be, she
confine herself to fret and twisting, and behave peevishly
about the card-house which they be allow to build till dinner, as
a suitable amusement for boy and girl in their good clothe. Tom
could build perfect pyramid of house; but Maggie's would never bear
the laying on the roof. it be always so with the thing that Maggie
make; and Tom have deduce the conclusion that no girl could ever make
anything. but it happen that Lucy prove wonderfully clever at
building; she handle the card so lightly, and move so gently, that
Tom condescend to admire her house as well as his own, the more
readily because she have ask he to teach she. Maggie, too, would
have admire Lucy's house, and would have give up her own
unsuccessful building to contemplate they, without ill temper, if she
tucker have not make her peevish, and if Tom have not inconsiderately
laugh when her house fall, and tell she she be "a stupid."
"donot laugh at I, Tom!" she burst out angrily; "Ibe not a stupid. I
know a great many thing you donot."
"oh, I dare say, Miss Spitfire! Iwould never be such a cross thing as
you, make face like that. Lucy donot do so. I like Lucy well
than you; _I_ wish Lucy be _my_ sister."
"then itbe very wicked and cruel of you to wish so," say Maggie,
start up hurriedly from her place on the floor, and upset Tom's
wonderful pagoda. she really do not mean it, but the circumstantial
evidence be against she, and Tom turn white with anger, but say
nothing; he would have strike she, only he know it be cowardly to
strike a girl, and Tom Tulliver be quite determined he would never do
anything cowardly.
Maggie stand in dismay and terror, while Tom get up from the floor and
walk away, pale, from the scatter ruin of his pagoda, and Lucy
look on mutely, like a kitten pausing from its lapping.
"oh, Tom," say Maggie, at last, go half-way toward he, "I donot
mean to knock it down, indeed, indeed I donot."
Tom take no notice of she, but take, instead, two or three hard pea
out of his pocket, and shoot they with his thumbnail against the
window, vaguely at first, but presently with the distinct aim of
hit a superannuate blue-bottle which be expose its imbecility
in the spring sunshine, clearly against the view of Nature, who have
provide Tom and the pea for the speedy destruction of this weak
individual.
thus the morning have be make heavy to Maggie, and Tom's persistent
coldness to she all through their walk spoil the fresh air and
sunshine for she. he call Lucy to look at the half-build bird's nest
without care to show it Maggie, and peel a willow switch for Lucy
and himself, without offer one to Maggie. Lucy have say, "Maggie,
shouldnot _you_ like one?" but Tom be deaf.
still, the sight of the peacock opportunely spread his tail on the
stackyard wall, just as they reach Garum Firs, be enough to divert
the mind temporarily from personal grievance. and this be only the
beginning of beautiful sight at Garum Firs. all the farmyard life be
wonderful there,--bantam, speckled and top-knot; Friesland hen,
with their feather all turn the wrong way; Guinea-fowl that fly
and scream and drop their pretty spot feather; pouter-pigeon
and a tame magpie; nay, a goat, and a wonderful brindled dog, half
mastiff, half bull-dog, as large as a lion. then there be white
railing and white gate all about, and glitter weathercock of
various design, and garden-walk pave with pebble in beautiful
patterns,--nothing be quite common at Garum Firs; and Tom think
that the unusual size of the toad there be simply due to the general
unusualness which characterize uncle Pullet's possession as a
gentleman farmer. toad who pay rent be naturally lean. as for
the house, it be not less remarkable; it have a recede centre, and
two wing with battlemented turret, and be cover with glitter
white stucco.
Uncle Pullet have see the expected party approach from the window,
and make haste to unbar and unchain the front door, keep always in
this fortified condition from fear of tramp, who might be suppose to
know of the glass case of stuff bird in the hall, and to
contemplate rush in and carry it away on their head. Aunt
Pullet, too, appear at the doorway, and as soon as her sister be
within hearing say, "stop the child, for God's sake! bessy; donot
let them come up the door-step; Sally's bring the old mat and the
duster, to rub their shoe."
Mrs. Pullet's front-door mat be by no mean intend to wipe shoe
on; the very scraper have a deputy to do its dirty work. Tom rebel
particularly against this shoewiping, which he always consider in
the light of an indignity to his sex. he feel it as the beginning of
the disagreeable incident to a visit at aunt Pullet's, where he have
once be compel to sit with towel wrap round his boot; a fact
which may serve to correct the too-hasty conclusion that a visit to
Garum Firs must have be a great treat to a young gentleman fond of
animals,--fond, that be, of throw stone at they.
the next disagreeable be confine to his feminine companion; it be
the mounting of the polished oak stair, which have very handsome
carpet roll up and lay by in a spare bedroom, so that the ascent
of these glossy step might have serve, in barbarous time, as a
trial by ordeal from which none but the most spotless virtue could
have come off with unbroken limb. Sophy's weakness about these
polished stair be always a subject of bitter remonstrance on Mrs.
Glegg's part; but Mrs. Tulliver venture on no comment, only think
to herself it be a mercy when she and the child be safe on the
landing.
"Mrs. Gray have send home my new bonnet, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet, in a
pathetic tone, as Mrs. Tulliver adjust her cap.
"have she, sister?" say Mrs. Tulliver, with an air of much interest.
"and how do you like it?"
"itbe apt to make a mess with clothe, take them out and put them
in again," say Mrs. Pullet, draw a bunch of key from her pocket
and look at they earnestly, "but it 'ud be a pity for you to go
away without see it. therebe no knowing what may happen."
Mrs. Pullet shake her head slowly at this last serious consideration,
which determine she to single out a particular key.
"Ibe afraid itwill be troublesome to you get it out, sister," say
Mrs. Tulliver; "but I _should_ like to see what sort of a crown shebe
make you."
Mrs. Pullet rise with a melancholy air and unlock one wing of a very
bright wardrobe, where you may have hastily suppose she would find a
new bonnet. not at all. such a supposition could only have arise from
a too-superficial acquaintance with the habit of the Dodson family.
in this wardrobe Mrs. Pullet be seek something small enough to be
hide among layer of linen,--it be a door-key.
"you must come with I into the good room," say Mrs. Pullet.
"may the child come too, sister?" inquire Mrs. Tulliver, who see
that Maggie and Lucy be look rather eager.
"well," say aunt Pullet, reflectively, "itwill perhaps be safe for
them to come; theywill be touch something if we leave them behind."
so they go in procession along the bright and slippery corridor,
dimly light by the semi-lunar top of the window which rise above the
closed shutter; it be really quite solemn. Aunt Pullet pause and
unlock a door which open on something still more solemn than the
passage,--a darken room, in which the outer light, enter feebly,
show what look like the corps of furniture in white shroud.
everything that be not shroud stand with its leg upward. Lucy lay
hold of Maggie's frock, and Maggie's heart beat rapidly.
Aunt Pullet half-open the shutter and then unlock the wardrobe,
with a melancholy deliberateness which be quite in keep with the
funereal solemnity of the scene. the delicious scent of rose-leaf
that issue from the wardrobe make the process of take out sheet
after sheet of silver paper quite pleasant to assist at, though the
sight of the bonnet at last be an anticlimax to Maggie, who would
have prefer something more strikingly preternatural. but few thing
could have be more impressive to Mrs. Tulliver. she look all round
it in silence for some moment, and then say emphatically, "well,
sister, Iwill never speak against the full crown again!"
it be a great concession, and Mrs. Pullet feel it; she feel something
be due to it.
"youwould like to see it on, sister?" she say sadly. "Iwill open the
shutter a bit far."
"well, if you donot mind take off your cap, sister," say Mrs.
Tulliver.
Mrs. Pullet take off her cap, display the brown silk scalp with a
jutting promontory of curl which be common to the more mature and
judicious woman of those time, and place the bonnet on her head,
turn slowly round, like a draper's lay-figure, that Mrs. Tulliver
might miss no point of view.
"Ihave sometimes think therebe a loop too much o' ribbon on this left
side, sister; what do you think?" say Mrs. Pullet.
Mrs. Tulliver look earnestly at the point indicate, and turn she
head on one side. "well, I think itbe good as it be; if you meddle
with it, sister, you might repent."
"thatbe true," say aunt Pullet, take off the bonnet and look at
it contemplatively.
"how much might she charge you for that bonnet, sister?" say Mrs.
Tulliver, whose mind be actively engage on the possibility of
get a humble imitation of this _chef-d'oeuvre_ make from a piece
of silk she have at home.
Mrs. Pullet screw up her mouth and shake her head, and then
whisper, "pullet pay for it; he say I be to have the good bonnet
at Garum Church, let the next good be whose it would."
she begin slowly to adjust the trimming, in preparation for return
it to its place in the wardrobe, and her thought seem to have take
a melancholy turn, for she shake her head.
"ah," she say at last, "I may never wear it twice, sister; who
know?"
"donot talk o' that sister," answer Mrs. Tulliver. "I hope youwill
have your health this summer."
"ah! but there may come a death in the family, as there do soon after
I have my green satin bonnet. Cousin Abbott may go, and we cannot think
o' wear crape less nor half a year for he."
"that _would_ be unlucky," say Mrs. Tulliver, enter thoroughly
into the possibility of an inopportune decease. "therebe never so much
pleasure I' wear a bonnet the second year, especially when the
crown be so chancy,--never two summer alike."
"ah, itbe the way I' this world," say Mrs. Pullet, return the
bonnet to the wardrobe and lock it up. she maintain a silence
characterize by head-shake, until they have all issue from the
solemn chamber and be in her own room again. then, begin to cry,
she say, "Sister, if you should never see that bonnet again till Ibe
dead and go, youwill remember I show it you this day."
Mrs. Tulliver feel that she ought to be affect, but she be a woman
of sparse tear, stout and healthy; she couldnot cry so much as her
sister Pullet do, and have often feel her deficiency at funeral. her
effort to bring tear into her eye issue in an odd contraction of
her face. Maggie, look on attentively, feel that there be some
painful mystery about her aunt's bonnet which she be consider too
young to understand; indignantly conscious, all the while, that she
could have understand that, as well as everything else, if she have
be take into confidence.
when they go down, uncle Pullet observe, with some acuman, that he
reckon the missis have be show she bonnet,--that be what have
make they so long upstairs. with Tom the interval have seem still
long, for he have be seat in irksome constraint on the edge of a
sofa directly opposite his uncle Pullet, who regard he with
twinkle gray eye, and occasionally address he as "young sir."
"well, young sir, what do you learn at school?" be a standing
question with uncle Pullet; whereupon Tom always look sheepish,
rub his hand across his face, and answer, "I donot know." it be
altogether so embarrassing to be seat _tete-a-tete_ with uncle
Pullet, that Tom could not even look at the print on the wall, or
the flycage, or the wonderful flower-pot; he see nothing but his
uncle's gaiter. not that Tom be in awe of his uncle's mental
superiority; indeed, he have make up his mind that he donot want to be
a gentleman farmer, because he shouldnot like to be such a
thin-legged, silly fellow as his uncle Pullet,--a molly-coddle, in
fact. a boy's sheepishness be by no mean a sign of overmaster
reverence; and while you be make encouraging advance to he under
the idea that he be overwhelm by a sense of your age and wisdom, ten
to one he be think you extremely queer. the only consolation I can
suggest to you be, that the greek boy probably think the same of
Aristotle. it be only when you have master a restive horse, or
thrash a drayman, or have get a gun in your hand, that these shy
junior feel you to be a truly admirable and enviable character. at
least, I be quite sure of Tom Tulliver's sentiment on these point.
in very tender year, when he still wear a lace border under his
outdoor cap, he be often observe peep through the bar of a gate
and make minatory gesture with his small forefinger while he
scold the sheep with an inarticulate burr, intend to strike terror
into their astonished mind; indicate thus early that desire for
mastery over the inferior animal, wild and domestic, include
cockchafer, neighbor' dog, and small sister, which in all age have
be an attribute of so much promise for the fortune of our race.
now, Mr. Pullet never ride anything tall than a low pony, and be
the least predatory of man, consider firearm dangerous, as apt to
go off of themselves by nobody's particular desire. so that Tom be
not without strong reason when, in confidential talk with a chum, he
have describe uncle Pullet as a nincompoop, take care at the same
time to observe that he be a very "rich fellow."
the only alleviate circumstance in a _tete-a-tete_ with uncle Pullet
be that he keep a variety of lozenge and peppermint-drop about his
person, and when at a loss for conversation, he fill up the void by
propose a mutual solace of this kind.
"do you like peppermint, young sir?" require only a tacit answer
when it be accompany by a presentation of the article in question.
the appearance of the little girl suggest to uncle Pullet the
further solace of small sweet-cake, of which he also keep a stock
under lock and key for his own private eating on wet day; but the
three child have no soon get the tempting delicacy between their
finger, than aunt Pullet desire they to abstain from eat it till
the tray and the plate come, since with those crisp cake they would
make the floor "all over" crumb. Lucy donot mind that much, for the
cake be so pretty, she think it be rather a pity to eat it; but
Tom, watch his opportunity while the elder be talk, hastily
stow it in his mouth at two bite, and chew it furtively. as for
Maggie, become fascinated, as usual, by a print of Ulysses and
Nausicaa, which uncle Pullet have buy as a "pretty scripture thing,"
she presently let fall her cake, and in an unlucky movement crush it
beneath her foot,--a source of so much agitation to aunt Pullet and
conscious disgrace to Maggie, that she begin to despair of hear the
musical snuff-box to-day, till, after some reflection, it occur to
she that Lucy be in high favor enough to venture on ask for a
tune. so she whisper to Lucy; and Lucy, who always do what she be
desire to do, go up quietly to her uncle's knee, and blush-all over
her neck while she finger her necklace, say, "will you please play
we a tune, uncle?"
Lucy think it be by reason of some exceptional talent in uncle
Pullet that the snuff-box play such beautiful tune, and indeed the
thing be view in that light by the majority of his neighbor in
Garum. Mr. Pullet have _buy_ the box, to begin with, and he
understand wind it up, and know which tune it be go to play
beforehand; altogether the possession of this unique "piece of music"
be a proof that Mr. Pullet's character be not of that entire nullity
which might otherwise have be attribute to it. but uncle Pullet,
when entreat to exhibit his accomplishment, never depreciate it by
a too-ready consent. "wewill see about it," be the answer he always
give, carefully abstain from any sign of compliance till a suitable
number of minute have pass. Uncle Pullet have a programme for all
great social occasion, and in this way fence himself in from much
painful confusion and perplex freedom of will.
perhaps the suspense do heighten Maggie's enjoyment when the fairy
tune begin; for the first time she quite forget that she have a load on
her mind, that Tom be angry with she; and by the time "hush, ye
pretty warbling choir," have be play, her face wear that bright
look of happiness, while she sit immovable with her hand clasp,
which sometimes comfort her mother with the sense that Maggie could
look pretty now and then, in spite of her brown skin. but when the
magic music cease, she jump up, and run toward Tom, put her arm
round his neck and say, "oh, Tom, benot it pretty?"
lest you should think it show a revolting insensibility in Tom that
he feel any new anger toward Maggie for this uncalled-for and, to he,
inexplicable caress, I must tell you that he have his glass of cowslip
wine in his hand, and that she jerk he so as to make he spill half
of it. he must have be an extreme milksop not to say angrily, "look
there, now!" especially when his resentment be sanction, as it be,
by general disapprobation of Maggie's behavior.
"why donot you sit still, Maggie?" her mother say peevishly.
"little gell mustnot come to see I if they behave in that way," say
aunt Pullet.
"why, yoube too rough, little miss," say uncle Pullet.
Poor Maggie sit down again, with the music all chase out of her soul,
and the seven small demon all in again.
Mrs. Tulliver, foresee nothing but misbehavior while the child
remain indoor, take an early opportunity of suggest that, now
they be rest after their walk, they might go and play out of
door; and aunt Pullet give permission, only enjoin they not to go
off the paved walk in the garden, and if they want to see the
poultry fed, to view they from a distance on the horse-block; a
restriction which have be impose ever since Tom have be find
guilty of run after the peacock, with an illusory idea that fright
would make one of its feather drop off.
Mrs. Tulliver's thought have be temporarily divert from the
quarrel with Mrs. Glegg by millinery and maternal care, but now the
great theme of the bonnet be throw into perspective, and the
child be out of the way, yesterday's anxiety recur.
"it weigh on my mind so as never be," she say, by way of open
the subject, "sister Glegg's leave the house in that way. Ibe sure
Iwould no wish t' offend a sister."
"ah," say aunt Pullet, "therebe no accounting for what Jane 'ull do.
I wouldnot speak of it out o' the family, if it benot to Dr.
Turnbull; but itbe my belief Jane live too low. Ihave say so to
Pullet often and often, and he know it."
"why, you say so last Monday be a week, when we come away from
drink tea with them," say Mr. Pullet, begin to nurse his knee
and shelter it with his pocket-hand-kerchief, as be his way when the
conversation take an interesting turn.
"very like I do," say Mrs. Pullet, "for you remember when I say
thing, well than I can remember myself. hebe get a wonderful
memory, Pullet have," she continue, look pathetically at her
sister. "I should be poorly off if he be to have a stroke, for he
always remember when Ihave get to take my doctor's stuff; and Ibe
take three sort now."
"therebe the 'pill as before' every other night, and the new drop at
eleven and four, and the 'fervesce mixture 'when agreeable,'"
rehearse Mr. Pullet, with a punctuation determine by a lozenge on
his tongue.
"ah, perhaps it 'ud be well for sister Glegg if _shewould_ go to the
doctor sometimes, instead o' chew Turkey rhubard whenever therebe
anything the matter with she," say Mrs. Tulliver, who naturally see
the wide subject of medicine chiefly in relation to Mrs. Glegg.
"itbe dreadful to think on," say aunt Pullet, raise her hand and
let they fall again, "people play with their own inside in
that way! and itbe fly I' the face o' providence; for what be the
doctor for, if we benot to call them in? and when folk have get the
money to pay for a doctor, it benot respectable, as Ihave tell Jane
many a time. Ibe ashamed of acquaintance know it."
"well, _wehave_ no call to be ashamed," say Mr. Pullet, "for Doctor
Turnbull havenot get such another patient as you I' this parish, now
old Mrs. Sutton's gone."
"Pullet keep all my physic-bottle, do you know, Bessy?" say Mrs.
Pullet. "he willnot have one sell. he say itbe nothing but right folk
should see them when Ibe go. they fill two o' the long store-room
shelf a'ready; but," she add, begin to cry a little, "itbe
well if they ever fill three. I may go before Ihave make up the dozen
o' these last size. the pill-box be in the closet in my
room,--you'll remember that, sister,--but therebe nothing to show for
the bolus, if it benot the bill."
"donot talk o' your going, sister," say Mrs. Tulliver; "I should have
nobody to stand between I and sister Glegg if you be go. and
therebe nobody but you can get she to make it up with Mr. Tulliver,
for sister Deane's never o' my side, and if she be, itbe not to be
look for as she can speak like they as have get an independent
fortin."
"well, your husband _be_ awk'ard, you know, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet,
good-naturedly ready to use her deep depression on her sister's
account as well as her own. "hebe never behave quite so pretty to our
family as he should do, and the child take after him,--the boy's
very mischievous, and run away from his aunt and uncle, and the
gell's rude and brown. itbe your bad luck, and Ibe sorry for you,
Bessy; for you be allay my favorite sister, and we allay like the
same pattern."
"I know Tulliver's hasty, and say odd thing," say Mrs. Tulliver,
wipe away one small tear from the corner of her eye; "but Ibe sure
hebe never be the man, since he marry I, to object to my making
the friend o' my side o' the family welcome to the house."
"_i_ donot want to make the bad of you, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet,
compassionately, "for I doubt youwill have trouble enough without that;
and your husband's get that poor sister and her child hang on
him,--and so give to lawe, they say. I doubt hewill leave you poorly
off when he die. not as Iwould have it say out o' the family."
this view of her position be naturally far from cheer to Mrs.
Tulliver. her imagination be not easily act on, but she could not
help think that her case be a hard one, since it appear that
other people think it hard.
"Ibe sure, sister, I cannot help myself," she say, urge by the fear
lest her anticipate misfortune might be hold retributive, to take
comprehensive review of her past conduct. "therebe no woman strive
more for her child; and Ibe sure at scour-time this Lady-day as
Ihave have all the bedhanging take down I do as much as the two gell
put together; and therebe the last elder-flower wine Ihave
make--beautiful! I allay offer it along with the sherry, though
sister Glegg will have it Ibe so extravagant; and as for like to
have my clothe tidy, and not go a fright about the house, therebe
nobody in the parish can say anything against I in respect o'
backbiting and make mischief, for I donot wish anybody any harm; and
nobody lose by send I a porkpie, for my pie be fit to show with
the good o' my neighbor'; and the linen's so in order as if I be to
die to-morrow I shouldnot be ashamed. a woman can do no more nor she
can."
"but itbe all o' no use, you know, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet, hold
her head on one side, and fix her eye pathetically on her sister,
"if your husband make away with his money. not but what if you be
sell up, and other folk buy your furniture, itbe a comfort to
think as youhave keep it well rub. and therebe the linen, with your
maiden mark on, might go all over the country. it 'ud be a sad pity
for our family." Mrs. Pullet shake her head slowly.
"but what can I do, sister?" say Mrs. Tulliver. "Mr. Tulliverbe not a
man to be dictate to,--not if I be to go to the parson and get by
heart what I should tell my husband for the good. and Ibe sure I donot
pretend to know anything about put out money and all that. I could
never see into man's business as sister Glegg do."
"well, yoube like I in that, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet; "and I think
it 'ud be a deal more become o' Jane if shewould have that pier-glass
rub oftener,--there be ever so many spot on it last
week,--instead o' dictating to folk as have more coming in than she
ever have, and tell them what theybe to do with their money. but
Jane and I be allay contrairy; she _would_ have strip thing,
and I like spot. you like a spot too, Bessy; we allay hang together
I' that."
"yes, Sophy," say Mrs. Tulliver, "I remember our have a blue ground
with a white spot both alike,--i've get a bit in a bed-quilt now; and
if you would but go and see sister Glegg, and persuade she to make it
up with Tulliver, I should take it very kind of you. you be allay a
good sister to I."
"but the right thing 'ud be for Tulliver to go and make it up with she
himself, and say he be sorry for speak so rash. if hebe borrow
money of she, he shouldnot be above that," say Mrs. Pullet, whose
partiality do not blind she to principle; she do not forget what
be due to people of independent fortune.
"itbe no use talk o' that," say poor Mrs. Tulliver, almost
peevishly. "if I be to go down on my bare knee on the gravel to
Tulliver, hewould never humble himself."
"well, you cannot expect I to persuade _Jane_ to beg pardon," say
Mrs. Pullet. "her temperbe beyond everything; itbe well if it donot
carry she off her mind, though there never _be_ any of our family
go to a madhouse."
"Ibe not think of her begging pardon," say Mrs. Tulliver. "but if
shewould just take no notice, and not call her money in; as itbe not so
much for one sister to ask of another; time 'ud mend thing, and
Tulliver 'ud forget all about it, and theywould be friend again."
Mrs. Tulliver, you perceive, be not aware of her husband's
irrevocable determination to pay in the five hundred pound; at least
such a determination exceed her power of belief.
"well, Bessy," say Mrs. Pullet, mournfully, "_i_ donot want to help
you on to ruin. I willnot be behindhand I' do you a good turn, if it
be to be do. and I donot like it say among acquaintance as wehave
get quarrel in the family. I shall tell Jane that; and I donot mind
drive to Jane's tomorrow, if Pullet donot mind. what do you say,
Mr. Pullet?"
"Ihave no objection," say Mr. Pullet, who be perfectly content
with any course the quarrel might take, so that Mr. Tulliver do not
apply to _he_ for money. Mr. Pullet be nervous about his
investment, and do not see how a man could have any security for his
money unless he turn it into land.
after a little further discussion as to whether it would not be well
for Mrs. Tulliver to accompany they on a visit to sister Glegg, Mrs.
Pullet, observe that it be tea-time, turn to reach from a drawer
a delicate damask napkin, which she pin before she in the fashion
of an apron. the door do, in fact, soon open, but instead of the
tea-tray, Sally introduce an object so startling that both Mrs.
Pullet and Mrs. Tulliver give a scream, cause uncle Pullet to
swallow his lozenge--for the fifth time in his life, as he afterward
note.
Chapter X
Maggie behave worse than she expect
the startling object which thus make an epoch for uncle Pullet be no
other than little Lucy, with one side of her person, from her small
foot to her bonnet-crown, wet and discolor with mud, hold out two
tiny blacken hand, and make a very piteous face. to account for
this unprecedented apparition in aunt Pullet's parlor, we must return
to the moment when the three child go to play out of door, and
the small demon who have take possession of Maggie's soul at an early
period of the day have return in all the great force after a
temporary absence. all the disagreeable recollection of the morning
be thick upon she, when Tom, whose displeasure toward she have be
considerably refresh by her foolish trick of cause he to upset
his cowslip wine, say, "here, Lucy, you come along with I," and
walk off to the area where the toad be, as if there be no
Maggie in existence. see this, Maggie linger at a distance
look like a small Medusa with her snake crop. Lucy be
naturally pleased that cousin Tom be so good to she, and it be very
amusing to see he tickle a fat toad with a piece of string when the
toad be safe down the area, with an iron grating over he. still Lucy
wish Maggie to enjoy the spectacle also, especially as she would
doubtless find a name for the toad, and say what have be his past
history; for Lucy have a delighted semibelief in Maggie's story about
the live thing they come upon by accident,--how Mrs. Earwig have a
wash at home, and one of her child have fall into the hot copper,
for which reason she be run so fast to fetch the doctor. Tom have
a profound contempt for this nonsense of Maggie's, smash the earwig
at once as a superfluous yet easy mean of prove the entire
unreality of such a story; but Lucy, for the life of she, could not
help fancy there be something in it, and at all event think it
be very pretty make-believe. so now the desire to know the history of
a very portly toad, add to her habitual affectionateness, make she
run back to Maggie and say, "oh, there be such a big, funny toad,
Maggie! do come and see!"
Maggie say nothing, but turn away from she with a deep frown. as
long as Tom seem to prefer Lucy to she, Lucy make part of his
unkindness. Maggie would have think a little while ago that she
could never be cross with pretty little Lucy, any more than she could
be cruel to a little white mouse; but then, Tom have always be quite
indifferent to Lucy before, and it have be leave to Maggie to pet and
make much of she. as it be, she be actually begin to think that
she should like to make Lucy cry by slap or pinch she,
especially as it might vex Tom, whom it be of no use to slap, even if
she dare, because he donot mind it. and if Lucy havenot be there,
Maggie be sure he would have get friend with she soon.
tickle a fat toad who be not highly sensitive be an amusement that
it be possible to exhaust, and Tom by and by begin to look round for
some other mode of pass the time. but in so prim a garden, where
they be not to go off the paved walk, there be not a great choice
of sport. the only great pleasure such a restriction suggest be the
pleasure of break it, and Tom begin to meditate an insurrectionary
visit to the pond, about a field's length beyond the garden.
"I say, Lucy," he begin, nod his head up and down with great
significance, as he coil up his string again, "what do you think I
mean to do?"
"what, Tom?" say Lucy, with curiosity.
"I mean to go to the pond and look at the pike. you may go with I if
you like," say the young sultan.
"oh, Tom, _dare_ you?" say Lucy. "Aunt say we mustnot go out of the
garden."
"oh, I shall go out at the other end of the garden," say Tom. "nobody
'ull see we. besides, I donot care if they do,--I'll run off home."
"but _i_ couldnot run," say Lucy, who have never before be expose
to such severe temptation.
"oh, never mind; they willnot be cross with _you_," say Tom. "you say I
take you."
Tom walk along, and Lucy trot by his side, timidly enjoy the
rare treat of do something naughty,--excite also by the mention of
that celebrity, the pike, about which she be quite uncertain whether
it be a fish or a fowl.
Maggie see they leave the garden, and could not resist the impulse
to follow. anger and jealousy can no more bear to lose sight of their
object than love, and that Tom and Lucy should do or see anything of
which she be ignorant would have be an intolerable idea to Maggie.
so she keep a few yard behind they, unobserve by Tom, who be
presently absorb in watch for the pike,--a highly interesting
monster; he be say to be so very old, so very large, and to have
such a remarkable appetite. the pike, like other celebrity, do not
show when he be watch for, but Tom catch sight of something in
rapid movement in the water, which attract he to another spot on
the brink of the pond.
"here, Lucy!" he say in a loud whisper, "come here! take care! keep
on the grass!--don't step where the cow have be!" he add,
point to a peninsula of dry grass, with trodden mud on each side of
it; for Tom's contemptuous conception of a girl include the attribute
of be unfit to walk in dirty place.
Lucy come carefully as she be bid, and bend down to look at what
seem a golden arrow-head dart through the water. it be a
water-snake, Tom tell she; and Lucy at last could see the serpentine
wave of its body, very much wonder that a snake could swim. Maggie
have draw nearer and nearer; she _must_ see it too, though it be
bitter to she, like everything else, since Tom do not care about she
see it. at last she be close by Lucy; and Tom, who have be aware
of her approach, but would not notice it till he be oblige, turn
round and said,--
"now, get away, Maggie; therebe no room for you on the grass here.
nobody ask _you_ to come."
there be passion at war in Maggie at that moment to have make a
tragedy, if tragedy be make by passion only; but the essential
[greek text] which be present in the passion be want to the action;
the utmost Maggie could do, with a fierce thrust of her small brown arm,
be to push poor little pink-and-white Lucy into the cow-tread mud.
then Tom could not restrain himself, and give Maggie two smart slap
on the arm as he run to pick up Lucy, who lie cry helplessly.
Maggie retreat to the root of a tree a few yard off, and look on
impenitently. usually her repentance come quickly after one rash deed,
but now Tom and Lucy have make she so miserable, she be glad to spoil
their happiness,--glad to make everybody uncomfortable. why should she
be sorry? Tom be very slow to forgive _she_, however sorry she might
have be.
"I shall tell mother, you know, Miss Mag," say Tom, loudly and
emphatically, as soon as Lucy be up and ready to walk away. it be
not Tom's practice to "tell," but here justice clearly demand that
Maggie should be visit with the utmost punishment; not that Tom have
learn to put his view in that abstract form; he never mention
"justice," and have no idea that his desire to punish might be call
by that fine name. Lucy be too entirely absorb by the evil that have
befall her,--the spoiling of her pretty good clothe, and the
discomfort of be wet and dirty,--to think much of the cause, which
be entirely mysterious to she. she could never have guess what she
have do to make Maggie angry with she; but she feel that Maggie be
very unkind and disagreeable, and make no magnanimous entreaty to
Tom that he would not "tell," only run along by his side and
cry piteously, while Maggie sit on the root of the tree and look
after they with her small Medusa face.
"Sally," say Tom, when they reach the kitchen door, and Sally
look at they in speechless amaze, with a piece of bread-and-butter
in her mouth and a toasting-fork in she hand,--"sally, tell mother it
be Maggie push Lucy into the mud."
"but Lors ha' massy, how do you get near such mud as that?" say
Sally, make a wry face, as she stoop down and examine the _corpus
delicti_.
Tom's imagination have not be rapid and capacious enough to include
this question among the foreseen consequence, but it be no soon
put than he foresee whither it tend, and that Maggie would not be
consider the only culprit in the case. he walk quietly away from
the kitchen door, leave Sally to that pleasure of guess which
active mind notoriously prefer to ready-make knowledge.
Sally, as you be aware, lose no time in present Lucy at the parlor
door, for to have so dirty an object introduce into the house at
Garum Firs be too great a weight to be sustain by a single mind.
"goodness gracious!" aunt Pullet exclaim, after prelude by an
inarticulate scream; "keep she at the door, Sally! donot bring she off
the oil-cloth, whatever you do."
"why, shebe tumble into some nasty mud," say Mrs. Tulliver, go up
to Lucy to examine into the amount of damage to clothe for which she
feel herself responsible to her sister Deane.
"if you please, 'um, it be Miss Maggie as push she in," say Sally;
"Master Tom's be and say so, and they must ha' be to the pond,
for itbe only there they could ha' get into such dirt."
"there it be, Bessy; itbe what Ihave be tell you," say Mrs.
Pullet, in a tone of prophetic sadness; "itbe your children,--there's
no knowing what theywill come to."
Mrs. Tulliver be mute, feel herself a truly wretched mother. as
usual, the thought press upon she that people would think she have
do something wicked to deserve her maternal trouble, while Mrs.
Pullet begin to give elaborate direction to Sally how to guard the
premise from serious injury in the course of remove the dirt.
meantime tea be to be bring in by the cook, and the two naughty
child be to have theirs in an ignominious manner in the kitchen.
Mrs. Tulliver go out to speak to these naughty child, suppose
they to be close at hand; but it be not until after some search that
she find Tom lean with rather a harden, careless air against the
white pal of the poultry-yard, and lower his piece of string on
the other side as a means of exasperate the turkey-cock.
"Tom, you naughty boy, wherebe your sister?" say Mrs. Tulliver, in a
distressed voice.
"I donot know," say Tom; his eagerness for justice on Maggie have
diminish since he have see clearly that it could hardly be bring
about without the injustice of some blame on his own conduct.
"why, where do you leave she?" say the mother, look round.
"sit under the tree, against the pond," say Tom, apparently
indifferent to everything but the string and the turkey-cock.
"then go and fetch she in this minute, you naughty boy. and how could
you think o' go to the pond, and take your sister where there be
dirt? you know shewill do mischief if therebe mischief to be do."
it be Mrs. Tulliver's way, if she blame Tom, to refer his
misdemeanor, somehow or other, to Maggie.
the idea of Maggie sit alone by the pond rouse an habitual fear
in Mrs. Tulliver's mind, and she mount the horse-block to satisfy
herself by a sight of that fatal child, while Tom walk--not very
quickly--on his way toward she.
"theybe such child for the water, mine be," she say aloud,
without reflect that there be no one to hear she; "theywill be
bring in dead and drownde some day. I wish that river be far
enough."
but when she not only fail to discern Maggie, but presently see Tom
return from the pool alone, this hover fear enter and take
complete possession of she, and she hurry to meet he.
"Maggie's nowhere about the pond, mother," say Tom; "shebe go
away."
you may conceive the terrify search for Maggie, and the difficulty
of convince her mother that she be not in the pond. Mrs. Pullet
observe that the child might come to a bad end if she live, there
be no knowing; and Mr. Pullet, confused and overwhelm by this
revolutionary aspect of things,--the tea defer and the poultry
alarm by the unusual running to and fro,--took up his spud as an
instrument of search, and reach down a key to unlock the goose-pen,
as a likely place for Maggie to lie conceal in.
Tom, after a while, start the idea that Maggie be go home
(without think it necessary to state that it be what he should
have do himself under the circumstance), and the suggestion be
seize as a comfort by his mother.
"Sister, for goodness' sake let them put the horse in the carriage and
take I home; we shall perhaps find she on the road. Lucy cannot walk
in her dirty clothe," she say, look at that innocent victim, who
be wrap up in a shawl, and sit with naked foot on the sofa.
Aunt Pullet be quite willing to take the short mean of restore
her premise to order and quiet, and it be not long before Mrs.
Tulliver be in the chaise, look anxiously at the most distant
point before she. what the father would say if Maggie be lose, be a
question that predominate over every other.
chapter XI
Maggie try to run away from her Shadow
Maggie's intention, as usual, be on a large scale than Tom
imagine. the resolution that gather in her mind, after Tom and Lucy
have walk away, be not so simple as that of go home. no! she
would run away and go to the gypsy, and Tom should never see she any
more. that be by no mean a new idea to Maggie; she have be so often
tell she be like a gypsy, and "half wild," that when she be
miserable it seem to she the only way of escape opprobrium, and
be entirely in harmony with circumstance, would be to live in a
little brown tent on the common; the gypsy, she consider, would
gladly receive she and pay she much respect on account of her superior
knowledge. she have once mention her view on this point to Tom and
suggest that he should stain his face brown, and they should run
away together; but Tom reject the scheme with contempt, observe
that gypsy be thief, and hardly get anything to eat and have
nothing to drive but a donkey. to-day however, Maggie think she
misery have reach a pitch at which gypsydom be her refuge, and she
rise from her seat on the root of the tree with the sense that this
be a great crisis in her life; she would run straight away till she
come to Dunlow Common, where there would certainly be gypsy; and
cruel Tom, and the rest of her relation who find fault with she,
should never see she any more. she think of her father as she run
along, but she reconcile herself to the idea of part with he, by
determine that she would secretly send he a letter by a small
gypsy, who would run away without tell where she be, and just let
he know that she be well and happy, and always love he very much.
Maggie soon get out of breath with running, but by the time Tom get to
the pond again she be at the distance of three long field, and be
on the edge of the lane lead to the highroad. she stop to pant a
little, reflect that run away be not a pleasant thing until
one have get quite to the common where the gypsy be, but she
resolution have not abate; she presently pass through the gate into
the lane, not know where it would lead she, for it be not this way
that they come from Dorlcote Mill to Garum Firs, and she feel all the
safe for that, because there be no chance of her be overtake.
but she be soon aware, not without tremble, that there be two man
come along the lane in front of she; she have not think of meeting
stranger, she have be too much occupy with the idea of her friend
come after she. the formidable stranger be two shabby-look man
with flushed face, one of they carry a bundle on a stick over his
shoulder; but to her surprise, while she be dread their
disapprobation as a runaway, the man with the bundle stop, and in a
half-whine, half-coax tone ask she if she have a copper to give
a poor man. Maggie have a sixpence in her pocket,--her uncle Glegg's
present,--which she immediately draw out and give this poor man with a
polite smile, hop he would feel very kindly toward she as a
generous person. "thatbe the only money Ihave get," she say
apologetically. "thank you, little miss," say the man, in a less
respectful and grateful tone than Maggie anticipate, and she even
observe that he smile and wink at his companion. she walk on
hurriedly, but be aware that the two man be stand still,
probably to look after she, and she presently hear they laugh
loudly. suddenly it occur to she that they might think she be an
idiot; Tom have say that her cropped hair make she look like an idiot,
and it be too painful an idea to be readily forget. besides, she
have no sleeve on,--only a cape and bonnet. it be clear that she be
not likely to make a favorable impression on passenger, and she
think she would turn into the field again, but not on the same side
of the lane as before, lest they should still be uncle Pullet's
field. she turn through the first gate that be not lock, and
feel a delightful sense of privacy in creep along by the hedgerow,
after her recent humiliating encounter. she be use to wander
about the field by herself, and be less timid there than on the
highroad. sometimes she have to climb over high gate, but that be a
small evil; she be get out of reach very fast, and she should
probably soon come within sight of Dunlow Common, or at least of some
other common, for she have hear her father say that you couldnot go
very far without come to a common. she hop so, for she be get
rather tired and hungry, and until she reach the gypsy there be
no definite prospect of bread and butter. it be still broad daylight,
for aunt Pullet, retain the early habit of the Dodson family, take
tea at half-past four by the sun, and at five by the kitchen clock;
so, though it be nearly an hour since Maggie start, there be no
gathering gloom on the field to remind she that the night would come.
still, it seem to she that she have be walk a very great
distance indeed, and it be really surprising that the common do not
come within sight. Hitherto she have be in the rich parish of Garum,
where be a great deal of pasture-land, and she have only see one
laborer at a distance. that be fortunate in some respect, as
laborer might be too ignorant to understand the propriety of she
want to go to Dunlow Common; yet it would have be well if she
could have meet some one who would tell she the way without want to
know anything about her private business. at last, however, the green
field come to an end, and Maggie find herself look through the
bar of a gate into a lane with a wide margin of grass on each side of
it. she have never see such a wide lane before, and, without she
know why, it give she the impression that the common could not be
far off; perhaps it be because she see a donkey with a log to his
foot feed on the grassy margin, for she have see a donkey with that
pitiable encumbrance on Dunlow Common when she have be across it in
her father's gig. she creep through the bar of the gate and walk on
with new spirit, though not without haunt image of Apollyon, and a
highwayman with a pistol, and a blink dwarf in yellow with a mouth
from ear to ear, and other miscellaneous danger. for poor little
Maggie have at once the timidity of an active imagination and the
daring that come from overmaster impulse. she have rush into the
adventure of seek her unknown kindre, the gypsy; and now she be
in this strange lane, she hardly dare look on one side of she, lest
she should see the diabolical blacksmith in his leathern apron
grinning at she with arm akimbo. it be not without a leaping of the
heart that she catch sight of a small pair of bare leg stick up,
foot uppermost, by the side of a hillock; they seem something
hideously preternatural,--a diabolical kind of fungus; for she be too
much agitated at the first glance to see the ragged clothe and the
dark shaggy head attach to they. it be a boy asleep, and Maggie
trot along fast and more lightly, lest she should wake he; it
do not occur to she that he be one of her friend the gypsy, who
in all probability would have very genial manner. but the fact be
so, for at the next bend in the lane Maggie actually see the little
semicircular black tent with the blue smoke rise before it, which
be to be her refuge from all the blight obloquy that have pursue
she in civilized life. she even see a tall female figure by the column
of smoke, doubtless the gypsy-mother, who provide the tea and other
grocery; it be astonishing to herself that she do not feel more
delighted. but it be startling to find the gypsy in a lane, after
all, and not on a common; indeed, it be rather disappointing; for a
mysterious illimitable common, where there be sand-pit to hide in,
and one be out of everybody's reach, have always make part of Maggie's
picture of gypsy life. she go on, however, and think with some
comfort that gypsy most likely know nothing about idiot, so there
be no danger of their fall into the mistake of set she down at
the first glance as an idiot. it be plain she have attract
attention; for the tall figure, who prove to be a young woman with a
baby on her arm, walk slowly to meet she. Maggie look up in the
new face rather tremblingly as it approach, and be reassure by the
thought that her aunt Pullet and the rest be right when they call
she a gypsy; for this face, with the bright dark eye and the long
hair, be really something like what she use to see in the glass
before she cut her hair off.
"my little lady, where be you go to?" the gypsy say, in a tone of
coax deference.
it be delightful, and just what Maggie expect; the gypsy see at
once that she be a little lady, and be prepared to treat she
accordingly.
"not any far," say Maggie, feel as if she be say what she
have rehearse in a dream. "Ibe come to stay with _you_, please."
"thatbe pretty; come, then. why, what a nice little lady you be, to
be sure!" say the gypsy, take she by the hand. Maggie think she
very agreeable, but wish she have not be so dirty.
there be quite a group round the fire when she reach it. an old
gypsy woman be seat on the ground nurse her knee, and
occasionally poke a skewer into the round kettle that send forth an
odorous steam; two small shock-head child be lie prone and
rest on their elbow something like small sphinx; and a placid
donkey be bend his head over a tall girl, who, lie on her back,
be scratch his nose and indulge he with a bite of excellent
steal hay. the slanting sunlight fall kindly upon they, and the scene
be really very pretty and comfortable, Maggie think, only she hop
they would soon set out the tea-cup. everything would be quite
charming when she have teach the gypsy to use a washing-basin, and
to feel an interest in book. it be a little confusing, though, that
the young woman begin to speak to the old one in a language which
Maggie do not understand, while the tall girl, who be feed the
donkey, sit up and star at she without offer any salutation. at
last the old woman said,--
"what! my pretty lady, be you come to stay with we? sit ye down and
tell we where you come from."
it be just like a story; Maggie like to be call pretty lady and
treat in this way. she sit down and said,--
"Ibe come from home because Ibe unhappy, and I mean to be a gypsy.
Iwill live with you if you like, and I can teach you a great many
thing."
"such a clever little lady," say the woman with the baby sit down
by Maggie, and allow baby to crawl; "and such a pretty bonnet and
frock," she add, take off Maggie's bonnet and look at it while
she make an observation to the old woman, in the unknown language. the
tall girl snatch the bonnet and put it on her own head hind-foremost
with a grin; but Maggie be determined not to show any weakness on
this subject, as if she be susceptible about her bonnet.
"I donot want to wear a bonnet," she say; "Iwould rather wear a red
handkerchief, like your" (look at her friend by her side). "my
hair be quite long till yesterday, when I cut it off; but I dare say
it will grow again very soon," she add apologetically, think it
probable the gypsy have a strong prejudice in favor of long hair. and
Maggie have forget even her hunger at that moment in the desire to
conciliate gypsy opinion.
"oh, what a nice little lady!--and rich, Ibe sure," say the old
woman. "donot you live in a beautiful house at home?"
"yes, my home be pretty, and Ibe very fond of the river, where we go
fishing, but Ibe often very unhappy. I should have like to bring my
book with I, but I come away in a hurry, you know. but I can tell
you almost everything there be in my book, Ihave read they so many
time, and that will amuse you. and I can tell you something about
Geography too,--thatbe about the world we live in,--very useful and
interesting. do you ever hear about Columbus?"
Maggie's eye have begin to sparkle and her cheek to flush,--she be
really begin to instruct the gypsy, and gain great influence
over they. the gypsy themselves be not without amazement at this
talk, though their attention be divide by the content of Maggie's
pocket, which the friend at her right hand have by this time empty
without attract her notice.
"be that where you live, my little lady?" say the old woman, at the
mention of Columbus.
"oh, no!" say Maggie, with some pity; "Columbus be a very wonderful
man, who find out half the world, and they put chain on he and
treat he very badly, you know; itbe in my Catechism of Geography,
but perhaps itbe rather too long to tell before tea--_I want my tea
so_."
the last word burst from Maggie, in spite of herself, with a sudden
drop from patronize instruction to simple peevishness.
"why, shebe hungry, poor little lady," say the young woman. "give
she some o' the cold victual. youhave be walk a good way, Iwill be
bind, my dear. wherebe your home?"
"itbe Dorlcote Mill, a good way off," say Maggie. "my father be Mr.
Tulliver, but we mustnot let he know where I be, else hewill fetch I
home again. where do the queen of the gypsy live?"
"what! do you want to go to she, my little lady?" say the young
woman. the tall girl meanwhile be constantly star at Maggie and
grinning. her manner be certainly not agreeable.
"no," say Maggie, "Ibe only think that if she benot a very good
queen you might be glad when she die, and you could choose another.
if I be a queen, Iwould be a very good queen, and kind to everybody."
"herebe a bit o' nice victual, then," say the old woman, hand to
Maggie a lump of dry bread, which she have take from a bag of scrap,
and a piece of cold bacon.
"thank you," say Maggie, look at the food without take it; "but
will you give I some bread-and-butter and tea instead? I donot like
bacon."
"wehave get no tea nor butter," say the old woman, with something like
a scowl, as if she be get tired of coax.
"oh, a little bread and treacle would do," say Maggie.
"we han't get no treacle," say the old woman, crossly, whereupon
there follow a sharp dialogue between the two woman in their unknown
tongue, and one of the small sphinx snatch at the bread-and-bacon,
and begin to eat it. at this moment the tall girl, who have go a few
yard off, come back, and say something which produce a strong
effect. the old woman, seem to forget Maggie's hunger, poke the
skewer into the pot with new vigor, and the young creep under the
tent and reach out some platter and spoon. Maggie tremble a
little, and be afraid the tear would come into her eye. meanwhile
the tall girl give a shrill cry, and presently come run up the boy
whom Maggie have pass as he be sleeping,--a rough urchin about the
age of Tom. he star at Maggie, and there ensue much incomprehensible
chattering. she feel very lonely, and be quite sure she should begin to
cry before long; the gypsy donot seem to mind she at all, and she feel
quite weak among they. but the springing tear be check by new
terror, when two man come up, whose approach have be the cause
of the sudden excitement. the elder of the two carry a bag, which
he fling down, address the woman in a loud and scold tone,
which they answer by a shower of treble sauciness; while a black
cur run bark up to Maggie, and throw she into a tremor that only
find a new cause in the curse with which the young man call
the dog off, and give he a rap with a great stick he hold in his hand.
Maggie feel that it be impossible she should ever be queen of these
people, or ever communicate to they amusing and useful knowledge.
both the man now seem to be inquire about Maggie, for they look
at she, and the tone of the conversation become of that pacific kind
which imply curiosity on one side and the power of satisfy it on
the other. at last the young woman say in her previous deferential,
coax tone,--
"this nice little lady's come to live with we; benot you glad?"
"ay, very glad," say the young man, who be look at Maggie's
silver thimble and other small matter that have be take from her
pocket. he return they all except the thimble to the young woman,
with some observation, and she immediately restore they to Maggie's
pocket, while the man seat themselves, and begin to attack the
content of the kettle,--a stew of meat and potatoes,--which have be
take off the fire and turn out into a yellow platter.
Maggie begin to think that Tom must be right about the gypsy; they
must certainly be thief, unless the man mean to return her thimble
by and by. she would willingly have give it to he, for she be not
at all attach to her thimble; but the idea that she be among
thief prevent she from feel any comfort in the revival of
deference and attention toward she; all thief, except Robin Hood,
be wicked people. the woman see she be frightened.
"wehave get nothing nice for a lady to eat," say the old woman, in she
coax tone. "and shebe so hungry, sweet little lady."
"here, my dear, try if you can eat a bit o' this," say the young
woman, hand some of the stew on a brown dish with an iron spoon to
Maggie, who, remember that the old woman have seem angry with she
for not like the bread-and-bacon, dare not refuse the stew, though
fear have chase away her appetite. if her father would but come by in
the gig and take she up! or even if Jack the Giantkiller, or Mr.
Greatheart, or St. George who slay the dragon on the half-penny,
would happen to pass that way! but Maggie think with a sink heart
that these hero be never see in the neighborhood of St. Ogg's;
nothing very wonderful ever come there.
Maggie Tulliver, you perceive, be by no mean that well train,
well-inform young person that a small female of eight or nine
necessarily be in these day; she have only be to school a year at
St. Ogg's, and have so few book that she sometimes read the
dictionary; so that in travel over her small mind you would have
find the most unexpected ignorance as well as unexpected knowledge.
she could have inform you that there be such a word as "polygamy,"
and be also acquaint with "polysyllable," she have deduce the
conclusion that "poly" mean "many"; but she have have no idea that
gypsy be not well supply with grocery, and her thought
generally be the oddest mixture of clear-eyed acuman and blind
dream.
her idea about the gypsy have undergo a rapid modification in the
last five minute. from have consider they very respectful
companion, amenable to instruction, she have begin to think that they
mean perhaps to kill she as soon as it be dark, and cut up her body
for gradual cooking; the suspicion cross she that the fierce-eye
old man be in fact the Devil, who might drop that transparent
disguise at any moment, and turn either into the grinning blacksmith,
or else a fiery-eyed monster with dragon's wing. it be no use try
to eat the stew, and yet the thing she most dread be to offend the
gypsy, by betray she extremely unfavorable opinion of they; and
she wonder, with a keenness of interest that no theologian could
have exceed, whether, if the Devil be really present, he would
know her thought.
"what! you donot like the smell of it, my dear," say the young woman,
observe that Maggie do not even take a spoonful of the stew. "try a
bit, come."
"no, thank you," say Maggie, summon all her force for a desperate
effort, and try to smile in a friendly way. "I havenot time, I
think; it seem get dark. I think I must go home now, and come
again another day, and then I can bring you a basket with some
jam-tart and thing."
Maggie rise from her seat as she throw out this illusory prospect,
devoutly hop that Apollyon be gullible; but her hope sink when the
old gypsy-woman say, "stop a bit, stop a bit, little lady; wewill take
you home, all safe, when wehave do supper; you shall ride home, like
a lady."
Maggie sit down again, with little faith in this promise, though she
presently see the tall girl put a bridle on the donkey, and
throw a couple of bag on his back.
"now, then, little missis," say the young man, rise, and lead
the donkey forward, "tell we where you live; whatbe the name o' the
place?"
"Dorlcote Mill be my home," say Maggie, eagerly. "my father be Mr.
Tulliver; he live there."
"what! a big mill a little way this side o' St. Ogg's?"
"yes," say Maggie. "be it far off? I think I should like to walk
there, if you please."
"no, no, itwill be get dark, we must make haste. and the donkey'll
carry you as nice as can be; youwill see."
he lift Maggie as he speak, and set she on the donkey. she feel
relieve that it be not the old man who seem to be go with she,
but she have only a trembling hope that she be really go home.
"herebe your pretty bonnet," say the young woman, put that
recently despise but now welcome article of costume on Maggie's head;
"and youwill say wehave be very good to you, willnot you? and what a
nice little lady we say you be."
"oh yes, thank you," say Maggie, "Ibe very much oblige to you. but I
wish youwould go with I too." she think anything be well than go
with one of the dreadful man alone; it would be more cheerful to be
murder by a large party.
"ah, yoube fondest o' _I_, benot you?" say the woman. "but I cannot
go; youwill go too fast for I."
it now appear that the man also be to be seat on the donkey,
hold Maggie before he, and she be as incapable of remonstrate
against this arrangement as the donkey himself, though no nightmare
have ever seem to her more horrible. when the woman have pat she on
the back, and say "good-by," the donkey, at a strong hint from the
man's stick, set off at a rapid walk along the lane toward the point
Maggie have come from an hour ago, while the tall girl and the rough
urchin, also furnish with stick, obligingly escort they for the
first hundred yard, with much screaming and thwacking.
not Leonore, in that preternatural midnight excursion with her phantom
lover, be more terrified than poor Maggie in this entirely natural
ride on a short-pace donkey, with a gypsy behind she, who consider
that he be earn half a crown. the red light of the set sun
seem to have a portentous meaning, with which the alarming bray of
the second donkey with the log on its foot must surely have some
connection. two low thatched cottage--the only house they pass in
this lane--seem to add to its dreariness; they have no window to
speak of, and the door be close; it be probable that they be
inhabitate by witch, and it be a relief to find that the donkey
do not stop there.
at last--oh, sight of joy!--this lane, the long in the world, be
come to an end, be open on a broad highroad, where there be
actually a coach pass! and there be a finger-post at the
corner,--she have surely see that finger-post before,--"to St. Ogg's,
2 mile." the gypsy really mean to take her home, then; he be
probably a good man, after all, and might have be rather hurt at the
thought that she donot like come with he alone. this idea become
strong as she feel more and more certain that she know the road
quite well, and she be consider how she might open a conversation
with the injure gypsy, and not only gratify his feeling but efface
the impression of her cowardice, when, as they reach a cross-road.
Maggie catch sight of some one come on a white-faced horse.
"oh, stop, stop!" she cry out. "therebe my father! oh, father,
father!"
the sudden joy be almost painful, and before her father reach she,
she be sob. Great be Mr. Tulliver's wonder, for he have make a
round from Basset, and have not yet be home.
"why, whatbe the meaning o' this?" he say, check his horse, while
Maggie slip from the donkey and run to her father's stirrup.
"the little miss lose herself, I reckon," say the gypsy. "shewould come
to our tent at the far end o' Dunlow Lane, and I be bring she
where she say her home be. itbe a good way to come after be on
the tramp all day."
"oh yes, father, hebe be very good to bring I home," say
Maggie,--"a very kind, good man!"
"here, then, my man," say Mr. Tulliver, take out five shilling.
"itbe the good day's work _you_ ever do. I couldnot afford to lose
the little wench; here, lift she up before I."
"why, Maggie, howbe this, howbe this?" he say, as they ride along,
while she lay her head against her father and sob. "how come you
to be ramble about and lose yourself?"
"oh, father," sob Maggie, "I run away because I be so unhappy; Tom
be so angry with I. I couldnot bear it."
"Pooh, pooh," say Mr. Tulliver, soothingly, "you mustnot think o'
run away from father. what 'ud father do without his little
wench?"
"oh no, I never will again, father--never."
Mr. Tulliver speak his mind very strongly when he reach home that
evening; and the effect be see in the remarkable fact that Maggie
never hear one reproach from her mother, or one taunt from Tom, about
this foolish business of she run away to the gypsy. Maggie be
rather awe-stricken by this unusual treatment, and sometimes think
that her conduct have be too wicked to be allude to.
Chapter XII
Mr. and Mrs. Glegg at home
in order to see Mr. and Mrs. Glegg at home, we must enter the town of
St. ogg's,--that venerable town with the red flute roof and the
broad warehouse gable, where the black ship unlade themselves of
their burthen from the far north, and carry away, in exchange, the
precious inland product, the well-crush cheese and the soft fleece
which my refined reader have doubtless become acquainted with through
the medium of the good classic pastoral.
it be one of those old, old town which impress one as a continuation
and outgrowth of nature, as much as the nest of the bower-bird or
the wind gallery of the white ant; a town which carry the
trace of its long growth and history like a millennial tree, and have
spring up and develop in the same spot between the river and the low
hill from the time when the roman legion turn their back on it
from the camp on the hillside, and the long-haired sea-king come up
the river and look with fierce, eager eye at the fatness of the
land. it be a town "familiar with forget year." the shadow of the
Saxon hero-king still walk there fitfully, review the scene of
his youth and love-time, and be meet by the gloomy shadow of the
dreadful heathen Dane, who be stab in the midst of his warrior by
the sword of an invisible avenger, and who rise on autumn evening
like a white mist from his tumulus on the hill, and hover in the
court of the old hall by the river-side, the spot where he be thus
miraculously slay in the day before the old hall be build. it be
the Normans who begin to build that fine old hall, which be, like the
town, tell of the thought and hand of widely sunder
generation; but it be all so old that we look with love pardon at
its inconsistency, and be well content that they who build the
stone oriel, and they who build the Gothic facade and tower of fine
small brickwork with the trefoil ornament, and the window and
battlement define with stone, do not sacreligiously pull down the
ancient half-timbere body with its oak-roof banqueting-hall.
but old even than this old hall be perhaps the bit of wall now build
into the belfry of the parish church, and say to be a remnant of the
original chapel dedicate to St. Ogg, the patron saint of this ancient
town, of whose history I possess several manuscript version. I
incline to the brief, since, if it should not be wholly true, it be
at least likely to contain the least falsehood. "Ogg the son of
Beorl," say my private hagiographer, "be a boatman who gain a
scanty live by ferry passenger across the river Floss. and it
come to pass, one evening when the wind be high, that there sit
moaning by the brink of the river a woman with a child in her arm;
and she be clothe in rag, and have a worn and withered look, and she
crave to be row across the river. and the man thereabout question
she, and say, 'wherefore dost thou desire to cross the river? tarry
till the morning, and take shelter here for the night; so shalt thou
be wise and not foolish.' still she go on to mourn and crave. but
Ogg the son of Beorl come up and say, 'I will ferry thee across; it
be enough that thy heart need it.' and he ferry she across. and it
come to pass, when she step ashore, that her rag be turn into
robe of flow white, and her face become bright with exceed
beauty, and there be a glory around it, so that she shed a light on
the water like the moon in its brightness. and she say, 'Ogg, the son
of Beorl, thou art bless in that thou didst not question and wrangle
with the heart's need, but wast smitten with pity, and didst
straightway relieve the same. and from henceforth whoso step into thy
boat shall be in no peril from the storm; and whenever it put forth
to the rescue, it shall save the life both of man and beast.' and
when the flood come, many be save by reason of that blessing on
the boat. but when Ogg the son of Beorl die, behold, in the parting
of his soul, the boat loose itself from its mooring, and be float
with the ebb tide in great swiftness to the ocean, and be see no
more. yet it be witness in the flood of aftertime, that at the
come on of eventide, Ogg the son of Beorl be always see with his
boat upon the wide-spread water, and the blessed Virgin sit in the
prow, shed a light around as of the moon in its brightness, so
that the rower in the gathering darkness take heart and pull anew."
this legend, one see, reflect from a far-off time the visitation of
the flood, which, even when they leave human life untouched, be
widely fatal to the helpless cattle, and sweep as sudden death over
all small living thing. but the town know bad trouble even than
the floods,--troubles of the civil war, when it be a continual
fighting-place, where first Puritans thank God for the blood of the
Loyalists, and then Loyalists thank God for the blood of the
Puritans. many honest citizen lose all their possession for
conscience' sake in those time, and go forth beggar from their
native town. Doubtless there be many house stand now on which
those honest citizen turn their back in sorrow,--quaint-gable
house look on the river, jam between new warehouse, and
penetrate by surprising passage, which turn and turn at sharp angle
till they lead you out on a muddy strand overflow continually by the
rush tide. everywhere the brick house have a mellow look, and in
Mrs. Glegg's day there be no incongruous new-fashioned smartness, no
plate-glass in shop-windows, no fresh stucco-facing or other
fallacious attempt to make fine old red St. Ogg's wear the air of a
town that spring up yesterday. the shop-window be small and
unpretending; for the farmer' wife and daughter who come to do
their shopping on market-day be not to be withdraw from their
regular well-know shop; and the tradesman have no ware intend for
customer who would go on their way and be see no more. ah! even Mrs.
Glegg's day seem far back in the past now, separate from we by
change that widen the year. War and the rumor of war have then die
out from the mind of man, and if they be ever think of by the
farmer in drab greatcoat, who shake the grain out of their
sample-bag and buzz over it in the full market-place, it be as a
state of thing that belong to a past golden age when price be
high. surely the time be go forever when the broad river could
bring up unwelcome ship; Russia be only the place where the linseed
come from,--the more the better,--make grist for the great vertical
millstone with their scythe-like arm, roar and grind and
carefully sweeping as if an informing soul be in they. the
Catholics, bad harvest, and the mysterious fluctuation of trade be
the three evil mankind have to fear; even the flood have not be
great of late year. the mind of St. Ogg's do not look extensively
before or after. it inherit a long past without think of it, and
have no eye for the spirit that walk the street. since the century
when St. Ogg with his boat and the Virgin Mother at the prow have be
see on the wide water, so many memory have be leave behind, and have
gradually vanish like the recede hilltop! and the present time
be like the level plain where man lose their belief in volcano and
earthquake, think to-morrow will be as yesterday, and the giant
force that use to shake the earth be forever lay to sleep. the
day be go when people could be greatly work upon by their
faith, still less change it; the Catholics be formidable because
they would lay hold of government and property, and burn man alive;
not because any sane and honest parishioner of St. Ogg's could be
bring to believe in the Pope. one aged person remember how a rude
multitude have be sway when John Wesley preach in the
cattle-market; but for a long while it have not be expect of
preacher that they should shake the soul of man. an occasional burst
of fervor in dissent pulpit on the subject of infant baptism be
the only symptom of a zeal unsuited to sober time when man have do
with change. Protestantism sit at ease, unmindful of schism, careless
of proselytism: Dissent be an inheritance along with a superior pew
and a business connection; and Churchmanship only wonder
contemptuously at Dissent as a foolish habit that clung greatly to
family in the grocery and chandlering line, though not incompatible
with prosperous wholesale dealing. but with the Catholic Question have
come a slight wind of controversy to break the calm: the elderly
rector have become occasionally historical and argumentative; and Mr.
Spray, the Independent minister, have begin to preach political
sermon, in which he distinguish with much subtlety between his
fervent belief in the right of the Catholics to the franchise and his
fervent belief in their eternal perdition. Most of Mr. Spray's
hearer, however, be incapable of follow his subtlety, and many
old-fashioned Dissenters be much pain by his "siding with the
Catholics"; while other think he have well let politic alone.
public spirit be not hold in high esteem at St. Ogg's, and man who
busy themselves with political question be regard with some
suspicion, as dangerous character; they be usually person who have
little or no business of their own to manage, or, if they have, be
likely enough to become insolvent.
this be the general aspect of thing at St. Ogg's in Mrs. Glegg's
day, and at that particular period in her family history when she have
have her quarrel with Mr. Tulliver. it be a time when ignorance be
much more comfortable than at present, and be receive with all the
honor in very good society, without be oblige to dress itself in
an elaborate costume of knowledge; a time when cheap periodical be
not, and when country surgeon never think of ask their female
patient if they be fond of reading, but simply take it for grant
that they prefer gossip; a time when lady in rich silk gown wear
large pocket, in which they carry a mutton-bone to secure they
against cramp. Mrs. Glegg carry such a bone, which she have inherit
from her grandmother with a brocaded gown that would stand up empty,
like a suit of armor, and a silver-head walking-stick; for the
Dodson family have be respectable for many generation.
Mrs. Glegg have both a front and a back parlor in her excellent house
at St. Ogg's, so that she have two point of view from which she could
observe the weakness of her fellow-being, and reinforce she
thankfulness for her own exceptional strength of mind. from her front
window she could look down the Tofton Road, lead out of St. Ogg's,
and note the grow tendency to "gad about" in the wife of man
not retire from business, together with a practice of wear weave
cotton stocking, which open a dreary prospect for the come
generation; and from her back window she could look down the pleasant
garden and orchard which stretch to the river, and observe the folly
of Mr. Glegg in spend his time among "they flower and vegetable."
for Mr. Glegg, have retire from active business as a wool-stapler
for the purpose of enjoy himself through the rest of his life, have
find this last occupation so much more severe than his business, that
he have be drive into amateur hard labor as a dissipation, and
habitually relax by do the work of two ordinary gardener. the
economizing of a gardener's wage might perhaps have induce Mrs.
Glegg to wink at this folly, if it be possible for a healthy female
mind even to simulate respect for a husband's hobby. but it be well
know that this conjugal complacency belong only to the weak
portion of the sex, who be scarcely alive to the responsibility of
a wife as a constituted check on her husband's pleasure, which be
hardly ever of a rational or commendable kind.
Mr. Glegg on his side, too, have a double source of mental occupation,
which give every promise of be inexhaustible. on the one hand, he
surprise himself by his discovery in natural history, find that
his piece of garden-ground contain wonderful caterpillar, slug,
and insect, which, so far as he have hear, have never before attract
human observation; and he notice remarkable coincidence between
these zoological phenomenon and the great event of that time,--as, for
example, that before the burning of York Minster there have be
mysterious serpentine mark on the leaf of the rose-tree, together
with an unusual prevalence of slug, which he have be puzzle to know
the meaning of, until it flash upon he with this melancholy
conflagration. (Mr. Glegg have an unusual amount of mental activity,
which, when disengage from the wool business, naturally make itself a
pathway in other direction.) and his second subject of meditation be
the "contrairiness" of the female mind, as typically exhibit in Mrs.
Glegg. that a creature make--in a genealogical sense--out of a man's
rib, and in this particular case maintain in the high
respectability without any trouble of her own, should be normally in a
state of contradiction to the blandest proposition and even to the
most accommodating concession, be a mystery in the scheme of thing
to which he have often in vain seek a clew in the early chapter of
Genesis. Mr. Glegg have choose the eld Miss Dodson as a handsome
embodiment of female prudence and thrift, and be himself of a
money-getting, money-keep turn, have calculate on much conjugal
harmony. but in that curious compound, the feminine character, it may
easily happen that the flavor be unpleasant in spite of excellent
ingredient; and a fine systematic stinginess may be accompany with
a seasoning that quite spoil its relish. now, good Mr. Glegg himself
be stingy in the most amiable manner; his neighbor call he
"near," which always mean that the person in question be a lovable
skinflint. if you express a preference for cheese-paring, Mr. Glegg
would remember to save they for you, with a good-natured delight in
gratify your palate, and he be give to pet all animal which
require no appreciable keep. there be no humbug or hypocrisy about
Mr. Glegg; his eye would have water with true feeling over the sale
of a widow's furniture, which a five-pound note from his side pocket
would have prevent; but a donation of five pound to a person "in a
small way of life" would have seem to he a mad kind of lavishness
rather than "charity," which have always present itself to he as a
contribution of small aid, not a neutralizing of misfortune. and Mr.
Glegg be just as fond of save other people's money as his own; he
would have ride as far round to avoid a turnpike when his expense
be to be pay for he, as when they be to come out of his own
pocket, and be quite zealous in try to induce indifferent
acquaintance to adopt a cheap substitute for black. this
inalienable habit of saving, as an end in itself, belong to the
industrious man of business of a former generation, who make their
fortune slowly, almost as the tracking of the fox belong to the
harrier,--it constitute they a "race," which be nearly lose in these
day of rapid money-getting, when lavishness come close on the back
of want. in old-fashioned time an "independence" be hardly ever make
without a little miserliness as a condition, and you would have find
that quality in every provincial district, combine with character as
various as the fruit from which we can extract acid. the true
Harpagons be always mark and exceptional character; not so the
worthy tax-payer, who, have once pinch from real necessity,
retain even in the midst of their comfortable retirement, with their
wallfruit and wine-bin, the habit of regard life as an ingenious
process of nibble out one's livelihood without leave any
perceptible deficit, and who would have be as immediately prompt
to give up a newly tax luxury when they have have their clear five
hundred a year, as when they have only five hundred pound of capital.
Mr. Glegg be one of these man, find so impracticable by chancellor
of the exchequer; and know this, you will be the well able to
understand why he have not swerve from the conviction that he have make
an eligible marriage, in spite of the too-pungent seasoning that
nature have give to the eld Miss Dodson's virtue. a man with an
affectionate disposition, who find a wife to concur with his
fundamental idea of life, easily come to persuade himself that no
other woman would have suit he so well, and do a little daily
snap and quarrel without any sense of alienation. Mr. Glegg,
be of a reflective turn, and no long occupy with wool, have much
wonder meditation on the peculiar constitution of the female mind
as unfold to he in his domestic life; and yet he think Mrs.
Glegg's household way a model for her sex. it strike he as a
pitiable irregularity in other woman if they do not roll up their
table-napkin with the same tightness and emphasis as Mrs. Glegg do,
if their pastry have a less leathery consistence, and their damson
cheese a less venerable hardness than her; nay, even the peculiar
combination of grocery and druglike odor in Mrs. Glegg's private
cupboard impress he as the only right thing in the way of cupboard
smell. I be not sure that he would not have long for the
quarrelling again, if it have cease for an entire week; and it be
certain that an acquiescent, mild wife would have leave his meditation
comparatively jejune and barren of mystery.
Mr. Glegg's unmistakable kind-heartedness be show in this, that it
pain he more to see his wife at variance with others,--even with
dolly, the servant,--than to be in a state of cavil with she himself;
and the quarrel between she and Mr. Tulliver vex he so much that it
quite nullify the pleasure he would otherwise have have in the state
of his early cabbage, as he walk in his garden before breakfast the
next morning. still, he go in to breakfast with some slight hope
that, now Mrs. Glegg have "sleep upon it," her anger might be subdue
enough to give way to her usually strong sense of family decorum. she
have be use to boast that there have never be any of those deadly
quarrel among the dodson which have disgrace other family; that no
Dodson have ever be "cut off with a shilling," and no cousin of the
Dodsons disown; as, indeed, why should they be? for they have no
cousin who have not money out at use, or some house of their own, at
the very least.
there be one evening-cloud which have always disappear from Mrs.
Glegg's brow when she sit at the breakfast-table. it be her fuzzy
front of curl; for as she occupy herself in household matter in
the morning it would have be a mere extravagance to put on anything
so superfluous to the making of leathery pastry as a fuzzy curl
front. by half-past ten decorum demand the front; until then Mrs.
Glegg could economize it, and society would never be any the wiser.
but the absence of that cloud only leave it more apparent that the
cloud of severity remain; and Mr. Glegg, perceive this, as he sit
down to his milkporridge, which it be his old frugal habit to stem
his morning hunger with, prudently resolve to leave the first remark
to Mrs. Glegg, lest, to so delicate an article as a lady's temper, the
slight touch should do mischief. People who seem to enjoy their ill
temper have a way of keep it in fine condition by inflict
privation on themselves. that be Mrs. Glegg's way. she make her tea
weak than usual this morning, and decline butter. it be a hard
case that a vigorous mood for quarrelling, so highly capable of use
an opportunity, should not meet with a single remark from Mr. Glegg on
which to exercise itself. but by and by it appear that his silence
would answer the purpose, for he hear himself apostrophize at last
in that tone peculiar to the wife of one's bosom.
"well, Mr. Glegg! itbe a poor return I get for make you the wife
Ihave make you all these year. if this be the way Ibe to be treat,
Iwould well ha' know it before my poor father die, and then, when Iwould
want a home, I should ha' go elsewhere, as the choice be offer
I."
Mr. Glegg pause from his porridge and look up, not with any new
amazement, but simply with that quiet, habitual wonder with which we
regard constant mystery.
"why, Mrs. G., what have I do now?"
"do now, Mr. Glegg? _do now?_--i'm sorry for you."
not see his way to any pertinent answer, Mr. Glegg revert to his
porridge.
"therebe husband in the world," continue Mrs. Glegg, after a pause,
"as 'ud have know how to do something different to side with
everybody else against their own wife. perhaps Ibe wrong and you can
teach I well. but Ihave allay hear as itbe the husband's place to
stand by the wife, instead o' rejoicing and triumph when folk
insult she."
"now, what call have you to say that?" say Mr. Glegg, rather warmly,
for though a kind man, he be not as meek as Moses. "when do I
rejoice or triumph over you?"
"there's way o' do thing bad than speak out plain, Mr.
Glegg. Iwould soon youwould tell I to my face as you make light of I,
than try to make out as everybodybe in the right but I, and come to
your breakfast in the morning, as Ihave hardly sleep an hour this
night, and sulk at I as if I be the dirt under your foot."
"sulk at you?" say Mr. Glegg, in a tone of angry facetiousness.
"yoube like a tipsy man as think everybodybe have too much but
himself."
"donot lower yourself with use coarse language to _I_, Mr. Glegg!
it make you look very small, though you cannot see yourself," say
Mrs. Glegg, in a tone of energetic compassion. "a man in your place
should set an example, and talk more sensible."
"yes; but will you listen to sense?" retort Mr. Glegg, sharply. "the
good sense I can talk to you be what I say last night,--as yoube I'
the wrong to think o' call in your money, when itbe safe enough if
youwould let it alone, all because of a bit of a tiff, and I be in hope
youwould ha' alter your mind this morning. but if youwould like to call it
in, donot do it in a hurry now, and breed more enmity in the family,
but wait till therebe a pretty mortgage to be have without any trouble.
youwould have to set the lawyer to work now to find an investment, and
make no end o' expense."
Mrs. Glegg feel there be really something in this, but she toss she
head and emit a guttural interjection to indicate that her silence
be only an armistice, not a peace. and, in fact hostility soon
break out again.
"Iwill thank you for my cup o' tea, now, Mrs. G.," say Mr. Glegg,
see that she do not proceed to give it he as usual, when he have
finish his porridge. she lift the teapot with a slight toss of the
head, and said,--
"Ibe glad to hear youwill _thank_ I, Mr. Glegg. itbe little thank _I_
get for what I do for folk I' this world. though therebe never a
woman o' _your_ side o' the family, Mr. Glegg, as be fit to stand up
with I, and Iwould say it if I be on my die bed. not but what Ihave
allay conduct myself civil to your kin, and there benot one of them
can say the contrary, though my equil they benot, and nobody shall
make I say it."
"youwould well leave find fault wi' my kin till youhave leave off
quarrel with you own, Mrs. G.," say Mr. Glegg, with angry
sarcasm. "Iwill trouble you for the milk-jug."
"thatbe as false a word as ever you speak, Mr. Glegg," say the lady,
pour out the milk with unusual profuseness, as much as to say, if
he want milk he should have it with a vengeance. "and you know itbe
false. Ibe not the woman to quarrel with my own kin; _you_ may, for
Ihave know you to do it."
"why, what do you call it yesterday, then, leave your sister's
house in a tantrum?"
"Iwould no quarrel wi' my sister, Mr. Glegg, and itbe false to say it.
Mr. Tulliver's none o' my blood, and it be he quarrel with I,
and drive I out o' the house. but perhaps youwould have have I stay and
be swear at, Mr. Glegg; perhaps you be vex not to hear more abuse
and foul language pour out upo' your own wife. but, let I tell you,
itbe _your_ disgrace."
"do ever anybody hear the like I' this parish?" say Mr. Glegg,
get hot. "a woman, with everything provide for she, and allow
to keep her own money the same as if it be settle on she, and with a
gig new stuff and line at no end o' expense, and provide for when
I die beyond anything she could expect--to go on I' this way, bite
and snap like a mad dog! itbe beyond everything, as God a 'mighty
should ha' make woman _so_." (these last word be utter in a tone
of sorrowful agitation. Mr. Glegg push his tea from he, and tap
the table with both his hand.)
"well, Mr. Glegg, if those be your feeling, itbe good they should be
know," say Mrs. Glegg, take off her napkin, and fold it in an
excited manner. "but if you talk o' my be provide for beyond what
I could expect, I beg leave to tell you as Ihave a right to expect a
many thing as I donot find. and as to my be like a mad dog, itbe
well if yoube not cry shame on by the county for your treatment of
I, for itbe what I cannot bear, and I willnot bear----"
here Mrs. Glegg's voice intimate that she be go to cry, and
break off from speech, she ring the bell violently.
"Sally," she say, rise from her chair, and speak in rather a
choke voice, "light a fire up-stair, and put the blind down. Mr.
Glegg, youwill please to order what youwould like for dinner. I shall have
gruel."
Mrs. Glegg walk across the room to the small book-case, and take
down Baxter's "saint' Everlasting Rest," which she carry with she
up-stair. it be the book she be accustom to lay open before she
on special occasions,--on wet Sunday morning, or when she hear of a
death in the family, or when, as in this case, her quarrel with Mr.
Glegg have be set an octave high than usual.
but Mrs. Glegg carry something else up-stair with she, which,
together with the "Saints' rest" and the gruel, may have have some
influence in gradually calm her feeling, and make it possible
for she to endure existence on the ground-floor, shortly before
tea-time. this be, partly, Mr. Glegg's suggestion that she would do
well to let she five hundred lie still until a good investment turn
up; and, far, his parenthetic hint at his handsome provision for
she in case of his death. Mr. Glegg, like all man of his stamp, be
extremely reticent about his will; and Mrs. Glegg, in her gloomy
moment, have foreboding that, like other husband of whom she have
hear, he might cherish the mean project of heighten her grief at
his death by leave she poorly off, in which case she be firmly
resolve that she would have scarcely any weeper on her bonnet, and
would cry no more than if he have be a second husband. but if he have
really show she any testamentary tenderness, it would be affect to
think of he, poor man, when he be go; and even his foolish fuss
about the flower and garden-stuff, and his insistence on the subject
of snail, would be touch when it be once fairly at an end. to
survive Mr. Glegg, and talk eulogistically of he as a man who might
have his weakness, but who have do the right thing by she,
not-withstand his numerous poor relation; to have sum of interest
come in more frequently, and secrete it in various corner, baffle
to the most ingenious of thief (for, to Mrs. Glegg's mind, bank and
strong-box would have nullify the pleasure of property; she might
as well have take her food in capsule); finally, to be look up to
by her own family and the neighborhood, so as no woman can ever hope
to be who have not the praeterite and present dignity comprise in be
a "widow well left,"--all this make a flattering and conciliatory view
of the future. so that when good Mr. Glegg, restore to good humor by
much hoeing, and move by the sight of his wife's empty chair, with
her knitting roll up in the corner, go up-stair to she, and
observe that the bell have be toll for poor Mr. Morton, Mrs.
Glegg answer magnanimously, quite as if she have be an uninjured
woman: "ah! then, therewill be a good business for somebody to take
to."
Baxter have be open at least eight hour by this time, for it be
nearly five o'clock; and if people be to quarrel often, it follow as
a corollary that their quarrel cannot be protract beyond certain
limit.
Mr. and Mrs. Glegg talk quite amicably about the Tullivers that
evening. Mr. Glegg go the length of admit that Tulliver be a
sad man for get into hot water, and be like enough to run through
his property; and Mrs. Glegg, meet this acknowledgment half-way,
declare that it be beneath she to take notice of such a man's
conduct, and that, for her sister's sake, she would let he keep the
five hundred a while long, for when she put it out on a mortgage she
should only get four per cent.
Chapter XIII
Mr. Tulliver Further Entangles the Skein of Life
owe to this new adjustment of Mrs. Glegg's thought, Mrs. Pullet
find her task of mediation the next day surprisingly easy. Mrs.
Glegg, indeed check she rather sharply for think it would be
necessary to tell her eld sister what be the right mode of behavior
in family matter. Mrs. Pullet's argument, that it would look ill in
the neighborhood if people should have it in their power to say that
there be a quarrel in the family, be particularly offensive. if the
family name never suffer except through Mrs. Glegg, Mrs. Pullet
might lay her head on her pillow in perfect confidence.
"itbe not to be expect, I suppose," observe Mrs. Glegg, by way of
wind up the subject, "as I shall go to the mill again before Bessy
come to see I, or as I shall go and fall down o' my knee to Mr.
Tulliver, and ask his pardon for show he favor; but I shall bear
no malice, and when Mr. Tulliver speak civil to I, Iwill speak civil
to he. nobody have any call to tell I whatbe become."
find it unnecessary to plead for the Tullivers, it be natural that
aunt Pullet should relax a little in her anxiety for they, and recur
to the annoyance she have suffer yesterday from the offspring of that
apparently ill-fat house. Mrs. Glegg hear a circumstantial
narrative, to which Mr. Pullet's remarkable memory furnish some
item; and while aunt Pullet pity poor Bessy's bad luck with her
child, and express a half-form project of pay for Maggie's
be send to a distant boarding-school, which would not prevent she
be so brown, but might tend to subdue some other vice in she, aunt
Glegg blame Bessy for her weakness, and appeal to all witness who
should be live when the Tulliver child have turn out ill, that
she, Mrs. Glegg, have always say how it would be from the very first,
observe that it be wonderful to herself how all her word come
true.
"then I may call and tell Bessy youwill bear no malice, and everything
be as it be before?" Mrs. Pullet say, just before part.
"yes, you may, Sophy," say Mrs. Glegg; "you may tell Mr. Tulliver,
and Bessy too, as Ibe not go to behave ill because folk behave ill
to I; I know itbe my place, as the eld, to set an example in every
respect, and I do it. nobody can say different of I, if theywill keep
to the truth."
Mrs. Glegg be in this state of satisfaction in her own lofty
magnanimity, I leave you to judge what effect be produce on she by
the reception of a short letter from Mr. Tulliver that very evening,
after Mrs. Pullet's departure, inform she that she neednot trouble
her mind about her five hundred pound, for it should be pay back to
she in the course of the next month at farth, together with the
interest due thereon until the time of payment. and furthermore, that
Mr. Tulliver have no wish to behave uncivilly to Mrs. Glegg, and she
be welcome to his house whenever she like to come, but he desire no
favor from she, either for himself or his child.
it be poor Mrs. Tulliver who have hasten this catastrophe, entirely
through that irrepressible hopefulness of hers which lead she to expect
that similar cause may at any time produce different result. it have
very often occur in her experience that Mr. Tulliver have do
something because other people have say he be not able to do it, or
have pity he for his suppose inability, or in any other way pique
his pride; still, she think to-day, if she tell he when he come in
to tea that sister Pullet be go to try and make everything up with
sister Glegg, so that he neednot think about pay in the money, it
would give a cheerful effect to the meal. Mr. Tulliver have never
slacken in his resolve to raise the money, but now he at once
determine to write a letter to Mrs. Glegg, which should cut off all
possibility of mistake. Mrs. Pullet go to beg and pray for _he_
indeed! Mr. Tulliver do not willingly write a letter, and find the
relation between speak and write language, briefly know as
spelling, one of the most puzzling thing in this puzzle world.
nevertheless, like all fervid writing, the task be do in less time
than usual, and if the spelling differ from Mrs. Glegg's,--why, she
belong, like himself, to a generation with whom spelling be a
matter of private judgment.
Mrs. Glegg do not alter she will in consequence of this letter, and
cut off the Tulliver child from their sixth and seventh share in
her thousand pound; for she have her principle. no one must be able
to say of she when she be dead that she have not divide her money
with perfect fairness among her own kin. in the matter of will,
personal quality be subordinate to the great fundamental fact of
blood; and to be determine in the distribution of your property by
caprice, and not make your legacy bear a direct ratio to degree of
kinship, be a prospective disgrace that would have embitter her
life. this have always be a principle in the Dodson family; it be
one form if that sense of honor and rectitude which be a proud
tradition in such families,--a tradition which have be the salt of
our provincial society.
but though the letter could not shake Mrs. Glegg's principle, it make
the family breach much more difficult to mend; and as to the effect it
produce on Mrs. Glegg's opinion of Mr. Tulliver, she beg to be
understand from that time forth that she have nothing whatever to say
about he; his state of mind, apparently, be too corrupt for she to
contemplate it for a moment. it be not until the evening before Tom
go to school, at the beginning of August, that Mrs. Glegg pay a
visit to her sister Tulliver, sit in her gig all the while, and
show her displeasure by markedly abstain from all advice and
criticism; for, as she observe to her sister Deane, "Bessy must bear
the consequence o' have such a husband, though Ibe sorry for she,"
and Mrs. Deane agree that Bessy be pitiable.
that evening Tom observe to Maggie: "oh my! Maggie, aunt Glegg's
begin to come again; Ibe glad Ibe go to school. _youwill_ catch
it all now!"
Maggie be already so full of sorrow at the thought of Tom's go
away from she, that this playful exultation of his seem very unkind,
and she cry herself to sleep that night.
Mr. Tulliver's prompt procedure entail on he further promptitude in
find the convenient person who be desirous of lend five hundred
pound on bond. "it must be no client of Wakem's," he say to himself;
and yet at the end of a fortnight it turn out to the contrary; not
because Mr. Tulliver's will be feeble, but because external fact be
strong. Wakem's client be the only convenient person to be find.
Mr. Tulliver have a destiny as well as Oedipus, and in this case
he might plead, like Oedipus, that his deed be inflict on he
rather than commit by he.
Book II
_school-Time_
chapter I
Tom's "First Half"
Tom Tulliver's suffering during the first quarter he be at King's
Lorton, under the distinguished care of the Rev. Walter Stelling, be
rather severe. at Mr. Jacob's academy life have not present itself to
he as a difficult problem; there be plenty of fellow to play with,
and Tom be good at all active games,--fighting especially,--had
that precedence among they which appear to he inseparable from the
personality of Tom Tulliver. Mr. Jacobs himself, familiarly know as
Old Goggles, from his habit of wear spectacle, impose no painful
awe; and if it be the property of snuffy old hypocrite like he to
write like copperplate and surround their signature with arabesque,
to spell without forethought, and to spout "my name be Norval" without
bungling, Tom, for his part, be glad he be not in danger of those
mean accomplishment. he be not go to be a snuffy schoolmaster,
he, but a substantial man, like his father, who use to go hunting
when he be young, and ride a capital black mare,--as pretty a bit
of horse-flesh as ever you see; Tom have hear what her point be a
hundred time. _he_ mean to go hunt too, and to be generally
respect. when people be grow up, he consider, nobody inquire
about their writing and spelling; when he be a man, he should be
master of everything, and do just as he like. it have be very
difficult for he to reconcile himself to the idea that his
school-time be to be prolong and that he be not to be bring up
to his father's business, which he have always think extremely
pleasant; for it be nothing but rid about, give order, and
go to market; and he think that a clergyman would give he a
great many scripture lesson, and probably make he learn the Gospel
and Epistle on a Sunday, as well as the Collect. but in the absence of
specific information, it be impossible for he to imagine that school
and a schoolmaster would be something entirely different from the
academy of Mr. Jacobs. so, not to be at a deficiency, in case of his
finding genial companion, he have take care to carry with he a small
box of percussion-cap; not that there be anything particular to be
do with they, but they would serve to impress strange boy with a
sense of his familiarity with gun. thus poor Tom, though he see very
clearly through Maggie's illusion, be not without illusion of his
own, which be to be cruelly dissipate by his enlarged experience at
King's Lorton.
he have not be there a fortnight before it be evident to he that
life, complicated not only with the Latin grammar but with a new
standard of english pronunciation, be a very difficult business, make
all the more obscure by a thick mist of bash fulness. Tom, as you have
observe, be never an exception among boy for ease of address; but
the difficulty of enunciate a monosyllable in reply to Mr. or Mrs.
Stelling be so great, that he even dread to be ask at table
whether he would have more pudding. as to the percussion-cap, he have
almost resolve, in the bitterness of his heart, that he would throw
they into a neighboring pond; for not only be he the solitary pupil,
but he begin even to have a certain scepticism about gun, and a
general sense that his theory of life be undermine. for Mr. Stelling
think nothing of gun, or horse either, apparently; and yet it be
impossible for Tom to despise Mr. Stelling as he have despise Old
Goggles. if there be anything that be not thoroughly genuine about
Mr. Stelling, it lie quite beyond Tom's power to detect it; it be only
by a wide comparison of fact that the wise full-grow man can
distinguish well-roll barrel from mere supernal thunder.
Mr. Stelling be a well-size, broad-cheste man, not yet thirty, with
flaxen hair standing erect, and large lightish-gray eye, which be
always very wide open; he have a sonorous bass voice, and an air of
defiant self-confidence incline to brazenness. he have enter on his
career with great vigor, and intend to make a considerable
impression on his fellowman. the Rev. Walter Stelling be not a man
who would remain among the "inferior clergy" all his life. he have a
true british determination to push his way in the world,--as a
schoolmaster, in the first place, for there be capital mastership
of grammar-school to be have, and Mr. Stelling mean to have one of
they; but as a preacher also, for he mean always to preach in a
strike manner, so as to have his congregation swell by admirer
from neighboring parish, and to produce a great sensation whenever
he take occasional duty for a brother clergyman of minor gift. the
style of preach he have choose be the extemporaneous, which be
hold little short of the miraculous in rural parish like King's
Lorton. some passage of Massillon and Bourdaloue, which he know by
heart, be really very effective when roll out in Mr. Stelling's
deep tone; but as comparatively feeble appeal of his own be
deliver in the same loud and impressive manner, they be often
think quite as strike by his hearer. Mr. Stelling's doctrine be
of no particular school; if anything, it have a tinge of
evangelicalism, for that be "the tell thing" just then in the
diocese to which King's Lorton belong. in short, Mr. Stelling be a
man who mean to rise in his profession, and to rise by merit,
clearly, since he have no interest beyond what might be promise by a
problematic relationship to a great lawyer who have not yet become Lord
Chancellor. a clergyman who have such vigorous intention naturally
get a little into debt at start; it be not to be expect that he
will live in the meagre style of a man who mean to be a poor curate
all his life; and if the few hundred Mr. Timpson advance toward his
daughter's fortune do not suffice for the purchase of handsome
furniture, together with a stock of wine, a grand piano, and the
lay out of a superior flower-garden, it follow in the most
rigorous manner, either that these thing must be procure by some
other mean, or else that the Rev. Mr. Stelling must go without they,
which last alternative would be an absurd procrastination of the
fruit of success, where success be certain. Mr. Stelling be so
broad-cheste and resolute that he feel equal to anything; he would
become celebrate by shake the conscience of his hearer, and he
would by and by edit a greek play, and invent several new reading. he
have not yet select the play, for have be marry little more
than two year, his leisure time have be much occupy with
attention to Mrs. Stelling; but he have tell that fine woman what he
mean to do some day, and she feel great confidence in her husband, as
a man who understand everything of that sort.
but the immediate step to future success be to bring on Tom Tulliver
during this first half-year; for, by a singular coincidence, there have
be some negotiation concern another pupil from the same
neighborhood and it might further a decision in Mr. Stelling's favor,
if it be understand that young Tulliver, who, Mr. Stelling observe
in conjugal privacy, be rather a rough cub, have make prodigious
progress in a short time. it be on this ground that he be severe
with Tom about his lesson; he be clearly a boy whose power would
never be develop through the medium of the latin grammar, without
the application of some sternness. not that Mr. Stelling be a
harsh-temper or unkind man; quite the contrary. he be jocose with
Tom at table, and correct his provincialism and his deportment in
the most playful manner; but poor Tom be only the more cowed and
confuse by this double novelty, for he have never be use to joke
at all like Mr. Stelling's; and for the first time in his life he have
a painful sense that he be all wrong somehow. when Mr. Stelling say,
as the roast-beef be be uncover, "now, Tulliver! which would you
rather decline, roast-beef or the Latin for it?" Tom, to whom in his
cool moment a pun would have be a hard nut, be throw into a
state of embarrassed alarm that make everything dim to he except the
feeling that he would rather not have anything to do with Latin; of
course he answer, "roast-beef," whereupon there follow much
laughter and some practical joking with the plate, from which Tom
gather that he have in some mysterious way refuse beef, and, in
fact, make himself appear "a silly." if he could have see a
fellow-pupil undergo these painful operation and survive they in good
spirit, he might soon have take they as a matter of course. but
there be two expensive form of education, either of which a parent
may procure for his son by send he as solitary pupil to a
clergyman: one be the enjoyment of the reverend gentleman's undivided
neglect; the other be the endurance of the reverend gentleman's
undivided attention. it be the latter privilege for which Mr.
Tulliver pay a high price in Tom's initiatory month at King's
Lorton.
that respectable miller and maltster have leave Tom behind, and drive
homeward in a state of great mental satisfaction. he consider that
it be a happy moment for he when he have think of ask Riley's
advice about a tutor for Tom. Mr. Stelling's eye be so wide open,
and he talk in such an off-hand, matter-of-fact way, answer every
difficult, slow remark of Mr. Tulliver's with, "I see, my good sir, I
see"; "to be sure, to be sure"; "you want your son to be a man who
will make his way in the world,"--that Mr. Tulliver be delighted to
find in he a clergyman whose knowledge be so applicable to the
every-day affair of this life. except Counsellor Wylde, whom he have
hear at the last session, Mr. Tulliver think the Rev. Mr Stelling
be the shrewd fellow he have ever meet with,--not unlike Wylde, in
fact; he have the same way of stick his thumb in the armhole of
his waistcoat. Mr. Tulliver be not by any mean an exception in
mistaking brazenness for shrewdness; most layman think stelling
shrewd, and a man of remarkable power generally; it be chiefly by
his clerical brother that he be consider rather a full fellow. but
he tell Mr. Tulliver several story about "swing" and incendiarism,
and ask his advice about feed pig in so thoroughly secular and
judicious a manner, with so much polished glibness of tongue, that the
miller thought, here be the very thing he want for Tom. he have no
doubt this first-rate man be acquaint with every branch of
information, and know exactly what Tom must learn in order to become a
match for the lawyer, which poor Mr. Tulliver himself do _not_ know,
and so be necessarily throw for self-direction on this wide kind of
inference. it be hardly fair to laugh at he, for I have know much
more highly instruct person than he make inference quite as wide,
and not at all wise.
as for Mrs. Tulliver, find that Mrs. Stelling's view as to the
airing of linen and the frequent recurrence of hunger in a grow boy
entirely coincide with her own; moreover, that Mrs. Stelling, though
so young a woman, and only anticipate her second confinement, have
go through very nearly the same experience as herself with regard to
the behavior and fundamental character of the monthly nurse,--she
express great contentment to her husband, when they drive away, at
leave Tom with a woman who, in spite of her youth, seem quite
sensible and motherly, and ask advice as prettily as could be.
"they must be very well off, though," say Mrs. Tulliver, "for
everythingbe as nice as can be all over the house, and that water
silk she have on cost a pretty penny. Sister Pullet have get one like
it."
"ah," say Mr. Tulliver, "hebe get some income besides the curacy, I
reckon. perhaps her father allow them something. therebe Tom 'ull be
another hundred to he, and not much trouble either, by his own
account; he say teaching come natural to he. thatbe wonderful,
now," add Mr. Tulliver, turn his head on one side, and give his
horse a meditative tickling on the flank.
perhaps it be because teaching come naturally to Mr. Stelling, that
he set about it with that uniformity of method and independence of
circumstance which distinguish the action of animal understand to
be under the immediate teaching of nature. Mr. Broderip's amiable
beaver, as that charming naturalist tell we, busy himself as
earnestly in construct a dam, in a room up three pair of stair in
London, as if he have be lay his foundation in a stream or lake in
Upper Canada. it be "Binny's" function to build; the absence of water
or of possible progeny be an accident for which he be not
accountable. with the same unerring instinct Mr. Stelling set to work
at his natural method of instill the Eton Grammar and Euclid into
the mind of Tom Tulliver. this, he consider, be the only basis of
solid instruction; all other mean of education be mere
charlatanism, and could produce nothing well than smatterer. fix
on this firm basis, a man might observe the display of various or
special knowledge make by irregularly educate people with a pitying
smile; all that sort of thing be very well, but it be impossible
these people could form sound opinion. in hold this conviction Mr.
Stelling be not biassed, as some tutor have be, by the excessive
accuracy or extent of his own scholarship; and as to his view about
Euclid, no opinion could have be free from personal partiality. Mr.
Stelling be very far from be lead astray by enthusiasm, either
religious or intellectual; on the other hand, he have no secret belief
that everything be humbug. he think religion be a very excellent
thing, and Aristotle a great authority, and deanery and prebend
useful institution, and Great Britain the providential bulwark of
Protestantism, and faith in the unseen a great support to afflict
mind; he believe in all these thing, as a swiss hotel-keeper
believe in the beauty of the scenery around he, and in the pleasure
it give to artistic visitor. and in the same way Mr. Stelling
believe in his method of education; he have no doubt that he be do
the very good thing for Mr. Tulliver's boy. of course, when the miller
talk of "mapping" and "sum" in a vague and diffident manner, Mr
Stelling have set his mind at rest by an assurance that he understand
what be want; for how be it possible the good man could form any
reasonable judgment about the matter? Mr Stelling's duty be to teach
the lad in the only right way,--indeed he know no other; he have not
waste his time in the acquirement of anything abnormal.
he very soon set down poor Tom as a thoroughly stupid lad; for though
by hard labor he could get particular declension into his brain,
anything so abstract as the relation between case and termination
could by no mean get such a lodgment there as to enable he to
recognize a chance genitive or dative. this strike Mr. Stelling as
something more than natural stupidity; he suspect obstinacy, or at
any rate indifference, and lecture Tom severely on his want of
thorough application. "you feel no interest in what yoube do,
sir," Mr. Stelling would say, and the reproach be painfully true. Tom
have never find any difficulty in discern a pointer from a setter,
when once he have be tell the distinction, and his perceptive power
be not at all deficient. I fancy they be quite as strong as those
of the Rev. Mr. Stelling; for Tom could predict with accuracy what
number of horse be canter behind he, he could throw a stone
right into the centre of a give ripple, he could guess to a fraction
how many length of his stick it would take to reach across the
playground, and could draw almost perfect square on his slate without
any measurement. but Mr. Stelling take no note of these thing; he
only observe that Tom's faculty fail he before the abstraction
hideously symbolize to he in the page of the Eton Grammar, and that
he be in a state border on idiocy with regard to the demonstration
that two give triangle must be equal, though he could discern with
great promptitude and certainty the fact that they _be_ equal.
whence Mr. Stelling conclude that Tom's brain, be peculiarly
impervious to etymology and demonstration, be peculiarly in need of
be plough and harrow by these patent implement; it be his
favorite metaphor, that the classic and geometry constitute that
culture of the mind which prepare it for the reception of any
subsequent crop. I say nothing against Mr. Stelling's theory; if we
be to have one regimen for all mind, his seem to I as good as any
other. I only know it turn out as uncomfortably for Tom Tulliver as
if he have be ply with cheese in order to remedy a gastric weakness
which prevent he from digest it. it be astonish what a
different result one get by change the metaphor! once call the
brain an intellectual stomach, and one's ingenious conception of the
classic and geometry as plough and harrow seem to settle nothing.
but then it be open to some one else to follow great authority, and
call the mind a sheet of white paper or a mirror, in which case one's
knowledge of the digestive process become quite irrelevant. it be
doubtless an ingenious idea to call the camel the ship of the desert,
but it would hardly lead one far in training that useful beast. O
Aristotle! if you have have the advantage of be "the fresh modern"
instead of the great ancient, would you not have mingle your
praise of metaphorical speech, as a sign of high intelligence, with a
lamentation that intelligence so rarely show itself in speech without
metaphor,--that we can so seldom declare what a thing be, except by
say it be something else?
Tom Tulliver, be abundant in no form of speech, do not use any
metaphor to declare his view as to the nature of Latin; he never
call it an instrument of torture; and it be not until he have get on
some way in the next half-year, and in the Delectus, that he be
advanced enough to call it a "bore" and "beastly stuff." at present,
in relation to this demand that he should learn Latin declension and
conjugation, Tom be in a state of as blank unimaginativeness
concern the cause and tendency of his suffering, as if he have be
an innocent shrewmouse imprison in the split trunk of an ash-tree in
order to cure lameness in cattle. it be doubtless almost incredible to
instruct mind of the present day that a boy of twelve, not
belong strictly to "the mass," who be now understand to have the
monopoly of mental darkness, should have have no distinct idea how
there come to be such a thing as Latin on this earth; yet so it be
with Tom. it would have take a long while to make conceivable to he
that there ever exist a people who buy and sell sheep and oxen,
and transact the every-day affair of life, through the medium of
this language; and still long to make he understand why he should
be call upon to learn it, when its connection with those affair have
become entirely latent. so far as Tom have gain any acquaintance with
the Romans at Mr. Jacob's academy, his knowledge be strictly correct,
but it go no far than the fact that they be "in the New
Testament"; and Mr. Stelling be not the man to enfeeble and
emasculate his pupil's mind by simplify and explain, or to
reduce the tonic effect of etymology by mix it with smatter,
extraneous information, such as be give to girl.
yet, strange to say, under this vigorous treatment Tom become more
like a girl than he have ever be in his life before. he have a large
share of pride, which have hitherto find itself very comfortable in
the world, despise Old Goggles, and repose in the sense of
unquestione right; but now this same pride meet with nothing but
bruise and crushing. Tom be too clear-sight not to be aware that
Mr. Stelling's standard of thing be quite different, be certainly
something high in the eye of the world than that of the people he
have be live amongst, and that, bring in contact with it, he, Tom
Tulliver, appear uncouth and stupid; he be by no mean indifferent
to this, and his pride get into an uneasy condition which quite
nullify his boyish self-satisfaction, and give he something of the
girl's susceptibility. he be a very firm, not to say obstinate,
disposition, but there be no brute-like rebellion and recklessness in
his nature; the human sensibility predominate, and if it have
occur to he that he could enable himself to show some quickness at
his lesson, and so acquire Mr. Stelling's approbation, by stand on
one leg for an inconvenient length of time, or rap his head
moderately against the wall, or any voluntary action of that sort, he
would certainly have try it. but no; Tom have never hear that these
measure would brighten the understanding, or strengthen the verbal
memory; and he be not give to hypothesis and experiment. it do
occur to he that he could perhaps get some help by pray for it;
but as the prayer he say every evening be form learn by heart,
he rather shrink from the novelty and irregularity of introduce an
extempore passage on a topic of petition for which he be not aware of
any precedent. but one day, when he have break down, for the fifth
time, in the supine of the third conjugation, and Mr. Stelling,
convince that this must be carelessness, since it transcend the
bound of possible stupidity, have lecture he very seriously,
point out that if he fail to seize the present golden opportunity
of learn supine, he would have to regret it when he become a
man,--tom, more miserable than usual, determine to try his sole
resource; and that evening, after his usual form of prayer for his
parent and "little sister" (he have begin to pray for Maggie when she
be a baby), and that he might be able always to keep God's
commandment, he add, in the same low whisper, "and please to make
I always remember my Latin." he pause a little to consider how he
should pray about Euclid--whether he should ask to see what it mean,
or whether there be any other mental state which would be more
applicable to the case. but at last he add: "and make Mr. Stelling
say I sha'n't do Euclid any more. amen."
the fact that he get through his supine without mistake the next day,
encourage he to persevere in this appendix to his prayer, and
neutralize any scepticism that might have arise from Mr. Stelling's
continue demand for Euclid. but his faith break down under the
apparent absence of all help when he get into the irregular verb. it
seem clear that Tom's despair under the caprice of the present
tense do not constitute a _nodus_ worthy of interference, and since
this be the climax of his difficulty, where be the use of pray
for help any long? he make up his mind to this conclusion in one of
his dull, lonely evening, which he spend in the study, prepare his
lesson for the morrow. his eye be apt to get dim over the page,
though he hat cry, and be ashamed of it; he couldnot help
think with some affection even of Spouncer, whom he use to fight
and quarrel with; he would have feel at home with Spouncer, and in a
condition of superiority. and then the mill, and the river, and Yap
prick up his ear, ready to obey the least sign when Tom say,
"Hoigh!" would all come before he in a sort of calenture, when his
finger play absently in his pocket with his great knife and his
coil of whipcord, and other relic of the past.
Tom, as I say, have never be so much like a girl in his life before,
and at that epoch of irregular verb his spirit be far depress
by a new mean of mental development which have be think of for he
out of school hour. Mrs. Stelling have lately have her second baby, and
as nothing could be more salutary for a boy than to feel himself
useful, Mrs. Stelling consider she be do Tom a service by
set he to watch the little cherub Laura while the nurse be
occupy with the sickly baby. it be quite a pretty employment for
Tom to take little Laura out in the sunniest hour of the autumn day;
it would help to make he feel that Lorton Parsonage be a home for
he, and that he be one of the family. the little cherub Laura, not
be an accomplished walker at present, have a ribbon fasten round
her waist, by which Tom hold she as if she have be a little dog
during the minute in which she choose to walk; but as these be rare,
he be for the most part carry this fine child round and round the
garden, within sight of Mrs. Stelling's window, accord to order.
if any one consider this unfair and even oppressive toward Tom, I beg
he to consider that there be feminine virtue which be with
difficulty combine, even if they be not incompatible. when the wife
of a poor curate contrive, under all her disadvantage, to dress
extremely well, and to have a style of coiffure which require that
her nurse shall occasionally officiate as lady's-maid; when, moreover,
her dinner-party and her drawing-room show that effort at elegance
and completeness of appointment to which ordinary woman might imagine
a large income necessary, it would be unreasonable to expect of she
that she should employ a second nurse, or even act as a nurse herself.
Mr. Stelling know well; he see that his wife do wonder already,
and be proud of she. it be certainly not the good thing in the world
for young Tulliver's gait to carry a heavy child, but he have plenty of
exercise in long walk with himself, and next half-year Mr. Stelling
would see about have a drilling-master. among the many mean whereby
Mr. Stelling intend to be more fortunate than the bulk of his
fellow-man, he have entirely give up that of have his own way in his
own house. what then? he have marry "as kind a little soul as ever
breathe," accord to Mr. Riley, who have be acquaint with Mrs.
Stelling's blond ringlet and smile demeanor throughout her maiden
life, and on the strength of that knowledge would have be ready any
day to pronounce that whatever domestic difference might arise in her
married life must be entirely Mr. Stelling's fault.
if Tom have have a bad disposition, he would certainly have hat the
little cherub Laura, but he be too kind-hearte a lad for that; there
be too much in he of the fibre that turn to true manliness, and to
protect pity for the weak. I be afraid he hat Mrs. Stelling, and
contract a last dislike to pale blond ringlet and broad plait,
as directly associate with haughtiness of manner, and a frequent
reference to other people's "duty." but he couldnot help play with
little Laura, and like to amuse she; he even sacrifice his
percussion-cap for her sake, in despair of their ever serve a
great purpose,--thinking the small flash and bang would delight she,
and thereby draw down on himself a rebuke from Mrs. Stelling for
teach her child to play with fire. Laura be a sort of
playfellow--and oh, how Tom long for playfellow! in his secret
heart he yearn to have Maggie with he, and be almost ready to dote
on her exasperating act of forgetfulness; though, when he be at
home, he always represent it as a great favor on his part to let
Maggie trot by his side on his pleasure excursion.
and before this dreary half-year be end, Maggie actually come. Mrs.
Stelling have give a general invitation for the little girl to come
and stay with her brother; so when Mr. Tulliver drive over to King's
Lorton late in October, Maggie come too, with the sense that she be
take a great journey, and begin to see the world. it be Mr.
Tulliver's first visit to see Tom, for the lad must learn not to think
too much about home.
"well, my lad," he say to Tom, when Mr. Stelling have leave the room to
announce the arrival to his wife, and Maggie have begin to kiss Tom
freely, "you look rarely! school agree with you."
Tom wish he have look rather ill.
"I donot think I _be_ well, father," say Tom; "I wish youwould ask Mr.
Stelling not to let I do Euclid; it bring on the toothache, I
think."
(the toothache be the only malady to which Tom have ever be
subject.)
"Euclid, my lad,--why, whatbe that?" say Mr. Tulliver.
"oh, I donot know; itbe definition, and axiom, and triangle, and
thing. itbe a book Ihave get to learn in--therebe no sense in it."
"go, go!" say Mr. Tulliver, reprovingly; "you mustnot say so. you
must learn what your master tell you. he know what itbe right for
you to learn."
"_Iwill_ help you now, Tom," say Maggie, with a little air of
patronize consolation. "Ibe come to stay ever so long, if Mrs.
Stelling ask I. Ihave bring my box and my pinafore, havenot I,
father?"
"_you_ help I, you silly little thing!" say Tom, in such high
spirit at this announcement that he quite enjoy the idea of
confound Maggie by show she a page of Euclid. "I should like to
see you do one of _my_ lesson! why, I learn Latin too! girl never
learn such thing. theybe too silly."
"I know what Latin be very well," say Maggie, confidently, "Latin's a
language. there be latin word in the Dictionary. there's bonus, a
gift."
"now, yoube just wrong there, Miss Maggie!" say Tom, secretly
astonish. "you think yoube very wise! but 'bonus' mean 'good,' as
it happens,--bonus, bona, bonum."
"well, thatbe no reason why it shouldnot mean 'gift,'" say Maggie,
stoutly. "it may mean several thing; almost every word do. therebe
'lawn,'--it mean the grass-plot, as well as the stuff pocket-
handkerchief be make of."
"well do, little 'un," say Mr. Tulliver, laugh, while Tom feel
rather disgusted with Maggie's knowingness, though beyond measure
cheerful at the thought that she be go to stay with he. her
conceit would soon be overawe by the actual inspection of his book.
Mrs. Stelling, in her press invitation, do not mention a long
time than a week for Maggie's stay; but Mr. Stelling, who take she
between his knee, and ask she where she steal her dark eye from,
insist that she must stay a fortnight. Maggie think Mr. Stelling
be a charming man, and Mr. Tulliver be quite proud to leave his
little wench where she would have an opportunity of show she
cleverness to appreciate stranger. so it be agree that she should
not be fetched home till the end of the fortnight.
"now, then, come with I into the study, Maggie," say Tom, as their
father drive away. "what do you shake and toss your head now for, you
silly?" he continue; for though her hair be now under a new
dispensation, and be brush smoothly behind her ear, she seem
still in imagination to be toss it out of her eye. "it make you
look as if you be crazy."
"oh, I cannot help it," say Maggie, impatiently. "donot tease I, Tom.
oh, what book!" she exclaim, as she see the bookcase in the study.
"how I should like to have as many book as that!"
"why, you couldnot read one of them," say Tom, triumphantly. "theybe
all Latin."
"no, they benot," say Maggie. "I can read the back of
this,--'history of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.'"
"well, what do that mean? _you_ donot know," say Tom, wag his
head.
"but I could soon find out," say Maggie, scornfully.
"why, how?"
"I should look inside, and see what it be about."
"youwould well not, Miss Maggie," say Tom, see her hand on the
volume. "Mr. Stelling let nobody touch his book without leave, and
_I_ shall catch it, if you take it out."
"oh, very well. let I see all _your_ book, then," say Maggie,
turn to throw her arm round Tom's neck, and rub his cheek with her
small round nose.
Tom, in the gladness of his heart at have dear old Maggie to dispute
with and crow over again, seize her round the waist, and begin to
jump with her round the large library table. away they jump with
more and more vigor, till Maggie's hair fly from behind her ear, and
twirl about like an animate mop. but the revolution round the
table become more and more irregular in their sweep, till at last
reach Mr. Stelling's reading stand, they send it thunder down
with its heavy lexicon to the floor. happily it be the ground-floor,
and the study be a one-story wing to the house, so that the
downfall make no alarming resonance, though Tom stand dizzy and aghast
for a few minute, dread the appearance of Mr. or Mrs. Stelling.
"oh, I say, Maggie," say Tom at last, lift up the stand, "we must
keep quiet here, you know. if we break anything Mrs. Stelling'll make
we cry peccavi."
"whatbe that?" say Maggie.
"oh, itbe the Latin for a good scolding," say Tom, not without some
pride in his knowledge.
"be she a cross woman?" say Maggie.
"I believe you!" say Tom, with an emphatic nod.
"I think all woman be cross than man," say Maggie. "Aunt Glegg's a
great deal crosser than uncle Glegg, and mother scold I more than
father do."
"well, _youwill_ be a woman some day," say Tom, "so _you_ neednot
talk."
"but I shall be a _clever_ woman," say Maggie, with a toss.
"oh, I dare say, and a nasty conceited thing. Everybody'll hate you."
"but you oughtnot to hate I, Tom; itwill be very wicked of you, for I
shall be your sister."
"yes, but if yoube a nasty disagreeable thing I _shall_ hate you."
"oh, but, Tom, you willnot! I sha'n't be disagreeable. I shall be very
good to you, and I shall be good to everybody. you willnot hate I
really, will you, Tom?"
"oh, bother! never mind! come, itbe time for I to learn my lesson.
see here! what Ihave get to do," say Tom, draw Maggie toward he
and show she his theorem, while she push her hair behind her
ear, and prepare herself to prove her capability of help he in
Euclid. she begin to read with full confidence in her own power, but
presently, become quite bewilder, her face flush with
irritation. it be unavoidable; she must confess her incompetency, and
she be not fond of humiliation.
"itbe nonsense!" she say, "and very ugly stuff; nobody need want to
make it out."
"ah, there, now, Miss Maggie!" say Tom, draw the book away, and
wag his head at she, "you see yoube not so clever as you think
you be."
"oh," say Maggie, pouting, "I dare say I could make it out, if Ihave
learn what go before, as you have."
"but thatbe what you just couldnot, Miss Wisdom," say Tom. "for itbe
all the hard when you know what go before; for then youhave get to
say what definition 3 be, and what axiom V. be. but get along with you
now; I must go on with this. herebe the Latin Grammar. see what you
can make of that."
Maggie find the Latin Grammar quite soothing after her mathematical
mortification; for she delight in new word, and quickly find that
there be an English Key at the end, which would make she very wise
about Latin, at slight expense. she presently make up her mind to skip
the rule in the Syntax, the example become so absorbing. these
mysterious sentence, snatch from an unknown context,--like strange
horn of beast, and leaf of unknown plant, bring from some
far-off region,--gave boundless scope to her imagination, and be all
the more fascinating because they be in a peculiar tongue of their
own, which she could learn to interpret. it be really very
interesting, the Latin Grammar that Tom have say no girl could learn;
and she be proud because she find it interesting. the most
fragmentary example be her favourite. _mor omnibus est communi_
would have be jejune, only she like to know the Latin; but the
fortunate gentleman whom every one congratulate because he have a son
"endow with _such_ a disposition" afford she a great deal of
pleasant conjecture, and she be quite lose in the "thick grove
penetrable by no star," when Tom call out,--
"now, then, Magsie, give we the Grammar!"
"oh, Tom, itbe such a pretty book!" she say, as she jump out of the
large arm-chair to give it he; "itbe much pretty than the
Dictionary. I could learn Latin very soon. I donot think itbe at all
hard."
"oh, I know what youhave be do," say Tom; "youhave be read
the English at the end. any donkey can do that."
Tom seize the book and open it with a determined and business-like
air, as much as to say that he have a lesson to learn which no donkey
would find themselves equal to. Maggie, rather pique, turn to the
bookcase to amuse herself with puzzle out the title.
presently Tom call to she: "here, Magsie, come and hear if I can say
this. stand at that end of the table, where Mr. Stelling sit when he
hear I."
Maggie obey, and take the open book.
"where do you begin, Tom?"
"oh, I begin at _'Appellativa arborum,'_ because I say all over again
what Ihave be learn this week."
Tom sail along pretty well for three line; and Maggie be begin
to forget her office of prompter in speculate as to what _mas_ could
mean, which come twice over, when he stick fast at _Sunt etiam
volucrum_.
"donot tell I, Maggie; _Sunt etiam volucrum_--_Sunt etiam
volucrum_--_ut ostrea, cetus_----"
"no," say Maggie, open her mouth and shake her head.
"_Sunt etiam volucrum_," say Tom, very slowly, as if the next word
might be expect to come soon when he give they this strong hint
that they be wait for.
"C, e, u," say Maggie, get impatient.
"oh, I know--hold your tongue," say Tom. "_Ceu passer, hirundo;
ferarum_--_ferarum_----" Tom take his pencil and make several hard
dot with it on his book-cover--"_ferarum_----"
"oh dear, oh dear, Tom," say Maggie, "what a time you be! _ut_----"
"_Ut ostrea_----"
"no, no," say Maggie, "_ut tigris_----"
"oh yes, now I can do," say Tom; "it be _tigris, vulpe_, Iwould
forget: _ut tigris, volupe; et Piscium_."
with some further stammering and repetition, Tom get through the next
few line.
"now, then," he say, "the next be what Ihave just learn for
to-morrow. give I hold of the book a minute."
after some whisper gabbling, assist by the beating of his fist on
the table, Tom return the book.
"_Mascula nomina in a_," he begin.
"no, Tom," say Maggie, "that donot come next. itbe _noman non
cresken genittivo_----"
"_cresken genittivo!_" exclaim Tom, with a derisive laugh, for Tom
have learn this omit passage for his yesterday's lesson, and a
young gentleman do not require an intimate or extensive acquaintance
with Latin before he can feel the pitiable absurdity of a false
quantity. "_cresken genittivo!_ what a little silly you be, Maggie!"
"well, you neednot laugh, Tom, for you donot remember it at all. Ibe
sure itbe spell so; how be I to know?"
"phee-e-e-h! I tell you girl couldnot learn Latin. itbe _noman non
crescen genitivo_."
"very well, then," say Maggie, pouting. I can say that as well as you
can. and you donot mind your stop. for you ought to stop twice as
long at a semicolon as you do at a comma, and you make the long
stop where there ought to be no stop at all."
"oh, well, donot chatter. let I go on."
they be presently fetch to spend the rest of the evening in the
drawing-room, and Maggie become so animate with Mr. Stelling, who,
she feel sure, admire her cleverness, that Tom be rather amazed and
alarm at her audacity. but she be suddenly subdue by Mr.
Stelling's allude to a little girl of whom he have hear that she
once run away to the gypsy.
"what a very odd little girl that must be!" say Mrs. Stelling,
meaning to be playful; but a playfulness that turn on her suppose
oddity be not at all to Maggie's taste. she fear that Mr. Stelling,
after all, do not think much of she, and go to bed in rather low
spirit. Mrs. Stelling, she feel, look at she as if she think she
hair be very ugly because it hang down straight behind.
nevertheless it be a very happy fortnight to Maggie, this visit to
Tom. she be allow to be in the study while he have his lesson, and
in her various reading get very deep into the example in the Latin
Grammar. the astronomer who hat woman generally cause she so much
puzzle speculation that she one day ask Mr. Stelling if all
astronomer hat woman, or whether it be only this particular
astronomer. but forestall his answer, she said,--
"I suppose itbe all astronomer; because, you know, they live up in
high tower, and if the woman come there they might talk and hinder
they from look at the star."
Mr. Stelling like she prattle immensely, and they be on the good
term. she tell Tom she should like to go to school to Mr. Stelling,
as he do, and learn just the same thing. she know she could do
Euclid, for she have look into it again, and she see what a b C
meant; they be the name of the line.
"Ibe sure you couldnot do it, now," say Tom; "and Iwill just ask Mr.
Stelling if you could."
"I donot mind," say the little conceited minx, "Iwill ask he myself."
"Mr. Stelling," she say, that same evening when they be in the
drawing-room, "couldnot I do Euclid, and all Tom's lesson, if you
be to teach I instead of he?"
"no, you couldnot," say Tom, indignantly. "girl cannot do Euclid; can
they, sir?"
"they can pick up a little of everything, I dare say," say Mr.
Stelling. "theyhave a great deal of superficial cleverness; but they
couldnot go far into anything. theybe quick and shallow."
Tom, delight with this verdict, telegraph his triumph by wag
his head at Maggie, behind Mr. Stelling's chair. as for Maggie, she
have hardly ever be so mortified. she have be so proud to be call
"quick" all her little life, and now it appear that this quickness
be the brand of inferiority. it would have be well to be slow,
like Tom.
"ha, ha! Miss Maggie!" say Tom, when they be alone; "you see itbe
not such a fine thing to be quick. youwill never go far into anything,
you know."
and Maggie be so oppress by this dreadful destiny that she have no
spirit for a retort.
but when this small apparatus of shallow quickness be fetch away in
the gig by Luke, and the study be once more quite lonely for Tom, he
miss she grievously. he have really be bright, and have get
through his lesson well, since she have be there; and she have
ask Mr. Stelling so many question about the Roman Empire, and
whether there really ever be a man who say, in Latin, "I would not
buy it for a farthing or a rotten nut," or whether that have only be
turn into Latin, that Tom have actually come to a dim understanding
of the fact that there have once be people upon the earth who be so
fortunate as to know Latin without learn it through the medium of
the Eton Grammar. this luminous idea be a great addition to his
historical acquirement during this half-year, which be otherwise
confine to an epitomize history of the Jews.
but the dreary half-year _do_ come to an end. how glad Tom be to see
the last yellow leaf flutter before the cold wind! the dark
afternoon and the first December snow seem to he far lively than
the August sunshine; and that he might make himself the surer about
the flight of the day that be carry he homeward, he stick
twenty-one stick deep in a corner of the garden, when he be three
week from the holiday, and pull one up every day with a great
wrench, throw it to a distance with a vigor of will which would
have carry it to limbo, if it have be in the nature of stick to
travel so far.
but it be worth purchasing, even at the heavy price of the Latin
Grammar, the happiness of see the bright light in the parlor at
home, as the gig pass noiselessly over the snow-cover bridge; the
happiness of pass from the cold air to the warmth and the kiss
and the smile of that familiar hearth, where the pattern of the rug
and the grate and the fire-iron be "first idea" that it be no
more possible to criticise than the solidity and extension of matter.
there be no sense of ease like the ease we feel in those scene where
we be bear, where object become dear to we before we have know the
labor of choice, and where the outer world seem only an extension of
our own personality; we accept and love it as we accept our own
sense of existence and our own limb. very commonplace, even ugly,
that furniture of our early home might look if it be put up to
auction; an improved taste in upholstery scorn it; and be not the
strive after something well and well in our surrounding the
grand characteristic that distinguish man from the brute, or, to
satisfy a scrupulous accuracy of definition, that distinguish the
british man from the foreign brute? but heaven know where that
strive might lead we, if our affection have not a trick of twining
round those old inferior thing; if the love and sanctity of our
life have no deep immovable root in memory. one's delight in an
elderberry bush overhang the confused leafage of a hedgerow bank,
as a more gladden sight than the fine cistus or fuchsia spread
itself on the soft undulating turf, be an entirely unjustifiable
preference to a nursery-gardener, or to any of those regulate mind
who be free from the weakness of any attachment that do not rest on
a demonstrable superiority of quality. and there be no well reason
for prefer this elderberry bush than that it stir an early
memory; that it be no novelty in my life, speak to I merely
through my present sensibility to form and color, but the long
companion of my existence, that weave itself into my joy when joy
be vivid.
Chapter II
the Christmas Holidays
fine old Christmas, with the snowy hair and ruddy face, have do his
duty that year in the noblest fashion, and have set off his rich gift
of warmth and color with all the heighten contrast of frost and
snow.
Snow lie on the croft and river-bank in undulation soft than the
limb of infancy; it lie with the neatli finished border on every
slop roof, make the dark-red gable stand out with a new depth of
color; it weigh heavily on the laurel and fir-tree, till it fall
from they with a shudder sound; it clothe the rough turnip-field
with whiteness, and make the sheep look like dark blotch; the gate
be all block up with the slop drift, and here and there a
disregarded four-footed beast stand as if petrify "in unrecumbent
sadness"; there be no gleam, no shadow, for the heaven, too, be
one still, pale cloud; no sound or motion in anything but the dark
river that flow and moan like an unreste sorrow. but old
Christmas smile as he lay this cruel-seem spell on the outdoor
world, for he mean to light up home with new brightness, to deepen
all the richness of indoor color, and give a keener edge of delight to
the warm fragrance of food; he mean to prepare a sweet imprisonment
that would strengthen the primitive fellowship of kindred, and make
the sunshine of familiar human face as welcome as the hide
day-star. his kindness fall but hardly on the homeless,--fell but
hardly on the home where the hearth be not very warm, and where the
food have little fragrance; where the human face have have no sunshine
in they, but rather the leaden, blank-eyed gaze of unexpectant want.
but the fine old season mean well; and if he have not learn the
secret how to bless man impartially, it be because his father Time,
with ever-unrelenting unrelenting purpose, still hide that secret in
his own mighty, slow-beat heart.
and yet this Christmas day, in spite of Tom's fresh delight in home,
be not, he think, somehow or other, quite so happy as it have always
be before. the red berry be just as abundant on the holly, and
he and Maggie have dress all the window and mantlepiece and
picture-frame on Christmas eve with as much taste as ever, wedding
the thick-set scarlet cluster with branch of the black-berry ivy.
there have be sing under the window after midnight,--supernatural
singing, Maggie always feel, in spite of Tom's contemptuous insistence
that the singer be old Patch, the parish clerk, and the rest of the
church choir; she tremble with awe when their carolling break in upon
her dream, and the image of man in fustian clothe be always thrust
away by the vision of angel rest on the part cloud. the midnight
chant have help as usual to lift the morning above the level of
common day; and then there be the smell of hot toast and ale from
the kitchen, at the breakfast hour; the favorite anthem, the green
bough, and the short sermon give the appropriate festal character to
the church-going; and aunt and uncle Moss, with all their seven
child, be look like so many reflector of the bright
parlor-fire, when the church-goer come back, stamp the snow from
their foot. the plum-pudding be of the same handsome roundness as
ever, and come in with the symbolic blue flame around it, as if it
have be heroically snatch from the nether fire, into which it have
be throw by dyspeptic Puritans; the dessert be as splendid as
ever, with its golden orange, brown nut, and the crystalline light
and dark of apple-jelly and damson cheese; in all these thing
Christmas be as it have always be since Tom could remember; it be
only distinguish, it by anything, by superior sliding and snowball.
Christmas be cheery, but not so Mr. Tulliver. he be irate and
defiant; and Tom, though he espouse his father's quarrel and share
his father's sense of injury, be not without some of the feeling that
oppress Maggie when Mr. Tulliver get loud and more angry in
narration and assertion with the increase leisure of dessert. the
attention that Tom might have concentrate on his nut and wine be
distract by a sense that there be rascally enemy in the world,
and that the business of grow-up life could hardly be conduct
without a good deal of quarrel. now, Tom be not fond of
quarrelling, unless it could soon be put an end to by a fair stand-up
fight with an adversary whom he have every chance of thrashing; and his
father's irritable talk make he uncomfortable, though he never
account to himself for the feeling, or conceive the notion that his
father be faulty in this respect.
the particular embodiment of the evil principle now excite Mr.
Tulliver's determined resistance be Mr. Pivart, who, have land
high up the Ripple, be take measure for their irrigation, which
either be, or would be, or be bind to be (on the principle that
water be water), an infringement on Mr. Tulliver's legitimate share
of water-power. Dix, who have a mill on the stream, be a feeble
auxiliary of Old Harry compare with Pivart. Dix have be bring to
his sens by arbitration, and Wakem's advice have not carry _he_
far. no; Dix, Mr. Tulliver consider, have be as good as nowhere in
point of law; and in the intensity of his indignation against Pivart,
his contempt for a baffled adversary like Dix begin to wear the air of
a friendly attachment. he have no male audience to-day except Mr. Moss,
who know nothing, as he say, of the "natur' o' mill," and could only
assent to Mr. Tulliver's argument on the _a priori_ ground of family
relationship and monetary obligation; but Mr. Tulliver do not talk
with the futile intention of convince his audience, he talk to
relieve himself; while good Mr. Moss make strong effort to keep his
eye wide open, in spite of the sleepiness which an unusually good
dinner produce in his hard-work frame. Mrs. Moss, more alive to the
subject, and interested in everything that affect her brother,
listen and put in a word as often as maternal preoccupation
allow.
"why, Pivart's a new name hereabout, brother, benot it?" she say; "he
donot own the land in father's time, nor yours either, before I be
married."
"new name? yes, I should think it _be_ a new name," say Mr. Tulliver,
with angry emphasis. "Dorlcote Mill's be in our family a hundred
year and well, and nobody ever hear of a Pivart meddling with the
river, till this fellow come and buy Bincome's farm out of hand,
before anybody else could so much as say 'snap.' but Iwill _pivart_
he!" add Mr. Tulliver, lift his glass with a sense that he have
define his resolution in an unmistakable manner.
"you willnot be force to go to law with he, I hope, brother?" say
Mrs. Moss, with some anxiety.
"I donot know what I shall be force to; but I know what I shall force
_he_ to, with his dike and erigation, if therebe any law to be
bring to bear o' the right side. I know well enough whobe at the
bottom of it; hebe get Wakem to back he and egg he on. I know Wakem
tell he the law cannot touch he for it, but therebe folk can handle
the law besides Wakem. it take a big raskil to beat he; but therebe
big to be find, as know more o' th' in and out o' the law, else
how come Wakem to lose Brumley's suit for he?"
Mr. Tulliver be a strictly honest man, and proud of be honest, but
he consider that in law the end of justice could only be achieve
by employ a strong knave to frustrate a weak. Law be a sort of
cock-fight, in which it be the business of injure honesty to get a
game bird with the good pluck and the strong spur.
"Gore's no fool; you neednot tell I that," he observe presently, in
a pugnacious tone, as if poor Gritty have be urge that lawyer's
capability; "but, you see, he benot up to the law as Wakem be. and
water's a very particular thing; you cannot pick it up with a
pitchfork. thatbe why itbe be nuts to Old Harry and the lawyer.
itbe plain enough whatbe the right and the wrong of water, if you
look at it straight-forrard; for a river's a river, and if youhave get
a mill, you must have water to turn it; and itbe no use tell I
Pivart's erigation and nonsense willnot stop my wheel; I know what
belong to water well than that. talk to I o' what th' engineer
say! I say itbe common sense, as Pivart's dike must do I an injury.
but if thatbe their engineering, Iwill put Tom to it by-and-by, and he
shall see if he cannot find a bit more sense in th' engineering
business than what _that_ come to."
Tom, look round with some anxiety at this announcement of his
prospect, unthinkingly withdraw a small rattle he be amusing baby
Moss with, whereupon she, be a baby that know her own mind with
remarkable clearness, instantaneously express her sentiment in a
pierce yell, and be not to be appease even by the restoration of
the rattle, feel apparently that the original wrong of have it
take from she remain in all its force. Mrs. Moss hurry away with
she into another room, and express to Mrs. Tulliver, who accompany
she, the conviction that the dear child have good reason for cry;
imply that if it be suppose to be the rattle that baby clamor
for, she be a misunderstood baby. the thoroughly justifiable yell
be quiet, Mrs. Moss look at her sister-in-law and said,--
"Ibe sorry to see brother so put out about this water work."
"itbe your brother's way, Mrs. Moss; Iwould never anything o' that sort
before I be marry," say Mrs. Tulliver, with a half-imply
reproach. she always speak of her husband as "your brother" to Mrs.
Moss in any case when his line of conduct be not matter of pure
admiration. amiable Mrs. Tulliver, who be never angry in her life,
have yet her mild share of that spirit without which she could hardly
have be at once a Dodson and a woman. be always on the defensive
toward her own sister, it be natural that she should be keenly
conscious of her superiority, even as the weak Dodson, over a
husband's sister, who, besides be poorly off, and incline to "hang
on" her brother, have the good-natured submissiveness of a large,
easy-temper, untidy, prolific woman, with affection enough in she
not only for her own husband and abundant child, but for any number
of collateral relation.
"I hope and pray he willnot go to law," say Mrs. Moss, "for therebe
never any knowing where thatwill end. and the right donot allay win.
this Mr. Pivart's a rich man, by what I can make out, and the rich
mostly get thing their own way."
"as to that," say Mrs. Tulliver, stroke her dress down, "Ihave see
what rich be in my own family; for my sister have get husband as
can afford to do pretty much what they like. but I think sometimes I
shall be drive off my head with the talk about this law and erigation;
and my sister lie all the fault to I, for they donot know what it be
to marry a man like your brother; how should they? Sister Pullet have
her own way from morning till night."
"well," say Mrs. Moss, "I donot think I should like my husband if he
havenot get any wit of his own, and I have to find head-piece for he.
itbe a deal easy to do what please one's husband, than to be
puzzle what else one should do."
"if people come to talk o' do what please their husband," say
Mrs. Tulliver, with a faint imitation of her sister Glegg, "Ibe sure
your brother might have wait a long while before hewould have find a
wife that 'ud have let he have his say in everything, as I do. itbe
nothing but law and erigation now, from when we first get up in the
morning till we go to bed at night; and I never contradict he; I only
say, 'well, Mr. Tulliver, do as you like; but whativer you do, donot
go to law."
Mrs. Tulliver, as we have see, be not without influence over her
husband. no woman be; she can always incline he to do either what she
wish, or the reverse; and on the composite impulse that be
threaten to hurry Mr. Tulliver into "law," Mrs. Tulliver's
monotonous pleading have doubtless its share of force; it might even be
comparable to that proverbial feather which have the credit or
discredit of break the camel's back; though, on a strictly
impartial view, the blame ought rather to lie with the previous weight
of feather which have already place the back in such imminent peril
that an otherwise innocent feather could not settle on it without
mischief. not that Mrs. Tulliver's feeble beseeching could have have
this feather's weight in virtue of her single personality; but
whenever she depart from entire assent to her husband, he see in her
the representative of the Dodson family; and it be a guide
principle with Mr. Tulliver to let the dodson know that they be not
to domineer over _he_, or--more specifically--that a male Tulliver
be far more than equal to four female dodson, even though one of
they be Mrs. Glegg.
but not even a direct argument from that typical Dodson female herself
against his go to law could have heighten his disposition toward
it so much as the mere thought of Wakem, continually freshen by the
sight of the too able attorney on market-day. Wakem, to his certain
knowledge, be (metaphorically speak) at the bottom of Pivart's
irrigation; Wakem have try to make Dix stand out, and go to law about
the dam; it be unquestionably Wakem who have cause Mr. Tulliver to
lose the suit about the right of road and the bridge that make a
thoroughfare of his land for every vagabond who prefer an
opportunity of damage private property to walk like an honest man
along the highroad; all lawyer be more or less rascal, but Wakem's
rascality be of that peculiarly aggravate kind which place itself
in opposition to that form of right embody in Mr. Tulliver's
interest and opinion. and as an extra touch of bitterness, the
injure miller have recently, in borrow the five hundred pound,
be oblige to carry a little business to Wakem's office on his own
account. a hook-nosed glib fellow! as cool as a cucumber,--always
look so sure of his game! and it be vexatious that Lawyer Gore be
not more like he, but be a bald, round-feature man, with bland
manner and fat hand; a game-cock that you would be rash to bet upon
against Wakem. Gore be a sly fellow. his weakness do not lie on the
side of scrupulosity; but the large amount of winking, however
significant, be not equivalent to see through a stone wall; and
confident as Mr. Tulliver be in his principle that water be water,
and in the direct inference that Pivart have not a leg to stand on in
this affair of irrigation, he have an uncomfortable suspicion that
Wakem have more law to show against this (rationally) irrefragable
inference than Gore could show for it. but then, if they go to law,
there be a chance for Mr. Tulliver to employ Counsellor Wylde on his
side, instead of have that admirable bully against he; and the
prospect of see a witness of Wakem's make to perspire and become
confound, as Mr. Tulliver's witness have once be, be alluring to
the love of retributive justice.
much rumination have Mr. Tulliver on these puzzle subject during his
ride on the gray horse; much turning of the head from side to side,
as the scale dip alternately; but the probable result be still
out of sight, only to be reach through much hot argument and
iteration in domestic and social life. that initial stage of the
dispute which consist in the narration of the case and the
enforcement of Mr. Tulliver's view concern it throughout the
entire circle of his connection would necessarily take time; and at
the beginning of February, when Tom be go to school again, there
be scarcely any new item to be detect in his father's statement
of the case against Pivart, or any more specific indication of the
measure he be bent on take against that rash contravener of the
principle that water be water. Iteration, like friction, be likely to
generate heat instead of progress, and Mr. Tulliver's heat be
certainly more and more palpable. if there have be no new evidence on
any other point, there have be new evidence that Pivart be as "thick
as mud" with Wakem.
"Father," say Tom, one evening near the end of the holiday, "uncle
Glegg say Lawyer Wakem _be_ go to send his son to Mr. Stelling. it
benot true, what they say about his go to be send to France. you
willnot like I to go to school with Wakem's son, shall you?"
"itbe no matter for that, my boy," say Mr. Tulliver; "donot you learn
anything bad of he, thatbe all. the lad's a poor deform creatur,
and take after his mother in the face; I think there benot much of
his father in he. itbe a sign Wakem think high o' Mr. Sterling, as
he send his son to he, and Wakem know meal from bran."
Mr. Tulliver in his heart be rather proud of the fact that his son
be to have the same advantage as Wakem's; but Tom be not at all
easy on the point. it would have be much clear if the lawyer's son
have not be deform, for then Tom would have have the prospect of
pitch into he with all that freedom which be derive from a high
moral sanction.
Chapter III
the New Schoolfellow
it be a cold, wet January day on which Tom go back to school; a day
quite in keep with this severe phase of his destiny. if he have not
carry in his pocket a parcel of sugar-candy and a small dutch doll
for little Laura, there would have be no ray of expected pleasure to
enliven the general gloom. but he like to think how Laura would put
out her lip and her tiny hand for the bit of sugarcandy; and to
give the great keenness to these pleasure of imagination, he take
out the parcel, make a small hole in the paper, and bite off a crystal
or two, which have so solace an effect under the confine prospect
and damp odor of the gig-umbrella, that he repeat the process more
than once on his way.
"well, Tulliver, webe glad to see you again," say Mr. Stelling,
heartily. "take off your wrapping and come into the study till
dinner. youwill find a bright fire there, and a new companion."
Tom feel in an uncomfortable flutter as he take off his woollen
comforter and other wrapping. he have see Philip Wakem at St. Ogg's,
but have always turn his eye away from he as quickly as possible.
he would have dislike have a deformed boy for his companion, even
if Philip have not be the son of a bad man. and Tom do not see how a
bad man's son could be very good. his own father be a good man, and
he would readily have fight any one who say the contrary. he be in
a state of mingled embarrassment and defiance as he follow Mr.
Stelling to the study.
"here be a new companion for you to shake hand with, Tulliver," say
that gentleman on enter the study,--"master Philip Wakem. I shall
leave you to make acquaintance by yourself. you already know
something of each other, I imagine; for you be neighbor at home."
Tom look confused and awkward, while Philip rise and glance at he
timidly. Tom do not like to go up and put out his hand, and he be
not prepared to say, "how do you do?" on so short a notice.
Mr. Stelling wisely turn away, and close the door behind he; boy'
shyness only wear off in the absence of their elder.
Philip be at once too proud and too timid to walk toward Tom. he
think, or rather feel, that Tom have an aversion to look at he;
every one, almost, dislike look at he; and his deformity be more
conspicuous when he walk. so they remain without shake hand or
even speak, while Tom go to the fire and warm himself, every
now and then cast furtive glance at Philip, who seem to be
draw absently first one object and then another on a piece of paper
he have before he. he have seat himself again, and as he draw, be
think what he could say to Tom, and try to overcome his own
repugnance to make the first advance.
Tom begin to look oftener and long at Philip's face, for he could
see it without notice the hump, and it be really not a disagreeable
face,--very old-look, Tom think. he wonder how much old
Philip be than himself. an anatomist--even a mere physiognomist--
would have see that the deformity of Philip's spine be not a
congenital hump, but the result of an accident in infancy; but you
do not expect from Tom any acquaintance with such distinction;
to he, Philip be simply a humpback. he have a vague notion
that the deformity of Wakem's son have some relation to the lawyer's
rascality, of which he have so often hear his father talk with hot
emphasis; and he feel, too, a half-admit fear of he as probably
a spiteful fellow, who, not be able to fight you, have cunning
way of do you a mischief by the sly. there be a humpbacked
tailor in the neighborhood of Mr. Jacobs's academy, who be consider
a very unamiable character, and be much hoot after by public-spirit
boy solely on the ground of his unsatisfactory moral quality; so
that Tom be not without a basis of fact to go upon. still, no face
could be more unlike that ugly tailor's than this melancholy boy's
face,--the brown hair round it wave and curl at the end like a
girl's; Tom think that truly pitiable. this Wakem be a pale,
puny fellow, and it be quite clear he would not be able to play at
anything worth speak of; but he handle his pencil in an enviable
manner, and be apparently make one thing after another without
any trouble. what be he draw? Tom be quite warm now, and want
something new to be go forward. it be certainly more agreeable
to have an ill-natured humpback as a companion than to stand look
out of the study window at the rain, and kick his foot against
the washboard in solitude; something would happen every day,--
"a quarrel or something"; and Tom think he should rather like to
show Philip that he have well not try his spiteful trick on _he_.
he suddenly walk across the hearth and look over Philip's paper.
"why, thatbe a donkey with pannier, and a spaniel, and partridge in
the corn!" he exclaim, his tongue be completely loose by
surprise and admiration. "oh my button! I wish I could draw like
that. Ibe to learn draw this half; I wonder if I shall learn to
make dog and donkey!"
"oh, you can do they without learn," say Philip; "I never learn
drawing."
"never learn?" say Tom, in amazement. "why, when I make dog and
horse, and those thing, the head and the leg willnot come right;
though I can see how they ought to be very well. I can make house,
and all sort of chimneys,--chimneys go all down the wall,--and
window in the roof, and all that. but I dare say I could do dog and
horse if I be to try more," he add, reflect that Philip might
falsely suppose that he be go to "knock under," if he be too
frank about the imperfection of his accomplishment.
"oh, yes," say Philip, "itbe very easy. youhave only to look well at
thing, and draw they over and over again. what you do wrong once, you
can alter the next time."
"but havenot you be teach _any_the?" say Tom, begin to have
a puzzled suspicion that Philip's crooked back might be the source of
remarkable faculty. "I think youwould be to school a long while."
"yes," say Philip, smile; "Ihave be teach Latin and greek and
mathematic, and writing and such thing."
"oh, but I say, you donot like Latin, though, do you?" say Tom,
lower his voice confidentially.
"pretty well; I donot care much about it," say Philip.
"ah, but perhaps you havenot get into the _Propria quae maribus_," say
Tom, nod his head sideways, as much as to say, "that be the test;
it be easy talk till you come to _that_."
Philip feel some bitter complacency in the promising stupidity of this
well-make, active-looking boy; but make polite by his own extreme
sensitiveness, as well as by his desire to conciliate, he check his
inclination to laugh, and say quietly,--
"Ihave do with the grammar; I donot learn that any more."
"then you willnot have the same lesson as I shall?" say Tom, with a
sense of disappointment.
"no; but I dare say I can help you. I shall be very glad to help you
if I can."
Tom do not say "thank you," for he be quite absorb in the thought
that Wakem's son do not seem so spiteful a fellow as might have be
expect.
"I say," he say presently, "do you love your father?"
"yes," say Philip, color deeply; "donot you love your?"
"oh yes--I only want to know," say Tom, rather ashamed of himself,
now he see Philip color and look uncomfortable. he find much
difficulty in adjust his attitude of mind toward the son of Lawyer
Wakem, and it have occur to he that if Philip dislike his father,
that fact might go some way toward clear up his perplexity.
"shall you learn draw now?" he say, by way of change the
subject.
"no," say Philip. "my father wish I to give all my time to other
thing now."
"what! latin and Euclid, and those thing?" say Tom.
"yes," say Philip, who have leave off use his pencil, and be rest
his head on one hand, while Tom be learn forward on both elbow,
and look with increase admiration at the dog and the donkey.
"and you donot mind that?" say Tom, with strong curiosity.
"no; I like to know what everybody else know. I can study what I like
by-and-by."
"I cannot think why anybody should learn Latin," say Tom. "itbe no
good."
"itbe part of the education of a gentleman," say Philip. "all
gentleman learn the same thing."
"what! do you think Sir John Crake, the master of the harrier, know
Latin?" say Tom, who have often think he should like to resemble Sir
John Crake.
"he learn it when he be a boy, of course," say Philip. "but I dare
say hebe forget it."
"oh, well, I can do that, then," say Tom, not with any epigrammatic
intention, but with serious satisfaction at the idea that, as far as
Latin be concern, there be no hindrance to his resembling Sir John
Crake. "only yoube oblige to remember it while yoube at school,
else youhave get to learn ever so many line of 'Speaker.' Mr.
Stelling's very particular--do you know? hewill have you up ten time
if you say 'nam' for 'jam,'--he willnot let you go a letter wrong, _i_
can tell you."
"oh, I donot mind," say Philip, unable to choke a laugh; "I can
remember thing easily. and there be some lesson Ibe very fond of.
Ibe very fond of greek history, and everything about the Greeks. I
should like to have be a Greek and fight the Persians, and then
have come home and have write tragedy, or else have be listen
to by everybody for my wisdom, like Socrates, and have die a grand
death." (Philip, you perceive, be not without a wish to impress the
well-make barbarian with a sense of his mental superiority.)
"why, be the Greeks great fighter?" say Tom, who see a vista in
this direction. "be there anything like David and Goliath and Samson
in the greek history? those be the only bit I like in the history of
the Jews."
"oh, there be very fine story of that sort about the greeks,--about
the hero of early time who kill the wild beast, as Samson do.
and in the Odyssey--thatbe a beautiful poem--therebe a more wonderful
giant than Goliath,--Polypheme, who have only one eye in the middle of
his forehead; and Ulysses, a little fellow, but very wise and cunning,
get a red-hot pine-tree and stick it into this one eye, and make he
roar like a thousand bull."
"oh, what fun!" say Tom, jump away from the table, and stamp
first with one leg and then the other. "I say, can you tell I all
about those story? because I sha'n't learn Greek, you know. shall
I?" he add, pause in his stamp with a sudden alarm, lest the
contrary might be possible. "do every gentleman learn Greek? will
Mr. Stelling make I begin with it, do you think?"
"no, I should think not, very likely not," say Philip. "but you may
read those story without know Greek. Ihave get they in English."
"oh, but I donot like read; Iwould soon have you tell they I. but
only the fight one, you know. my sister Maggie be always want
to tell I story, but theybe stupid thing. girl' story always
be. can you tell a good many fighting story?"
"oh yes," say Philip; "lot of they, besides the greek story. I can
tell you about Richard Coeur-de-Lion and Saladin, and about William
Wallace and Robert Bruce and James Douglas,--I know no end."
"yoube old than I be, benot you?" say Tom.
"why, how old be _you?_ Ibe fifteen."
"Ibe only go in fourteen," say Tom. "but I thrash all the
fellow at jacob'--thatbe where I be before I come here. and I beat
them all at bandy and climbing. and I wish Mr. Stelling would let we go
fishing. _I_ could show you how to fish. you _could_ fish, couldnot
you? itbe only stand, and sit still, you know."
Tom, in his turn, wish to make the balance dip in his favor. this
hunchback must not suppose that his acquaintance with fighting story
put he on a par with an actual fighting hero, like Tom Tulliver.
Philip wince under this allusion to his unfitness for active sport,
and he answer almost peevishly,--
"I cannot bear fish. I think people look like fool sit watch
a line hour after hour, or else throw and throwing, and catch
nothing."
"ah, but you wouldnot say they look like fool when they land a
big pike, I can tell you," say Tom, who have never catch anything
that be "big" in his life, but whose imagination be on the stretch
with indignant zeal for the honor of sport. Wakem's son, it be plain,
have his disagreeable point, and must be keep in due check. happily
for the harmony of this first interview, they be now call to
dinner, and Philip be not allow to develop far his unsound
view on the subject of fishing. but Tom say to himself, that be
just what he should have expect from a hunchback.
Chapter IV
"the Young Idea"
the alteration of feeling in that first dialogue between Tom and
Philip continue to make their intercourse even after many week of
schoolboy intimacy. Tom never quite lose the feeling that Philip,
be the son of a "rascal," be his natural enemy; never thoroughly
overcome his repulsion to Philip's deformity. he be a boy who adhere
tenaciously to impression once receive; as with all mind in which
mere perception predominate over thought and emotion, the external
remain to he rigidly what it be in the first instance. but then it
be impossible not to like Philip's company when he be in a good
humor; he could help one so well in one's Latin exercise, which Tom
regard as a kind of puzzle that could only be find out by a lucky
chance; and he could tell such wonderful fighting story about Hal of
the Wynd, for example, and other hero who be especial favorite
with Tom, because they lay about they with heavy stroke. he have
small opinion of Saladin, whose cimeter could cut a cushion in two in
an instant; who want to cut cushion? that be a stupid story, and
he donot care to hear it again. but when Robert Bruce, on the black
pony, rise in his stirrup, and lift his good battle-axe, crack
at once the helmet and the skull of the too hasty knight at
Bannockburn, then Tom feel all the exaltation of sympathy, and if he
have have a cocoanut at hand, he would have crack it at once with the
poker. Philip in his happy mood indulge Tom to the top of his
bent, heighten the crash and bang and fury of every fight with all
the artillery of epithet and simile at his command. but he be not
always in a good humor or happy mood. the slight spurt of peevish
susceptibility which have escape he in their first interview be a
symptom of a perpetually recur mental ailment, half of it nervous
irritability, half of it the heart-bitterness produce by the sense of
his deformity. in these fit of susceptibility every glance seem to
he to be charge either with offensive pity or with ill-repressed
disgust; at the very least it be an indifferent glance, and Philip
feel indifference as a child of the south feel the chill air of a
northern spring. poor Tom's blunder patronage when they be out of
door together would sometimes make he turn upon the well-mean lad
quite savagely; and his eye, usually sad and quiet, would flash with
anything but playful lightning. no wonder Tom retain his suspicion
of the humpback.
but Philip's self-teach skill in drawing be another link between
they; for Tom find, to his disgust, that his new drawing-master give
he no dog and donkey to draw, but brooks and rustic bridge and
ruin, all with a general softness of black-lead surface, indicate
that nature, if anything, be rather satiny; and as Tom's feeling for
the picturesque in landscape be at present quite latent, it be not
surprising that Mr. Goodrich's production seem to he an
uninteresting form of art. Mr. Tulliver, have a vague intention that
Tom should be put to some business which include the drawing out of
plan and map, have complain to Mr. Riley, when he see he at
Mudport, that Tom seem to be learn nothing of that sort;
whereupon that oblige adviser have suggest that Tom should have
drawing-lesson. Mr. Tulliver must not mind pay extra for drawing;
let Tom be make a good draughtsman, and he would be able to turn his
pencil to any purpose. so it be order that Tom should have
drawing-lesson; and whom should Mr. Stelling have select as a
master if not Mr. Goodrich, who be consider quite at the head of
his profession within a circuit of twelve mile round King's Lorton?
by which mean Tom learn to make an extremely fine point to his
pencil, and to represent landscape with a "broad generality," which,
doubtless from a narrow tendency in his mind to detail, he think
extremely dull.
all this, you remember, happen in those dark age when there be no
school of design; before schoolmaster be invariably man of
scrupulous integrity, and before the clergy be all man of enlarged
mind and varied culture. in those less favored day, it be no fable
that there be other clergyman besides Mr. Stelling who have narrow
intellect and large want, and whose income, by a logical confusion
to which Fortune, be a female as well as blindfold, be peculiarly
liable, be proportion not to their want but to their intellect,
with which income have clearly no inherent relation. the problem these
gentleman have to solve be to readjust the proportion between their
want and their income; and since want be not easily starve to
death, the simple method appear to be to raise their income. there
be but one way of do this; any of those low calling in which man
be oblige to do good work at a low price be forbid to
clergyman; be it their fault if their only resource be to turn out
very poor work at a high price? besides, how should Mr. Stelling be
expect to know that education be a delicate and difficult business,
any more than an animal endow with a power of bore a hole through
a rock should be expect to have wide view of excavation? Mr.
Stelling's faculty have be early train to bore in a straight
line, and he have no faculty to spare. but among Tom's contemporary,
whose father cast their son on clerical instruction to find they
ignorant after many day, there be many far less lucky than Tom
Tulliver. education be almost entirely a matter of luck--usually of
ill-luck--in those distant day. the state of mind in which you take a
billiard-cue or a dice-box in your hand be one of sober certainty
compare with that of old-fashioned father, like Mr. Tulliver, when
they select a school or a tutor for their son. excellent man, who
have be force all their life to spell on an impromptu-phonetic
system, and have carry on a successful business in spite of this
disadvantage, have acquire money enough to give their son a well
start in life than they have have themselves, must necessarily take
their chance as to the conscience and the competence of the
schoolmaster whose circular fall in their way, and appear to promise
so much more than they would ever have think of ask for,
include the return of linen, fork, and spoon. it be happy for they
if some ambitious draper of their acquaintance have not bring up his
son to the Church, and if that young gentleman, at the age of
four-and-twenty, have not close his college dissipation by an
imprudent marriage; otherwise, these innocent father, desirous of
do the good for their offspring, could only escape the draper's son
by happen to be on the foundation of a grammar-school as yet
unvisite by commissioner, where two or three boy could have, all to
themselves, the advantage of a large and lofty building, together
with a head-master, toothless, dim-eyed and deaf, whose erudite
indistinctness and inattention be engross by they at the rate of
three hundred pound a-head,--a ripe scholar, doubtless, when first
appoint; but all ripeness beneath the sun have a further stage less
esteem in the market.
Tom Tulliver, then, compare with many other british youth of his
time who have since have to scramble through life with some fragment
of more or less relevant knowledge, and a great deal of strictly
relevant ignorance, be not so very unlucky. Mr. Stelling be a
broad-cheste, healthy man, with the bearing of a gentleman, a
conviction that a grow boy require a sufficiency of beef, and a
certain hearty kindness in he that make he like to see Tom look
well and enjoy his dinner; not a man of refined conscience, or with
any deep sense of the infinite issue belong to every-day duty,
not quite competent to his high office; but incompetent gentleman
must live, and without private fortune it be difficult to see how they
could all live genteelly if they have nothing to do with education or
government. besides, it be the fault of Tom's mental constitution
that his faculty could not be nourish on the sort of knowledge Mr.
Stelling have to communicate. a boy bear with a deficient power of
apprehend sign and abstraction must suffer the penalty of his
congenital deficiency, just as if he have be bear with one leg
shorter than the other. a method of education sanction by the long
practice of our venerable ancestor be not to give way before the
exceptional dulness of a boy who be merely live at the time then
present. and Mr. Stelling be convince that a boy so stupid at sign
and abstraction must be stupid at everything else, even if that
reverend gentleman could have teach he everything else. it be the
practice of our venerable ancestor to apply that ingenious instrument
the thumb-screw, and to tighten and tighten it in order to elicit
non-existent fact; they have a fix opinion to begin with, that the
fact be existent, and what have they to do but to tighten the
thumb-screw? in like manner, Mr. Stelling have a fix opinion that all
boy with any capacity could learn what it be the only regular thing
to teach; if they be slow, the thumb-screw must be tightened,--the
exercise must be insist on with increase severity, and a page of
Virgil be award as a penalty, to encourage and stimulate a too
languid inclination to latin verse.
the thumb-screw be a little relaxed, however, during this second
half-year. Philip be so advanced in his study, and so apt, that Mr.
Stelling could obtain credit by his facility, which require little
help, much more easily than by the troublesome process of overcome
Tom's dulness. gentleman with broad chest and ambitious intention do
sometimes disappoint their friend by fail to carry the world
before they. perhaps it be that high achievement demand some other
unusual qualification besides an unusual desire for high prize;
perhaps it be that these stalwart gentleman be rather indolent, their
_divinae particulum aurae_ be obstruct from soar by a too hearty
appetite. some reason or other there be why Mr. Stelling defer the
execution of many spirited projects,--why he do not begin the editing
of his greek play, or any other work of scholarship, in his leisure
hour, but, after turn the key of his private study with much
resolution, sit down to one of Theodore Hook's novel. Tom be
gradually allow to shuffle through his lesson with less rigor, and
have Philip to help he, he be able to make some show of have
apply his mind in a confused and blundering way, without be
cross-examine into a betrayal that his mind have be entirely neutral
in the matter. he think school much more bearable under this
modification of circumstance; and he go on contentedly enough,
pick up a promiscuous education chiefly from thing that be not
intend as education at all. what be understand to be his education
be simply the practice of reading, writing, and spelling, carry on
by an elaborate appliance of unintelligible idea, and by much failure
in the effort to learn by rote.
nevertheless, there be a visible improvement in Tom under this
training; perhaps because he be not a boy in the abstract, exist
solely to illustrate the evil of a mistaken education, but a boy make
of flesh and blood, with disposition not entirely at the mercy of
circumstance.
there be a great improvement in his bearing, for example; and some
credit on this score be due to Mr. Poulter, the village schoolmaster,
who, be an old Peninsular soldier, be employ to drill tom,--a
source of high mutual pleasure. Mr. Poulter, who be understand by the
company at the Black Swan to have once strike terror into the heart
of the French, be no long personally formidable. he have rather a
shrink appearance, and be tremulous in the morning, not from age,
but from the extreme perversity of the King's Lorton boy, which
nothing but gin could enable he to sustain with any firmness. still,
he carry himself with martial erectness, have his clothe
scrupulously brush, and his trouser tightly strap; and on the
Wednesday and Saturday afternoon, when he come to Tom, he be always
inspire with gin and old memory, which give he an exceptionally
spirited air, as of a superannuated charger who hear the drum. the
drilling-lesson be always protract by episode of warlike
narrative, much more interesting to Tom than Philip's story out of
the Iliad; for there be no cannon in the Iliad, and besides, Tom have
feel some disgust on learn that Hector and Achilles might possibly
never have exist. but the Duke of Wellington be really alive, and
Bony have not be long dead; therefore Mr. Poulter's reminiscence of
the Peninsular War be remove from all suspicion of be mythical.
Mr. Poulter, it appear, have be a conspicuous figure at Talavera,
and have contribute not a little to the peculiar terror with which his
regiment of infantry be regard by the enemy. on afternoon when his
memory be more stimulated than usual, he remember that the Duke of
Wellington have (in strict privacy, lest jealousy should be awaken)
express his esteem for that fine fellow poulter. the very surgeon
who attend he in the hospital after he have receive his
gunshot-wound have be profoundly impressed with the superiority of
Mr. Poulter's flesh,--no other flesh would have heal in anything
like the same time. on less personal matter connect with the
important warfare in which he have be engage, Mr. Poulter be more
reticent, only take care not to give the weight of his authority to
any loose notion concern military history. any one who pretend
to a knowledge of what occur at the siege of Badajos be especially
an object of silent pity to Mr. Poulter; he wish that prate person
have be run down, and have the breath trample out of he at the first
go-off, as he himself had,--he might talk about the siege of Badajos
then! Tom do not escape irritate his drilling-master occasionally,
by his curiosity concern other military matter than Mr. Poulter's
personal experience.
"and General Wolfe, Mr. Poulter,--wasn't he a wonderful fighter?" say
Tom, who hold the notion that all the martial hero commemorate on
the public-house sign be engage in the war with Bony.
"not at all!" say Mr. Poulter, contemptuously. "nothing o' the sort!
head up!" he add, in a tone of stern command, which delight Tom,
and make he feel as if he be a regiment in his own person.
"no, no!" Mr. Poulter would continue, on come to a pause in his
discipline; "theywould well not talk to I about General Wolfe. he do
nothing but die of his wound; thatbe a poor haction, I consider. any
other man 'ud have die o' the wound Ihave have. one of my sword-cut
'ud ha' kill a fellow like General Wolfe."
"Mr. Poulter," Tom would say, at any allusion to the sword, "I wish
youwould bring your sword and do the sword-exercise!"
for a long while Mr. Poulter only shake his head in a significant
manner at this request, and smile patronizingly, as Jupiter may have
do when Semele urge she too ambitious request. but one afternoon,
when a sudden shower of heavy rain have detain Mr. Poulter twenty
minute long than usual at the Black Swan, the sword be
brought,--just for Tom to look at.
"and this be the real sword you fight with in all the battle, Mr.
Poulter?" say Tom, handle the hilt. "have it ever cut a Frenchman's
head off?"
"head off? ah! and would, if hehave have three head."
"but you have a gun and bayonet besides?" say Tom. "_i_ should like
the gun and bayonet well, because you could shoot them first and spear
them after. Bang! Ps-s-s-s!" Tom give the requisite pantomime to
indicate the double enjoyment of pull the trigger and thrust the
spear.
"ah, but the sword's the thing when you come to close fighting," say
Mr. Poulter, involuntarily fall in with Tom's enthusiasm, and
draw the sword so suddenly that Tom leap back with much agility.
"oh, but, Mr. Poulter, if yoube go to do the exercise," say Tom,
a little conscious that he have not stand his ground as become an
Englishman, "let I go and call Philip. hewill like to see you, you
know."
"what! the humpbacked lad?" say Mr. Poulter, contemptuously; "whatbe
the use of _his_ look on?"
"oh, but he know a great deal about fighting," say Tom, "and how
they use to fight with bow and arrow, and battle-axis."
"let he come, then. Iwill show he something different from his bow
and arrow," say Mr. Poulter, cough and draw himself up, while
he give a little preliminary play to his wrist.
Tom run in to Philip, who be enjoy his afternoon's holiday at the
piano, in the drawing-room, pick out tune for himself and sing
they. he be supremely happy, perch like an amorphous bundle on the
high stool, with his head throw back, his eye fix on the opposite
cornice, and his lip wide open, send forth, with all his might,
impromptu syllable to a tune of Arne's which have hit his fancy.
"Come, Philip," say Tom, burst in; "donot stay roar 'la la'
there; come and see old poulter do his sword-exercise in the
carriage-house!"
the jar of this interruption, the discord of Tom's tone come across
the note to which Philip be vibrate in soul and body, would have
be enough to unhinge his temper, even if there have be no question
of poulter the drilling-master; and Tom, in the hurry of seize
something to say to prevent Mr. Poulter from think he be afraid of
the sword when he spring away from it, have alight on this
proposition to fetch Philip, though he know well enough that Philip
hat to hear he mention his drilling-lesson. Tom would never have
do so inconsiderate a thing except under the severe stress of his
personal pride.
Philip shudder visibly as he pause from his music. then turn
red, he say, with violent passion,--
"get away, you lumber idiot! donot come bellow at I; yoube not
fit to speak to anything but a cart-horse!"
it be not the first time Philip have be make angry by he, but Tom
have never before be assail with verbal missile that he understand
so well.
"Ibe fit to speak to something well than you, you poor-spirit
imp!" say Tom, light up immediately at Philip's fire. "you know I
willnot hit you, because yoube no well than a girl. but Ibe an honest
man's son, and _your_ father's a rogue; everybody say so!"
Tom fling out of the room, and slam the door after he, make
strangely heedless by his anger; for to slam door within the hearing
of Mrs. Stelling, who be probably not far off, be an offence only to
be wipe out by twenty line of Virgil. in fact, that lady do
presently descend from her room, in double wonder at the noise and the
subsequent cessation of Philip's music. she find he sit in a
heap on the hassock, and cry bitterly.
"whatbe the matter, Wakem? what be that noise about? who slam the
door?"
Philip look up, and hastily dry his eye. "it be Tulliver who
come in--to ask I to go out with he."
"and what be you in trouble about?" say Mrs. Stelling.
Philip be not her favorite of the two pupil; he be less obliging
than Tom, who be make useful in many way. still, his father pay
more than Mr. Tulliver do, and she mean he to feel that she behave
exceedingly well to he. Philip, however, meet her advance toward a
good understanding very much as a caress mollusk meet an invitation
to show himself out of his shell. Mrs. Stelling be not a love,
tender-hearted woman; she be a woman whose skirt sit well, who
adjust her waist and pat her curl with a preoccupied air when
she inquire after your welfare. these thing, doubtless, represent a
great social power, but it be not the power of love; and no other
power could win Philip from his personal reserve.
he say, in answer to her question, "my toothache come on, and make I
hysterical again."
this have be the fact once, and Philip be glad of the recollection;
it be like an inspiration to enable he to excuse his crying. he have
to accept eau-de-cologne and to refuse creosote in consequence; but
that be easy.
meanwhile Tom, who have for the first time send a poison arrow into
Philip's heart, have return to the carriage-house, where he find Mr.
Poulter, with a fixed and earnest eye, waste the perfection of his
sword-exercise on probably observant but inappreciative rat. but Mr.
Poulter be a host in himself; that be to say, he admire himself more
than a whole army of spectator could have admire he. he take no
notice of Tom's return, be too entirely absorb in the cut and
thrust,--the solemn one, two, three, four; and Tom, not without a
slight feeling of alarm at Mr. Poulter's fix eye and hungry-look
sword, which seem impatient for something else to cut besides the
air, admire the performance from as great a distance as possible. it
be not until Mr. Poulter pause and wipe the perspiration from his
forehead, that Tom feel the full charm of the sword-exercise, and
wish it to be repeat.
"Mr. Poulter," say Tom, when the sword be be finally sheathe, "I
wish youwould lend I your sword a little while to keep."
"no no, young gentleman," say Mr. Poulter, shake his head
decidedly; "you might do yourself some mischief with it."
"no, Ibe sure I wouldnot; Ibe sure Iwould take care and not hurt myself.
I shouldnot take it out of the sheath much, but I could ground arm
with it, and all that."
"no, no, it willnot do, I tell you; it willnot do," say Mr. Poulter,
prepare to depart. "what 'ud Mr. Stelling say to I?"
"oh, I say, do, Mr. Poulter! Iwould give you my five-shilling piece if
youwould let I keep the sword a week. look here!" say Tom, reach out
the attractively large round of silver. the young dog calculate the
effect as well as if he have be a philosopher.
"well," say Mr. Poulter, with still deep gravity, "you must keep it
out of sight, you know."
"oh yes, Iwill keep it under the bed," say Tom, eagerly, "or else at
the bottom of my large box."
"and let I see, now, whether you can draw it out of the sheath
without hurt yourself." that process have be go through more
than once, Mr. Poulter feel that he have act with scrupulous
conscientiousness, and say, "well, now, Master Tulliver, if I take
the crown-piece, it be to make sure as youwill do no mischief with the
sword."
"oh no, indeed, Mr. Poulter," say Tom, delightedly hand he the
crown-piece, and grasp the sword, which, he think, might have
be light with advantage.
"but if Mr. Stelling catch you carry it in?" say Mr. Poulter,
pocket the crown-piece provisionally while he raise this new
doubt.
"oh, he always keep in his upstairs study on Saturday afternoon,"
say Tom, who dislike anything sneaking, but be not disinclined to a
little stratagem in a worthy cause. so he carry off the sword in
triumph mix with dread--dread that he might encounter Mr. or Mrs.
Stelling--to his bedroom, where, after some consideration, he hide it
in the closet behind some hang clothe. that night he fall asleep
in the thought that he would astonish Maggie with it when she
came,--tie it round his waist with his red comforter, and make she
believe that the sword be his own, and that he be go to be a
soldier. there be nobody but Maggie who would be silly enough to
believe he, or whom he dare allow to know he have a sword; and Maggie
be really come next week to see Tom, before she go to a
boarding-school with Lucy.
if you think a lad of thirteen would have be so childish, you must
be an exceptionally wise man, who, although you be devoted to a civil
calling, require you to look bland rather than formidable, yet
never, since you have a beard, throw yourself into a martial attitude,
and frown before the look-glass. it be doubtful whether our
soldier would be maintain if there be not pacific people at home
who like to fancy themselves soldier. War, like other dramatic
spectacle, might possibly cease for want of a "public."
Chapter V
Maggie's Second Visit
this last breach between the two lad be not readily mend, and for
some time they speak to each other no more than be necessary. their
natural antipathy of temperament make resentment an easy passage to
hatred, and in Philip the transition seem to have begin; there be
no malignity in his disposition, but there be a susceptibility that
make he peculiarly liable to a strong sense of repulsion. the ox--we
may venture to assert it on the authority of a great classic--be not
give to use his tooth as an instrument of attack, and Tom be an
excellent bovine lad, who run at questionable object in a truly
ingenious bovine manner; but he have blunder on Philip's tender
point, and have cause he as much acute pain as if he have study the
mean with the nice precision and the most envenomed spite. Tom see
no reason why they should not make up this quarrel as they have do
many other, by behave as if nothing have happen; for though he have
never before say to Philip that his father be a rogue, this idea have
so habitually make part of his feeling as to the relation between
himself and his dubious schoolfellow, who he could neither like nor
dislike, that the mere utterance do not make such an epoch to he as
it do to Philip. and he have a right to say so when Philip hector
over _him_, and call he name. but perceive that his first
advance toward amity be not meet, he relapse into his least
favorable disposition toward Philip, and resolve never to appeal to
he either about draw or exercise again. they be only so far
civil to each other as be necessary to prevent their state of feud
from be observe by Mr. Stelling, who would have "put down" such
nonsense with great vigor.
when Maggie come, however, she could not help look with grow
interest at the new schoolfellow, although he be the son of that
wicked Lawyer Wakem, who make her father so angry. she have arrive in
the middle of school-hour, and have sit by while Philip go through
his lesson with Mr. Stelling. Tom, some week ago, have send her word
that Philip know no end of stories,--not stupid story like her; and
she be convince now from her own observation that he must be very
clever; she hop he would think _she_ rather clever too, when she
come to talk to he. Maggie, moreover, have rather a tenderness for
deform thing; she prefer the wry-neck lamb, because it seem
to she that the lamb which be quite strong and well make wouldnot
mind so much about be pet; and she be especially fond of
petting object that would think it very delightful to be pet by
she. she love Tom very dearly, but she often wish that he _care_
more about her love he.
"I think Philip Wakem seem a nice boy, Tom," she say, when they go
out of the study together into the garden, to pass the interval before
dinner. "he couldnot choose his father, you know; and Ihave read of
very bad man who have good son, as well as good parent who have bad
child. and if Philip be good, I think we ought to be the more sorry
for he because his father be not a good man. _you_ like he, donot
you?"
"oh, hebe a queer fellow," say Tom, curtly, "and hebe as sulky as can
be with I, because I tell he his father be a rogue. and Ihave a right
to tell he so, for it be true; and _he_ begin it, with call I
name. but you stop here by yourself a bit, Maggie, will you? Ihave get
something I want to do upstairs."
"cannot I go too?" say Maggie, who in this first day of meeting again
love Tom's shadow.
"no, itbe something Iwill tell you about by-and-by, not yet," say Tom,
skip away.
in the afternoon the boy be at their book in the study, prepare
the morrow's lesson's that they might have a holiday in the evening in
honor of Maggie's arrival. Tom be hang over his latin grammar,
move his lip inaudibly like a strict but impatient Catholic
repeat his tale of paternoster; and Philip, at the other end of
the room, be busy with two volume, with a look of content
diligence that excite Maggie's curiosity; he do not look at all as
if he be learn a lesson. she sit on a low stool at nearly a right
angle with the two boy, watch first one and then the other; and
Philip, look off his book once toward the fire-place, catch the
pair of question dark eye fix upon he. he think this sister
of Tulliver's seem a nice little thing, quite unlike her brother; he
wish _he_ have a little sister. what be it, he wonder, that make
Maggie's dark eye remind he of the story about princess be
turn into animal? I think it be that her eye be full of
unsatisfie intelligence, and unsatisfie beseech affection.
"I say, Magsie," say Tom at last, shut his book and put they
away with the energy and decision of a perfect master in the art of
leave off, "Ihave do my lesson now. come upstairs with I."
"what be it?" say Maggie, when they be outside the door, a slight
suspicion cross her mind as she remember Tom's preliminary visit
upstairs. "it benot a trick yoube go to play I, now?"
"no, no, Maggie," say Tom, in his most coaxing tone; "itbe something
youwill like _ever so_."
he put his arm round her neck, and she put hers round his waist, and
twin together in this way, they go upstairs.
"I say, Magsie, you must not tell anybody, you know," say Tom, "else
I shall get fifty line."
"be it alive?" say Maggie, whose imagination have settle for the
moment on the idea that Tom keep a ferret clandestinely.
"oh, I sha'n't tell you," say he. "now you go into that corner and
hide your face, while I reach it out," he add, as he lock the
bedroom door behind they. Iwill tell you when to turn round. you
mustnot squeal out, you know."
"oh, but if you frighten I, I shall," say Maggie, begin to look
rather serious.
"you willnot be frightened, you silly thing," say Tom. "go and hide
your face, and mind you donot peep."
"of course I sha'n't peep," say Maggie, disdainfully; and she bury
her face in the pillow like a person of strict honor.
but Tom look round warily as he walk to the closet; then he
step into the narrow space, and almost close the door. Maggie keep
her face bury without the aid of principle, for in that
dream-suggestive attitude she have soon forget where she be, and
her thought be busy with the poor deform boy, who be so clever,
when Tom call out, "now then, Magsie!"
nothing but long meditation and preconcerted arrangement of effect
would have enable Tom to present so strike a figure as he do to
Maggie when she look up. dissatisfied with the pacific aspect of a
face which have no more than the faint hint of flaxen eyebrow,
together with a pair of amiable blue-gray eye and round pink cheek
that refuse to look formidable, let he frown as he would before the
look-glass (Philip have once tell he of a man who have a horseshoe
frown, and Tom have try with all his frowning might to make a
horseshoe on his forehead), he have have recourse to that unfailing
source of the terrible, burn cork, and have make himself a pair of
black eyebrow that meet in a satisfactory manner over his nose, and
be match by a less carefully adjust blackness about the chin. he
have wind a red handkerchief round his cloth cap to give it the air of
a turban, and his red comforter across his breast as a scarf,--an
amount of red which, with the tremendous frown on his brow, and the
decision with which he grasp the sword, as he hold it with its point
rest on the ground, would suffice to convey an approximate idea of
his fierce and bloodthirsty disposition.
Maggie look bewildered for a moment, and Tom enjoy that moment
keenly; but in the next she laugh, clap her hand together, and
say, "oh, Tom, youhave make yourself like Bluebeard at the show."
it be clear she have not be strike with the presence of the
sword,--it be not unsheathed. her frivolous mind require a more
direct appeal to its sense of the terrible, and Tom prepare for his
master-stroke. frown with a double amount of intention, if not of
corrugation, he (carefully) draw the sword from its sheath, and
point it at Maggie.
"oh, Tom, please donot!" exclaim Maggie, in a tone of suppress
dread, shrink away from he into the opposite corner. "I _shall_
scream--i'm sure I shall! oh, donot I wish Iwould never come upstairs!"
the corner of Tom's mouth show an inclination to a smile of
complacency that be immediately check as inconsistent with the
severity of a great warrior. slowly he let down the scabbard on the
floor, lest it should make too much noise, and then say sternly,--
"Ibe the Duke of Wellington! March!" stamp forward with the right
leg a little bent, and the sword still point toward Maggie, who,
trembling, and with tear-fill eye, get upon the bed, as the only
mean of widen the space between they.
Tom, happy in this spectator of his military performance, even though
the spectator be only Maggie, proceed, with the utmost exertion of
his force, to such an exhibition of the cut and thrust as would
necessarily be expect of the Duke of Wellington.
"Tom, I _will not_ bear it, I _will_ scream," say Maggie, at the
first movement of the sword. "youwill hurt yourself; youwill cut your
head off!"
"one--two," say Tom, resolutely, though at "two" his wrist tremble a
little. "Three" come more slowly, and with it the sword swung
downward, and Maggie give a loud shriek. the sword have fall, with
its edge on Tom's foot, and in a moment after he have fall too.
Maggie leap from the bed, still shriek, and immediately there be
a rush of footstep toward the room. Mr. Stelling, from his upstairs
study, be the first to enter. he find both the child on the
floor. Tom have faint, and Maggie be shake he by the collar of
his jacket, scream, with wild eye. she think he be dead, poor
child! and yet she shake he, as if that would bring he back to life.
in another minute she be sob with joy because Tom open his
eye. she couldnot sorrow yet that he have hurt his foot; it seem as
if all happiness lie in his be alive.
Chapter VI
A Love-Scene
Poor Tom bear his severe pain heroically, and be resolute in not
"tell" of Mr. Poulter more than be unavoidable; the five-shilling
piece remain a secret even to Maggie. but there be a terrible dread
weigh on his mind, so terrible that he dare not even ask the
question which might bring the fatal "yes"; he dare not ask the
surgeon or Mr. Stelling, "shall I be lame, Sir?" he master himself
so as not to cry out at the pain; but when his foot have be dress,
and he be leave alone with Maggie seat by his bedside, the child
sob together, with their head lay on the same pillow. Tom be
think of himself walk about on crutch, like the wheelwright's
son; and Maggie, who do not guess what be in his mind, sob for
company. it have not occur to the surgeon or to Mr. Stelling to
anticipate this dread in Tom's mind, and to reassure he by hopeful
word. but Philip watch the surgeon out of the house, and waylay
Mr. Stelling to ask the very question that Tom have not dare to ask
for himself.
"I beg your pardon, sir,--but do Mr. Askern say Tulliver will be
lame?"
"oh, no; oh, no," say Mr. Stelling, "not permanently; only for a
little while."
"do he tell Tulliver so, sir, do you think?"
"no; nothing be say to he on the subject."
"then may I go and tell he, sir?"
"yes, to be sure; now you mention it, I dare say he may be troubling
about that. go to his bedroom, but be very quiet at present."
it have be Philip's first thought when he hear of the
accident,--"will Tulliver be lame? it will be very hard for he if he
be"; and Tom's hitherto unforgiven offence be wash out by that
pity. Philip feel that they be no long in a state of repulsion,
but be be draw into a common current of suffering and sad
privation. his imagination do not dwell on the outward calamity and
its future effect on Tom's life, but it make vividly present to he
the probable state of Tom's feeling. Philip have only live fourteen
year, but those year have, most of they, be steep in the sense of
a lot irremediably hard.
"Mr. Askern say youwill soon be all right again, Tulliver, do you
know?" he say rather timidly, as he step gently up to Tom's bed.
"Ihave just be to ask Mr. Stelling, and he say youwill walk as well
as ever again by-and-day."
Tom look up with that momentary stopping of the breath which come
with a sudden joy; then he give a long sigh, and turn his blue-gray
eye straight on Philip's face, as he have not do for a fortnight or
more. as for Maggie, this intimation of a possibility she have not
think of before affect she as a new trouble; the bare idea of
Tom's be always lame overpower the assurance that such a
misfortune be not likely to befall he, and she cling to he and
cry afresh.
"donot be a little silly, Magsie," say Tom, tenderly, feel very
brave now. "I shall soon get well."
"good-by, Tulliver," say Philip, put out his small, delicate
hand, which Tom clasp immediately with his more substantial finger.
"I say," say Tom, "ask Mr. Stelling to let you come and sit with I
sometimes, till I get up again, Wakem; and tell I about Robert Bruce,
you know."
after that, Philip spend all his time out of school-hour with Tom and
Maggie. Tom like to hear fight story as much as ever, but he
insist strongly on the fact that those great fighter who do so
many wonderful thing and come off unhurt, wear excellent armor from
head to foot, which make fight easy work, he consider. he should
not have hurt his foot if he have have an iron shoe on. he listen with
great interest to a new story of Philip's about a man who have a very
bad wound in his foot, and cry out so dreadfully with the pain that
his friend could bear with he no long, but put he ashore on a
desert island, with nothing but some wonderful poison arrow to kill
animal with for food.
"I donot roar out a bit, you know," Tom say, "and I dare say my foot
be as bad as his. itbe cowardly to roar."
but Maggie would have it that when anything hurt you very much, it be
quite permissible to cry out, and it be cruel of people not to bear
it. she want to know if Philoctetes have a sister, and why _she_
donot go with he on the desert island and take care of he.
one day, soon after Philip have tell this story, he and Maggie be in
the study alone together while Tom's foot be be dress. Philip
be at his book, and Maggie, after saunter idly round the room,
not care to do anything in particular, because she would soon go to
Tom again, go and lean on the table near Philip to see what he be
do, for they be quite old friend now, and perfectly at home with
each other.
"what be you read about in Greek?" she say. "itbe poetry, I can
see that, because the line be so short."
"itbe about Philoctetes, the lame man I be tell you of yesterday,"
he answer, rest his head on his hand, and look at she as if he
be not at all sorry to be interrupt. Maggie, in her absent way,
continue to lean forward, rest on her arm and move her foot
about, while her dark eye get more and more fixed and vacant, as if
she have quite forget Philip and his book.
"Maggie," say Philip, after a minute or two, still lean on his
elbow and look at she, "if you have have a brother like I, do you
think you should have love he as well as Tom?"
Maggie start a little on be rouse from her reverie, and say,
"what?" Philip repeat his question.
"oh, yes, well," she answer immediately. "no, not well; because
I donot think I _could_ love you well than Tom. but I should be so
sorry,--_so sorry_ for you."
Philip color; he have mean to imply, would she love he as well in
spite of his deformity, and yet when she allude to it so plainly, he
wince under her pity. Maggie, young as she be, feel her mistake.
Hitherto she have instinctively behave as if she be quite
unconscious of Philip's deformity; her own keen sensitiveness and
experience under family criticism suffice to teach she this as well
as if she have be direct by the most finished breeding.
"but you be so very clever, Philip, and you can play and sing," she
add quickly. "I wish you _be_ my brother. Ibe very fond of you.
and you would stay at home with I when Tom go out, and you would
teach I everything; wouldnot you,--greek and everything?"
"but youwill go away soon, and go to school, Maggie," say Philip, "and
then youwill forget all about I, and not care for I any more. and
then I shall see you when yoube grow up, and youwill hardly take any
notice of I."
"oh, no, I sha'n't forget you, Ibe sure," say Maggie, shake she
head very seriously. "I never forget anything, and I think about
everybody when Ibe away from they. I think about poor Yap; hebe get a
lump in his throat, and Luke say hewill die. only donot you tell Tom.
because it will vex he so. you never see Yap; hebe a queer little
dog,--nobody care about he but Tom and I."
"do you care as much about I as you do about Yap, Maggie?" say
Philip, smile rather sadly.
"oh, yes, I should think so," say Maggie, laugh.
"Ibe very fond of _you_, Maggie; I shall never forget _you_," say
Philip, "and when Ibe very unhappy, I shall always think of you, and
wish I have a sister with dark eye, just like your."
"why do you like my eye?" say Maggie, well please. she have never
hear any one but her father speak of her eye as if they have merit.
"I donot know," say Philip. "theybe not like any other eye. they
seem try to speak,--trye to speak kindly. I donot like other
people to look at I much, but I like you to look at I, Maggie."
"why, I think yoube fonder of I than Tom be," say Maggie, rather
sorrowfully. then, wonder how she could convince Philip that she
could like he just as well, although he be crook, she say:
"should you like I to kiss you, as I do Tom? I will, if you like."
"yes, very much; nobody kiss I."
Maggie put her arm round his neck and kiss he quite earnestly.
"there now," she say, "I shall always remember you, and kiss you when
I see you again, if itbe ever so long. but Iwill go now, because I
think Mr. Askern's do with Tom's foot."
when their father come the second time, Maggie say to he, "oh,
father, Philip Wakem be so very good to Tom; he be such a clever boy,
and I _do_ love he. and you love he too, Tom, donot you? _say_ you
love he," she add entreatingly.
Tom color a little as he look at his father, and say: "I sha'n't
be friend with he when I leave school, father; but wehave make it up
now, since my foot have be bad, and hebe teach I to play at
draught, and I can beat he."
"well, well," say Mr. Tulliver, "if hebe good to you, try and make
he amend, and be good to _he_. hebe a poor crooked creature, and
take after his dead mother. but donot you be get too thick with
he; hebe get his father's blood in he too. ay, ay, the gray colt may
chance to kick like his black sire."
the jarring nature of the two boy effect what Mr. Tulliver's
admonition alone might have fail to effect; in spite of Philip's new
kindness, and Tom's answer regard in this time of his trouble, they
never become close friend. when Maggie be go, and when Tom
by-and-by begin to walk about as usual, the friendly warmth that have
be kindle by pity and gratitude die out by degree, and leave they
in their old relation to each other. Philip be often peevish and
contemptuous; and Tom's more specific and kindly impression gradually
melt into the old background of suspicion and dislike toward he as
a queer fellow, a humpback, and the son of a rogue. if boy and man
be to be weld together in the glow of transient feeling, they must
be make of metal that will mix, else they inevitably fall asunder when
the heat die out.
Chapter VII
the Golden Gates be pass
so Tom go on even to the fifth half-year--till he be turn
sixteen--at King's Lorton, while Maggie be grow with a rapidity
which her aunt consider highly reprehensible, at Miss Firniss's
boarding-school in the ancient town of Laceham on the Floss, with
cousin Lucy for her companion. in her early letter to Tom she have
always send her love to Philip, and ask many question about he,
which be answer by brief sentence about Tom's toothache, and a
turf-house which he be help to build in the garden, with other
item of that kind. she be pain to hear Tom say in the holiday
that Philip be as queer as ever again, and often cross. they be no
long very good friend, she perceive; and when she remind Tom
that he ought always to love Philip for be so good to he when his
foot be bad, he answer: "well, it benot my fault; _i_ donot do
anything to he." she hardly ever see Philip during the remainder of
their school-life; in the Midsummer holiday he be always away at the
seaside, and at Christmas she could only meet he at long interval in
the street of St. Ogg's. when they do meet, she remember she
promise to kiss he, but, as a young lady who have be at a
boarding-school, she know now that such a greeting be out of the
question, and Philip would not expect it. the promise be void, like
so many other sweet, illusory promise of our childhood; void as
promise make in Eden before the season be divide, and when the
starry blossom grow side by side with the ripen peach,--impossible
to be fulfil when the golden gate have be pass.
but when their father be actually engage in the long-threaten
lawsuit, and Wakem, as the agent at once of Pivart and Old Harry, be
act against he, even Maggie feel, with some sadness, that they
be not likely ever to have any intimacy with Philip again; the very
name of Wakem make her father angry, and she have once hear he say
that if that crook-back son live to inherit his father's ill-get
gain, there would be a curse upon he. "have as little to do with he
at school as you can, my lad," he say to Tom; and the command be
obey the more easily because Mr. Sterling by this time have two
additional pupil; for though this gentleman's rise in the world be
not of that meteor-like rapidity which the admirer of his
extemporaneous eloquence have expect for a preacher whose voice
demand so wide a sphere, he have yet enough of grow prosperity to
enable he to increase his expenditure in continued disproportion to
his income.
as for Tom's school course, it go on with mill-like monotony, his
mind continue to move with a slow, half-stifle pulse in a medium
uninteresting or unintelligible idea. but each vacation he bring
home large and large drawing with the satiny rendering of
landscape, and water-color in vivid green, together with manuscript
book full of exercise and problem, in which the handwriting be all
the fine because he give his whole mind to it. each vacation he
bring home a new book or two, indicate his progress through
different stage of history, christian doctrine, and latin literature;
and that passage be not entirely without result, besides the
possession of the book. Tom's ear and tongue have become accustomed to
a great many word and phrase which be understand to be sign of an
educate condition; and though he have never really apply his mind to
any one of his lesson, the lesson have leave a deposit of vague,
fragmentary, ineffectual notion. Mr. Tulliver, see sign of
acquirement beyond the reach of his own criticism, think it be
probably all right with Tom's education; he observe, indeed, that
there be no map, and not enough "sum"; but he make no formal
complaint to Mr. Stelling. it be a puzzling business, this schooling;
and if he take Tom away, where could he send he with well effect?
by the time Tom have reach his last quarter at King's Lorton, the
year have make striking change in he since the day we see he
return from Mr. Jacobs's academy. he be a tall youth now, carry
himself without the least awkwardness, and speak without more
shyness than be a become symptom of blended diffidence and pride;
he wear his tail-coat and his stand-up collar, and watch the down
on his lip with eager impatience, look every day at his virgin
razor, with which he have provide himself in the last holiday. Philip
have already left,--at the autumn quarter,--that he might go to the
south for the winter, for the sake of his health; and this change
help to give Tom the unsettled, exultant feeling that usually
belong to the last month before leave school. this quarter, too,
there be some hope of his father's lawsuit be decide; _that_ make
the prospect of home more entirely pleasurable. for Tom, who have
gather his view of the case from his father's conversation, have no
doubt that Pivart would be beat.
Tom have not hear anything from home for some weeks,--a fact which do
not surprise he, for his father and mother be not apt to manifest
their affection in unnecessary letters,--when, to his great surprise,
on the morning of a dark, cold day near the end of November, he be
tell, soon after enter the study at nine o'clock, that his sister
be in the drawing-room. it be Mrs. Stelling who have come into the
study to tell he, and she leave he to enter the drawing-room alone.
Maggie, too, be tall now, with braid and coil hair; she be
almost as tall as Tom, though she be only thirteen; and she really
look old than he do at that moment. she have throw off her
bonnet, her heavy braid be push back from her forehead, as if it
would not bear that extra load, and her young face have a strangely
worn look, as her eye turn anxiously toward the door. when Tom
enter she do not speak, but only go up to he, put her arm round
his neck, and kiss he earnestly. he be use to various mood of
her, and feel no alarm at the unusual seriousness of her greeting.
"why, how be it yoube come so early this cold morning, Maggie? do
you come in the gig?" say Tom, as she back toward the sofa, and
draw he to her side.
"no, I come by the coach. Ihave walk from the turnpike."
"but how be it yoube not at school? the holiday have not begin yet?"
"Father want I at home," say Maggie, with a slight trembling of
the lip. "I come home three or four day ago."
"benot my father well?" say Tom, rather anxiously.
"not quite," say Maggie. "hebe very unhappy, Tom. the lawsuit be
end, and I come to tell you because I think it would be well for
you to know it before you come home, and I donot like only to send
you a letter."
"my father havenot lose?" say Tom, hastily, spring from the sofa,
and stand before Maggie with his hand suddenly thrust into his
pocket.
"yes, dear Tom," say Maggie, look up at he with trembling.
Tom be silent a minute or two, with his eye fix on the floor. then
he say:
"my father will have to pay a good deal of money, then?"
"yes," say Maggie, rather faintly.
"well, it cannot be help," say Tom, bravely, not translate the
loss of a large sum of money into any tangible result. "but my
father's very much vex, I dare say?" he add, look at Maggie,
and think that her agitated face be only part of her girlish way
of take thing.
"yes," say Maggie, again faintly. then, urge to full speech by
Tom's freedom from apprehension, she say loudly and rapidly, as if
the word _would_ burst from she: "oh, Tom, he will lose the mill and
the land and everything; he will have nothing leave."
Tom's eye flash out one look of surprise at she, before he turn
pale, and tremble visibly. he say nothing, but sit down on the sofa
again, look vaguely out of the opposite window.
anxiety about the future have never enter Tom's mind. his father have
always ride a good horse, keep a good house, and have the cheerful,
confident air of a man who have plenty of property to fall back upon.
Tom have never dream that his father would "fail"; _that_ be a form
of misfortune which he have always hear speak of as a deep disgrace,
and disgrace be an idea that he could not associate with any of his
relation, least of all with his father. a proud sense of family
respectability be part of the very air Tom have be bear and bring
up in. he know there be people in St. Ogg's who make a show without
money to support it, and he have always hear such people speak of by
his own friend with contempt and reprobation. he have a strong belief,
which be a lifelong habit, and require no definite evidence to rest
on, that his father could spend a great deal of money if he choose; and
since his education at Mr. Stelling's have give he a more expensive
view of life, he have often think that when he get old he would
make a figure in the world, with his horse and dog and saddle, and
other accoutrement of a fine young man, and show himself equal to any
of his contemporary at St. Ogg's, who might consider themselves a
grade above he in society because their father be professional
man, or have large oil-mill. as to the prognostic and headshaking of
his aunt and uncle, they have never produce the least effect on he,
except to make he think that aunt and uncle be disagreeable
society; he have hear they find fault in much the same way as long as
he could remember. his father know well than they do.
the down have come on Tom's lip, yet his thought and expectation have
be hitherto only the reproduction, in change form, of the boyish
dream in which he have live three year ago. he be awaken now with
a violent shock.
Maggie be frighten at Tom's pale, tremble silence. there be
something else to tell him,--somethe bad. she throw her arm round
he at last, and say, with a half sob:
"oh, Tom--dear, dear Tom, donot fret too much; try and bear it well."
Tom turn his cheek passively to meet her entreating kiss, and
there gather a moisture in his eye, which he just rub away with
his hand. the action seem to rouse he, for he shake himself and
say: "I shall go home, with you, Maggie. donot my father say I be
to go?"
"no, Tom, father donot wish it," say Maggie, her anxiety about _his_
feel help she to master her agitation. what _would_ he do when
she tell he all? "but mother want you to come,--poor mother!--she
cry so. oh, Tom, itbe very dreadful at home."
Maggie's lip grow whiter, and she begin to tremble almost as Tom have
do. the two poor thing clung close to each other, both
trembling,--the one at an unshapen fear, the other at the image of a
terrible certainty. when Maggie speak, it be hardly above a whisper.
"and--and--poor father----"
Maggie could not utter it. but the suspense be intolerable to Tom. a
vague idea of go to prison, as a consequence of debt, be the shape
his fear have begin to take.
"wherebe my father?" he say impatiently. "_tell_ I, Maggie."
"hebe at home," say Maggie, find it easy to reply to that
question. "but," she add, after a pause, "not himself--he fall off
his horse. he have know nobody but I ever since--he seem to have
lose his sens. o father, father----"
with these last word, Maggie's sob burst forth with the more
violence for the previous struggle against they. Tom feel that
pressure of the heart which forbid tear; he have no distinct vision
of their trouble as Maggie have, who have be at home; he only feel
the crush weight of what seem unmitigated misfortune. he
tighten his arm almost convulsively round Maggie as she sob, but
his face look rigid and tearless, his eye blank,--as if a black
curtain of cloud have suddenly fall on his path.
but Maggie soon check herself abruptly; a single thought have act
on she like a startling sound.
"we must set out, Tom, we must not stay. Father will miss I; we must
be at the turnpike at ten to meet the coach." she say this with hasty
decision, rub her eye, and rise to seize her bonnet.
Tom at once feel the same impulse, and rise too. "wait a minute,
Maggie," he say. "I must speak to Mr. Stelling, and then wewill go."
he think he must go to the study where the pupil be; but on his
way he meet Mr. Stelling, who have hear from his wife that Maggie
appear to be in trouble when she ask for her brother, and now that
he think the brother and sister have be alone long enough, be
come to inquire and offer his sympathy.
"please, sir, I must go home," Tom say abruptly, as he meet Mr.
Stelling in the passage. "I must go back with my sister directly. my
father's lose his lawsuit--hebe lose all his property--and hebe very
ill."
Mr. Stelling feel like a kind-hearted man; he foresee a probable money
loss for himself, but this have no appreciable share in his feeling,
while he look with grave pity at the brother and sister for whom
youth and sorrow have begin together. when he know how Maggie have come,
and how eager she be to get home again, he hurry their departure,
only whisper something to Mrs. Stelling, who have follow he, and
who immediately leave the room.
Tom and Maggie be stand on the door-step, ready to set out, when
Mrs. Stelling come with a little basket, which she hang on Maggie's
arm, say: "do remember to eat something on the way, dear." Maggie's
heart go out toward this woman whom she have never like, and she
kiss she silently. it be the first sign within the poor child of
that new sense which be the gift of sorrow,--that susceptibility to
the bare office of humanity which raise they into a bond of love
fellowship, as to haggard man among the ice-berg the mere presence of
an ordinary comrade stir the deep fountain of affection.
Mr. Stelling put his hand on Tom's shoulder and say: "God bless you,
my boy; let I know how you get on." then he press Maggie's hand;
but there be no audible good-bye. Tom have so often think how
joyful he should be the day he leave school "for good"! and now his
school year seem like a holiday that have come to an end.
the two slight youthful figure soon grow indistinct on the distant
road,--were soon lose behind the project hedgerow.
they have go forth together into their life of sorrow, and they would
never more see the sunshine undimmed by remember care. they have
enter the thorny wilderness, and the golden gate of their childhood
have forever close behind they.
Book III
_the Downfall_
chapter I
what have happen at home
when Mr. Tulliver first know the fact that the law-suit be decide
against he, and that Pivart and Wakem be triumphant, every one who
happen to observe he at the time think that, for so confident and
hot-temper a man, he bear the blow remarkably well. he think so
himself; he think he be go to show that if Wakem or anybody else
consider he crush, they would find themselves mistaken. he could
not refuse to see that the cost of this protract suit would take
more than he possess to pay they; but he appear to himself to be
full of expedient by which he could ward off any result but such as
be tolerable, and could avoid the appearance of break down in the
world. all the obstinacy and defiance of his nature, drive out of
their old channel, find a vent for themselves in the immediate
formation of plan by which he would meet his difficulty, and remain
Mr. Tulliver of Dorlcote Mill in spite of they. there be such a rush
of project in his brain, that it be no wonder his face be flush
when he come away from his talk with his attorney, Mr. Gore, and
mount his horse to ride home from Lindum. there be Furley, who hold
the mortgage on the land,--a reasonable fellow, who would see his own
interest, Mr. Tulliver be convince, and who would be glad not only
to purchase the whole estate, include the mill and homestead, but
would accept Mr. Tulliver as tenant, and be willing to advance money
to be repay with high interest out of the profit of the business,
which would be make over to he, Mr. Tulliver only take enough
barely to maintain himself and his family. who would neglect such a
profitable investment? certainly not Furley, for Mr. Tulliver have
determine that Furley should meet his plan with the utmost alacrity;
and there be man whose brain have not yet be dangerously heat
by the loss of a lawsuit, who be apt to see in their own interest or
desire a motive for other man's action. there be no doubt (in the
miller's mind) that Furley would do just what be desirable; and if he
do--why, thing would not be so very much bad. Mr. Tulliver and his
family must live more meagrely and humbly, but it would only be till
the profit of the business have pay off Furley's advance, and that
might be while Mr. Tulliver have still a good many year of life before
he. it be clear that the cost of the suit could be pay without his
be oblige to turn out of his old place, and look like a ruin
man. it be certainly an awkward moment in his affair. there be that
suretyship for poor Riley, who have die suddenly last April, and leave
his friend saddle with a debt of two hundred and fifty pounds,--a
fact which have help to make Mr. Tulliver's banking book less
pleasant reading than a man might desire toward Christmas. well! he
have never be one of those poor-spirited sneak who would refuse to
give a help hand to a fellow-traveller in this puzzle world. the
really vexatious business be the fact that some month ago the
creditor who have lend he the five hundred pound to repay Mrs. Glegg
have become uneasy about his money (set on by Wakem, of course), and
Mr. Tulliver, still confident that he should gain his suit, and
find it eminently inconvenient to raise the say sum until that
desirable issue have take place, have rashly accede to the demand that
he should give a bill of sale on his household furniture and some
other effect, as security in lieu of the bond. it be all one, he have
say to himself; he should soon pay off the money, and there be no
harm in give that security any more than another. but now the
consequence of this bill of sale occur to he in a new light, and
he remember that the time be close at hand when it would be
enforce unless the money be repay. two month ago he would have
declare stoutly that he would never be beholden to his wife's
friend; but now he tell himself as stoutly that it be nothing but
right and natural that Bessy should go to the Pullets and explain the
thing to they; they would hardly let Bessy's furniture be sell, and it
might be security to Pullet if he advance the money,--there would,
after all, be no gift or favor in the matter. Mr. Tulliver would never
have ask for anything from so poor-spirited a fellow for himself,
but Bessy might do so if she like.
it be precisely the proud and most obstinate man who be the most
liable to shift their position and contradict themselves in this
sudden manner; everything be easy to they than to face the simple
fact that they have be thoroughly defeat, and must begin life
anew. and Mr. Tulliver, you perceive, though nothing more than a
superior miller and maltster, be as proud and obstinate as if he have
be a very lofty personage, in whom such disposition might be a
source of that conspicuous, far-echo tragedy, which sweep the
stage in regal robe, and make the dull chronicl sublime. the
pride and obstinacy of miller and other insignificant people, whom
you pass unnoticingly on the road every day, have their tragedy too;
but it be of that unwept, hidden sort that go on from generation to
generation, and leave no record,--such tragedy, perhaps, as lie in
the conflict of young soul, hungry for joy, under a lot make
suddenly hard to they, under the dreariness of a home where the
morning bring no promise with it, and where the unexpectant
discontent of worn and disappointed parent weigh on the child
like a damp, thick air, in which all the function of life be
depressed; or such tragedy as lie in the slow or sudden death that
follow on a bruise passion, though it may be a death that find only
a parish funeral. there be certain animal to which tenacity of
position be a law of life,--they can never flourish again, after a
single wrench: and there be certain human being to whom predominance
be a law of life,--they can only sustain humiliation so long as they
can refuse to believe in it, and, in their own conception, predominate
still.
Mr. Tulliver be still predominate, in his own imagination, as he
approach St. Ogg's, through which he have to pass on his way
homeward. but what be it that suggest to he, as he see the Laceham
coach enter the town, to follow it to the coach-office, and get the
clerk there to write a letter, require Maggie to come home the very
next day? Mr. Tulliver's own hand shake too much under his excitement
for he to write himself, and he want the letter to be give to the
coachman to deliver at Miss Firniss's school in the morning. there be
a craving which he would not account for to himself, to have Maggie
near he, without delay,--she must come back by the coach to-morrow.
to Mrs. Tulliver, when he get home, he would admit no difficulty,
and scold down her burst of grief on hear that the lawsuit be
lose, by angry assertion that there be nothing to grieve about. he
say nothing to she that night about the bill of sale and the
application to Mrs. Pullet, for he have keep she in ignorance of the
nature of that transaction, and have explain the necessity for take
an inventory of the good as a matter connect with his will. the
possession of a wife conspicuously one's inferior in intellect be,
like other high privilege, attend with a few inconvenience, and,
among the rest, with the occasional necessity for use a little
deception.
the next day Mr. Tulliver be again on horseback in the afternoon, on
his way to Mr. Gore's office at St. Ogg's. Gore be to have see
Furley in the morning, and to have sound he in relation to Mr.
Tulliver's affair. but he have not go half-way when he meet a clerk
from Mr. Gore's office, who be bring a letter to Mr. Tulliver. Mr.
Gore have be prevent by a sudden call of business from wait at
his office to see Mr. Tulliver, accord to appointment, but would be
at his office at eleven to-morrow morning, and meanwhile have send some
important information by letter.
"oh!" say Mr. Tulliver, take the letter, but not open it. "then
tell Gore Iwill see he to-morrow at eleven"; and he turn his horse.
the clerk, strike with Mr. Tulliver's glistening, excited glance,
look after he for a few moment, and then ride away. the reading of
a letter be not the affair of an instant to Mr. Tulliver; he take in
the sense of a statement very slowly through the medium of write or
even print character; so he have put the letter in his pocket,
think he would open it in his armchair at home. but by-and-by it
occur to he that there might be something in the letter Mrs.
Tulliver must not know about, and if so, it would be well to keep it
out of her sight altogether. he stop his horse, take out the
letter, and read it. it be only a short letter; the substance be,
that Mr. Gore have ascertain, on secret, but sure authority, that
Furley have be lately much straiten for money, and have part with
his securities,--among the rest, the mortgage on Mr. Tulliver's
property, which he have transfer to----Wakem.
in half an hour after this Mr. Tulliver's own wagoner find he lie
by the roadside insensible, with an open letter near he, and his gray
horse snuff uneasily about he.
when Maggie reach home that evening, in obedience to her father's
call, he be no long insensible. about an hour before he have become
conscious, and after vague, vacant look around he, have mutter
something about "a letter," which he presently repeat impatiently.
at the instance of Mr. Turnbull, the medical man, Gore's letter be
bring and lay on the bed, and the previous impatience seem to be
allay. the stricken man lie for some time with his eye fix on the
letter, as if he be try to knit up his thought by its help. but
presently a new wave of memory seem to have come and sweep the other
away; he turn his eye from the letter to the door, and after
look uneasily, as if strive to see something his eye be too
dim for, he say, "the little wench."
he repeat the word impatiently from time to time, appear
entirely unconscious of everything except this one importunate want,
and give no sign of know his wife or any one else; and poor Mrs.
Tulliver, her feeble faculty almost paralyze by this sudden
accumulation of trouble, go backward and forward to the gate to see
if the Laceham coach be come, though it be not yet time.
but it come at last, and set down the poor anxious girl, no long the
"little wench," except to her father's fond memory.
"oh, mother, what be the matter?" Maggie say, with pale lip, as she
mother come toward her crying. she donot think her father be ill,
because the letter have come at his dictation from the office at St.
Ogg's.
but Mr. Turnbull come now to meet she; a medical man be the good angel
of the troubled house, and Maggie run toward the kind old friend, whom
she remember as long as she could remember anything, with a
trembling, question look.
"donot alarm yourself too much, my dear," he say, take her hand.
"your father have have a sudden attack, and have not quite recover his
memory. but he have be ask for you, and it will do he good to see
you. keep as quiet as you can; take off your thing, and come upstairs
with I."
Maggie obey, with that terrible beating of the heart which make
existence seem simply a painful pulsation. the very quietness with
which Mr. Turnbull speak have frighten her susceptible imagination.
her father's eye be still turn uneasily toward the door when she
enter and meet the strange, yearning, helpless look that have be
seek she in vain. with a sudden flash and movement, he raise
himself in the bed; she rush toward he, and clasp he with
agonize kiss.
poor child! it be very early for she to know one of those supreme
moment in life when all we have hop or delight in, all we can
dread or endure, fall away from our regard as insignificant; be lose,
like a trivial memory, in that simple, primitive love which knit we
to the being who have be near to we, in their time of
helplessness or of anguish.
but that flash of recognition have be too great a strain on the
father's bruised, enfeeble power. he sink back again in renew
insensibility and rigidity, which last for many hour, and be only
break by a flickering return of consciousness, in which he take
passively everything that be give to he, and seem to have a sort
of infantine satisfaction in Maggie's near presence,--such
satisfaction as a baby have when it be return to the nurse's lap.
Mrs. Tulliver send for her sister, and there be much wail and
lifting up of hand below stair. both uncle and aunt see that the
ruin of Bessy and her family be as complete as they have ever
forebode it, and there be a general family sense that a judgment have
fall on Mr. Tulliver, which it would be an impiety to counteract by
too much kindness. but Maggie hear little of this, scarcely ever
leave her father's bedside, where she sit opposite he with her hand
on his. Mrs. Tulliver want to have Tom fetch home, and seem to
be think more of her boy even than of her husband; but the aunt
and uncle oppose this. Tom be well at school, since Mr. Turnbull
say there be no immediate danger, he believe. but at the end of the
second day, when Maggie have become more accustomed to her father's
fit of insensibility, and to the expectation that he would revive
from they, the thought of Tom have become urgent with _she_ too; and
when her mother sate cry at night and say, "my poor lad--itbe
nothing but right he should come home," Maggie say, "let I go for
he, and tell he, mother; Iwill go to-morrow morning if father donot
know I and want I. it would be so hard for Tom to come home and not
know anything about it beforehand."
and the next morning Maggie go, as we have see. sit on the
coach on their way home, the brother and sister talk to each other
in sad, interrupt whisper.
"they say Mr. Wakem have get a mortgage or something on the land, Tom,"
say Maggie. "it be the letter with that news in it that make father
ill, they think."
"I believe that scoundrel's be plan all along to ruin my
father," say Tom, leap from the vague impression to a definite
conclusion. "Iwill make he feel for it when Ibe a man. mind you never
speak to Philip again."
"oh, Tom!" say Maggie, in a tone of sad remonstrance; but she have no
spirit to dispute anything then, still less to vex Tom by oppose
he.
Chapter II
Mrs. Tulliver's Teraphim, or Household Gods
when the coach set down Tom and Maggie, it be five hour since she
have start from home, and she be think with some trembling that
her father have perhaps miss she, and ask for "the little wench" in
vain. she think of no other change that might have happen.
she hurry along the gravel-walk and enter the house before Tom;
but in the entrance she be startle by a strong smell of tobacco. the
parlor door be ajar; that be where the smell come from. it be very
strange; could any visitor be smoke at a time like this? be her
mother there? if so, she must be tell that Tom be come. Maggie, after
this pause of surprise, be only in the act of open the door when
Tom come up, and they both look into the parlor together.
there be a coarse, dingy man, of whose face Tom have some vague
recollection, sit in his father's chair, smoking, with a jug and
glass beside he.
the truth flash on Tom's mind in an instant. to "have the bailiff in
the house," and "to be sell up," be phrase which he have be use
to, even as a little boy; they be part of the disgrace and misery of
"fail," of lose all one's money, and be ruined,--sinke into
the condition of poor work people. it seem only natural this
should happen, since his father have lose all his property, and he
think of no more special cause for this particular form of
misfortune than the loss of the lawsuit. but the immediate presence of
this disgrace be so much keener an experience to Tom than the bad
form of apprehension, that he feel at this moment as if his real
trouble have only just begin; it be a touch on the irritated nerve
compare with its spontaneous dull aching.
"how do you do, sir?" say the man, take the pipe out of his mouth,
with rough, embarrassed civility. the two young startled face make
he a little uncomfortable.
but Tom turn away hastily without speak; the sight be too
hateful. Maggie have not understand the appearance of this stranger, as
Tom have. she follow he, whispering: "who can it be, Tom? what be
the matter?" then, with a sudden undefined dread lest this stranger
might have something to do with a change in her father, she rush
upstairs, check herself at the bedroom door to throw off her
bonnet, and enter on tiptoe. all be silent there; her father be
lie, heedless of everything around he, with his eye close as when
she have leave he. a servant be there, but not her mother.
"wherebe my mother?" she whisper. the servant do not know.
Maggie hasten out, and say to Tom; "Father be lie quiet; let we
go and look for my mother. I wonder where she be."
Mrs. Tulliver be not downstairs, not in any of the bedroom. there
be but one room below the attic which Maggie have leave unsearched; it
be the storeroom, where her mother keep all her linen and all the
precious "good thing" that be only unwrapped and bring out on
special occasion.
Tom, precede Maggie, as they return along the passage, open the
door of this room, and immediately say, "Mother!"
Mrs. Tulliver be seat there with all her lay-up treasure. one of
the linen chest be open; the silver teapot be unwrapped from its
many fold of paper, and the good china be lay out on the top of the
close linen-chest; spoon and skewer and ladle be spread in row
on the shelf; and the poor woman be shake her head and weeping,
with a bitter tension of the mouth, over the mark, "Elizabeth Dodson,"
on the corner of some tablecloth she hold in her lap.
she drop they, and start up as Tom speak.
"oh, my boy, my boy!" she say, clasp he round the neck. "to think
as I should live to see this day! webe ruin--everythingbe go to
be sell up--to think as your father should ha' marry I to bring I
to this! wehave get nothing--we shall be beggar--we must go to the
workhouse----"
she kiss he, then seat herself again, and take another tablecloth
on her lap, unfold it a little way to look at the pattern, while
the child stand by in mute wretchedness, their mind quite fill
for the moment with the word "beggar" and "workhouse."
"to think o' these cloth as I spin myself," she go on, lift
thing out and turn they over with an excitement all the more
strange and piteous because the stout blond woman be usually so
passive,--if she have be ruffle before, it be at the surface
merely,--"and Job Haxey weave them, and bring the piece home on his
back, as I remember stand at the door and see he come, before I
ever think o' marry your father! and the pattern as I choose
myself, and bleach so beautiful, and I mark them so as nobody ever
see such marking,--they must cut the cloth to get it out, for itbe a
particular stitch. and theybe all to be sell, and go into strange
people's house, and perhaps be cut with the knife, and wear out
before Ibe dead. youwill never have one of them, my boy," she say,
look up at Tom with her eye full of tear, "and I mean them for
you. I want you to have all o' this pattern. Maggie could have have
the large check--it never show so well when the dish be on it."
Tom be touch to the quick, but there be an angry reaction
immediately. his face flush as he say:
"but will my aunt let they be sell, mother? do they know about it?
theywill never let your linen go, will they? havenot you send to they?"
"yes, I send Luke directly theywould put the bailie in, and your aunt
Pullet's be--and, oh dear, oh dear, she cry so and say your
father's disgrace my family and make it the talk o' the country; and
shewill buy the spot cloth for herself, because shebe never have so
many as she want o' that pattern, and they sha'n't go to stranger,
but shebe get more check a'ready nor she can do with." (here Mrs.
Tulliver begin to lay back the tablecloth in the chest, fold and
stroke they automatically.) "and your uncle Gleggbe be too, and he
say thing must be buy in for we to lie down on, but he must talk
to your aunt; and theybe all come to consult. but I know theywill
none of them take my chany," she add, turn toward the cup and
saucer, "for they all find fault with them when I buy them, 'cause
o' the small gold sprig all over them, between the flower. but therebe
none of them get well chany, not even your aunt pullet herself; and I
buy it wi' my own money as Ihave save ever since I be turn
fifteen; and the silver teapot, too,--your father never pay for them.
and to think as he should ha' marry I, and bring I to this."
Mrs. Tulliver burst out cry afresh, and she sob with her
handkerchief at her eye a few moment, but then remove it, she say
in a deprecating way, still half sob, as if she be call upon
to speak before she could command her voice,--
"and I _do_ say to he time and time, 'Whativer you do, donot go to
law,' and what more could I do? Ihave have to sit by while my own
fortin's be spend, and what should ha' be my child's, too.
youwill have niver a penny, my boy--but it benot your poor mother's
fault."
she put out one arm toward Tom, look up at he piteously with she
helpless, childish blue eye. the poor lad go to she and kiss she,
and she cling to he. for the first time Tom think of his father
with some reproach. his natural inclination to blame, hitherto keep
entirely in abeyance toward his father by the predisposition to think
he always right, simply on the ground that he be Tom Tulliver's
father, be turn into this new channel by his mother's plaint; and
with his indignation against Wakem there begin to mingle some
indignation of another sort. perhaps his father might have help
bring they all down in the world, and make people talk of they
with contempt, but no one should talk long of Tom Tulliver with
contempt.
the natural strength and firmness of his nature be begin to
assert itself, urge by the double stimulus of resentment against his
aunt, and the sense that he must behave like a man and take care of
his mother.
"donot fret, mother," he say tenderly. "I shall soon be able to get
money; Iwill get a situation of some sort."
"bless you, my boy!" say Mrs. Tulliver, a little soothed. then,
look round sadly, "but I shouldnot ha' minded so much if we could
ha' keep the thing wi' my name on them."
Maggie have witness this scene with gather anger. the imply
reproach against her father--her father, who be lie there in a
sort of live death--neutralize all her pity for grief about
tablecloth and china; and her anger on her father's account be
heighten by some egoistic resentment at Tom's silent concurrence
with her mother in shut she out from the common calamity. she have
become almost indifferent to her mother's habitual depreciation of
she, but she be keenly alive to any sanction of it, however passive,
that she might suspect in Tom. Poor Maggie be by no mean make up of
unalloye devotedness, but put forth large claim for herself where
she love strongly. she burst out at last in an agitated, almost
violent tone: "Mother, how can you talk so; as if you care only for
thing with _your_ name on, and not for what have my father's name too;
and to care about anything but dear father himself!--when hebe lie
there, and may never speak to we again. Tom, you ought to say so too;
you ought not to let any one find fault with my father."
Maggie, almost choke with mingled grief and anger, leave the room, and
take her old place on her father's bed. her heart go out to he with
a strong movement than ever, at the thought that people would blame
he. Maggie hat blame; she have be blame all her life, and nothing
have come of it but evil temper.
her father have always defend and excuse she, and her love
remembrance of his tenderness be a force within she that would enable
she to do or bear anything for his sake.
Tom be a little shocked at Maggie's outburst,--telle _he_ as well
as his mother what it be right to do! she ought to have learn
well than have those hectoring, assume manner, by this time. but
he presently go into his father's room, and the sight there touch
he in a way that efface the slighter impression of the previous
hour. when Maggie see how he be move, she go to he and put she
arm round his neck as he sit by the bed, and the two child forget
everything else in the sense that they have one father and one sorrow.
Chapter III
the Family Council
it be at eleven o'clock the next morning that the aunt and uncle
come to hold their consultation. the fire be light in the large
parlor, and poor Mrs. Tulliver, with a confused impression that it be
a great occasion, like a funeral, unbagge the bell-rope tassel, and
unpin the curtain, adjust they in proper fold, look round
and shake her head sadly at the polished top and leg of the
table, which sister Pullet herself could not accuse of insufficient
brightness.
Mr. Deane be not come, he be away on business; but Mrs. Deane
appear punctually in that handsome new gig with the head to it, and
the livery-servant drive it, which have throw so clear a light on
several trait in her character to some of her female friend in St.
Ogg's. Mr. Deane have be advance in the world as rapidly as Mr.
Tulliver have be go down in it; and in Mrs. Deane's house the
Dodson linen and plate be begin to hold quite a subordinate
position, as a mere supplement to the handsomer article of the same
kind, purchase in recent years,--a change which have cause an
occasional coolness in the sisterly intercourse between her and Mrs.
Glegg, who feel that Susan be get "like the rest," and there
would soon be little of the true Dodson spirit survive except in
herself, and, it might be hop, in those nephew who support the
Dodson name on the family land, far away in the Wolds.
People who live at a distance be naturally less faulty than those
immediately under our own eye; and it seem superfluous, when we
consider the remote geographical position of the Ethiopians, and how
very little the Greeks have to do with they, to inquire far why
Homer call they "blameless."
Mrs. Deane be the first to arrive; and when she have take her seat in
the large parlor, Mrs. Tulliver come down to she with she comely face
a little distorted, nearly as it would have be if she have be
cry. she be not a woman who could shed abundant tear, except in
moment when the prospect of lose her furniture become unusually
vivid, but she feel how unfit it be to be quite calm under
present circumstance.
"oh, sister, what a world this be!" she exclaim as she enter;
"what trouble, oh dear!"
Mrs. Deane be a thin-lipped woman, who make small well-consider
speech on peculiar occasion, repeat they afterward to her
husband, and ask he if she have not speak very properly.
"yes, sister," she say deliberately, "this be a change world, and
we donot know to-day what may happen tomorrow. but itbe right to be
prepare for all thing, and if trouble's send, to remember as it
benot send without a cause. Ibe very sorry for you as a sister, and if
the doctor order jelly for Mr. Tulliver, I hope youwill let I know.
Iwill send it willingly; for it be but right he should have proper
attendance while hebe ill."
"thank you, Susan," say Mrs. Tulliver, rather faintly, withdraw
her fat hand from her sister's thin one. "but therebe be no talk o'
jelly yet." then after a moment's pause she add, "therebe a dozen o'
cut jelly-glass upstairs--I shall never put jelly into them no more."
her voice be rather agitated as she utter the last word, but the
sound of wheel divert her thought. Mr. and Mrs. Glegg be come,
and be almost immediately follow by Mr. and Mrs. Pullet.
Mrs. Pullet enter crying, as a compendious mode, at all time, of
express what be her view of life in general, and what, in brief,
be the opinion she hold concern the particular case before she.
Mrs. Glegg have on her fuzziest front, and garment which appear to
have have a recent resurrection from rather a creasy form of burial; a
costume select with the high moral purpose of instill perfect
humility into Bessy and her child.
"Mrs. G., willnot you come near the fire?" say her husband, unwilling
to take the more comfortable seat without offer it to she.
"you see Ihave seat myself here, Mr. Glegg," return this superior
woman; "_you_ can roast yourself, if you like."
"well," say Mr. Glegg, seat himself good-humoredly, "and howbe the
poor man upstairs?"
"Dr. Turnbull think he a deal well this morning," say Mrs.
Tulliver; "he take more notice, and speak to I; but hebe never know
Tom yet,--looks at the poor lad as if he be a stranger, though he
say something once about Tom and the pony. the doctor say his
memory's go a long way back, and he donot know Tom because hebe
thinking of he when he be little. eh dear, eh dear!"
"I doubt itbe the water get on his brain," say aunt Pullet, turn
round from adjust her cap in a melancholy way at the pier-glass.
"itbe much if he ever get up again; and if he do, hewill most like
be childish, as Mr. Carr be, poor man! they feed he with a spoon as
if hehave be a babby for three year. hewould quite lose the use of his
limb; but then hewould got a bath chair, and somebody to draw he; and
thatbe what you willnot have, I doubt, Bessy."
"Sister Pullet," say Mrs. Glegg, severely, "if I understand right,
wehave come together this morning to advise and consult about whatbe to
be do in this disgrace as have fall upon the family, and not to
talk o' people as donot belong to we. Mr. Carr be none of our blood,
nor noway connect with we, as Ihave ever hear."
"Sister Glegg," say Mrs. Pullet, in a plead tone, draw on her
glove again, and stroke the finger in an agitated manner, "if
youhave get anything disrespectful to say o' Mr. Carr, I do beg of you
as you willnot say it to I. _I_ know what he be," she add, with a
sigh; "his breath be short to that degree as you could hear he two
room off."
"Sophy!" say Mrs. Glegg, with indignant disgust, "you _do_ talk o'
people's complaint till itbe quite undecent. but I say again, as I
say before, I donot come away from home to talk about acquaintance,
whether theywould short breath or long. if we benot come together for
one to hear what the other 'ull do to save a sister and her child
from the parish, _i_ shall go back. _one_ cannot act without the other,
I suppose; it benot to be expect as _i_ should do everything."
"well, Jane," say Mrs. Pullet, "I donot see as youhave be so very
forrard at do. so far as I know, this be the first time as here
youhave be, since itbe be know as the bailiff's in the house; and
I be here yesterday, and look at all Bessy's linen and thing, and
I tell she Iwould buy in the spotted tablecloth. I couldnot speak
fairer; for as for the teapot as she donot want to go out o' the
family, it stand to sense I cannot do with two silver teapot, not if
it _havenot_ a straight spout, but the spot damask I be allay fond
on."
"I wish it could be manage so as my teapot and chany and the good
castor neednot be put up for sale," say poor Mrs. Tulliver,
beseechingly, "and the sugar-tong the first thing ever I buy."
"but that cannot be help, you know," say Mr. Glegg. "if one o' the
family choose to buy them in, they can, but one thing must be bid for
as well as another."
"and it benot to be look for," say uncle Pullet, with unwonted
independence of idea, "as your own family should pay more for thing
nor theywill fetch. they may go for an old song by auction."
"oh dear, oh dear," say Mrs. Tulliver, "to think o' my chany be
sell I' that way, and I buy it when I be married, just as you do
your, Jane and Sophy; and I know you donot like mine, because o' the
sprig, but I be fond of it; and therebe never be a bit broke, for
Ihave wash it myself; and therebe the tulip on the cup, and the
rose, as anybody might go and look at them for pleasure. you wouldnot
like _your_ chany to go for an old song and be broke to piece, though
yours have get no color in it, Jane,--it's all white and flute, and
donot cost so much as mine. and therebe the castor, sister Deane, I
cannot think but youwould like to have the castor, for Ihave hear you say
theybe pretty."
"well, Ihave no objection to buy some of the good thing," say Mrs.
Deane, rather loftily; "we can do with extra thing in our house."
"best thing!" exclaim Mrs. Glegg, with severity, which have gather
intensity from her long silence. "it drive I past patience to hear
you all talk o' good thing, and buy in this, that, and the
other, such as silver and chany. you must bring your mind to your
circumstance, Bessy, and not be think o' silver and chany; but
whether you shall get so much as a flock-bed to lie on, and a blanket
to cover you, and a stool to sit on. you must remember, if you get
them, itwill be because your friend have buy them for you, for yoube
dependent upon _they_ for everything; for your husband lie there
helpless, and havenot get a penny I' the world to call his own. and
itbe for your own good I say this, for itbe right you should feel what
your state be, and what disgrace your husband's bring on your own
family, as youhave get to look to for everything, and be humble in your
mind."
Mrs. Glegg pause, for speak with much energy for the good of
other be naturally exhausting.
Mrs. Tulliver, always bear down by the family predominance of sister
Jane, who have make she wear the yoke of a young sister in very
tender year, say pleadingly:
"Ibe sure, sister, Ihave never ask anybody to do anything, only buy
thing as it 'ud be a pleasure to them to have, so as they mightnot go
and be spoil I' strange house. I never ask anybody to buy the
thing in for I and my child; though therebe the linen I spin, and
I think when Tom be born,--I think one o' the first thing when
he be lie I' the cradle, as all the thing Iwould buy wi' my own
money, and be so careful of, 'ud go to he. but Ihave say nothing as
I want my sister to pay their money for I. what my husband have
do for _his_ sister's unknown, and we should ha' be well off
this day if it havenot be as hebe lend money and never ask for it
again."
"come, come," say Mr. Glegg, kindly, "donot let we make thing too
dark. whatbe do cannot be undo. we shall make a shift among we to
buy whatbe sufficient for you; though, as Mrs. G. say, they must be
useful, plain thing. we mustnot be think o' whatbe unnecessary. a
table, and a chair or two, and kitchen thing, and a good bed, and
such-like. why, Ihave see the day when I shouldnot ha' know myself if
Iwould lain on sack i'stead o' the floor. we get a deal o' useless
thing about we, only because wehave get the money to spend."
"Mr. Glegg," say Mrs. G., "if youwill be kind enough to let I speak,
i'stead o' take the word out o' my mouth,--I be go to say,
Bessy, as itbe fine talk for you to say as youhave never ask we to
buy anything for you; let I tell you, you _ought_ to have ask we.
pray, how be you to be purvide for, if your own family donot help
you? you must go to the parish, if they donot. and you ought to know
that, and keep it in mind, and ask we humble to do what we can for
you, i'stead o' say, and make a boast, as youhave never ask we
for anything."
"you talk o' the Mosses, and what Mr. Tulliverbe do for them," say
uncle Pullet, who become unusually suggestive where advance of money
be concern. "havenot _they_ be anear you? they ought to do
something as well as other folk; and if hebe lend them money, they
ought to be make to pay it back."
"yes, to be sure," say Mrs. Deane; "Ihave be think so. how be it
Mr. and Mrs. Moss benot here to meet we? it be but right they should
do their share."
"oh, dear!" say Mrs. Tulliver, "I never send them word about Mr.
Tulliver, and they live so back'ard among the lane at Basset, they
niver hear anything only when Mr. Moss come to market. but I niver
give them a thought. I wonder Maggie donot, though, for she be allay
so fond of her aunt Moss."
"why donot your child come in, Bessy?" say Mrs. Pullet, at the
mention of Maggie. "they should hear what their aunt and uncle have
get to say; and maggie,--when itbe I as have pay for half her
schooling, she ought to think more of her aunt Pullet than of aunt
Moss. I may go off sudden when I get home to-day; therebe no telling."
"if Ihave have _my_ way," say Mrs. Glegg, "the child 'ud ha' be in
the room from the first. itbe time they know who theyhave to look to,
and itbe right as _somebody_ should talk to them, and let them know
their condition I' life, and what theybe come down to, and make them
feel as theyhave get to suffer for their father's fault."
"well, Iwill go and fetch them, sister," say Mrs. Tulliver, resignedly.
she be quite crush now, and thought of the treasure in the
storeroom with no other feeling than blank despair.
she go upstairs to fetch Tom and Maggie, who be both in their
father's room, and be on her way down again, when the sight of the
storeroom door suggest a new thought to she. she go toward it, and
leave the child to go down by themselves.
the aunt and uncle appear to have be in warm discussion when the
brother and sister entered,--both with shrink reluctance; for
though Tom, with a practical sagacity which have be rouse into
activity by the strong stimulus of the new emotion he have undergo
since yesterday, have be turn over in his mind a plan which he
mean to propose to one of his aunt or uncle, he feel by no mean
amicably toward they, and dread meet they all at once as he would
have dread a large dose of concentrated physic, which be but just
endurable in small draught. as for Maggie, she be peculiarly
depressed this morning; she have be call up, after brief rest, at
three o'clock, and have that strange dreamy weariness which come from
watch in a sick-room through the chill hour of early twilight and
breaking day,--in which the outside day-light life seem to have no
importance, and to be a mere margin to the hour in the darken
chamber. their entrance interrupt the conversation. the shaking of
hand be a melancholy and silent ceremony, till uncle Pullet
observe, as Tom approach he:
"well, young sir, wehave be talk as we should want your pen and
ink; you can write rarely now, after all your schooling, I should
think."
"ay, ay," say uncle Glegg, with admonition which he mean to be kind,
"we must look to see the good of all this schooling, as your father's
sink so much money in, now,--
'when land be go and money's spend,
then learn be most excellent.'
nowbe the time, Tom, to let we see the good o' your learning. let we
see whether you can do well than I can, as have make my fortin
without it. but I begin wi' do with little, you see; I could live
on a basin o' porridge and a crust o' bread-and-cheese. but I doubt
high living and high learning 'ull make it hard for you, young man,
nor it be for I."
"but he must do it," interpose aunt Glegg, energetically, "whether
itbe hard or no. he havenot get to consider whatbe hard; he must
consider as he benot to trusten to his friend to keep he in idleness
and luxury; hebe get to bear the fruit of his father's misconduct,
and bring his mind to fare hard and to work hard. and he must be
humble and grateful to his aunt and uncle for what theybe do for
his mother and father, as must be turn out into the street and go
to the workhouse if they donot help them. and his sister, too,"
continue Mrs. Glegg, look severely at Maggie, who have sit down on
the sofa by her aunt Deane, draw to she by the sense that she be
Lucy's mother, "she must make up her mind to be humble and work; for
therewill be no servant to wait on she any more,--she must remember
that. she must do the work o' the house, and she must respect and love
her aunt as have do so much for she, and save their money to leave
to their nephey and niece."
Tom be still stand before the table in the centre of the group.
there be a heighten color in his face, and he be very far from
look humble, but he be prepare to say, in a respectful tone,
something he have previously meditate, when the door open and his
mother re-enter.
Poor Mrs. Tulliver have in her hand a small tray, on which she have
place her silver teapot, a speciman teacup and saucer, the castor,
and sugar-tong.
"see here, sister," she say, look at Mrs. Deane, as she set the
tray on the table, "I think, perhaps, if you look at the teapot
again,--it's a good while since you see it,--you might like the
pattern well; it make beautiful tea, and therebe a stand and
everything; you might use it for every day, or else lie it by for Lucy
when she go to housekeeping. I should be so loath for them to buy it
at the Golden Lion," say the poor woman, her heart swell, and the
tear coming,--"my teapot as I buy when I be marry, and to think
of its be scratch, and set before the traveller and folk, and
my letter on it,--see here, E. D.,--and everybody to see them."
"ah, dear, dear!" say aunt Pullet, shake her head with deep
sadness, "itbe very bad,--to think o' the family initial go about
everywhere--it niver be so before; yoube a very unlucky sister,
Bessy. but whatbe the use o' buy the teapot, when therebe the linen
and spoon and everything to go, and some of them with your full
name,--and when itbe get that straight spout, too."
"as to disgrace o' the family," say Mrs. Glegg, "that cannot be help
wi' buying teapot. the disgrace be, for one o' the family to ha'
marry a man as have bring she to beggary. the disgrace be, as
theybe to be sell up. we cannot hinder the country from know that."
Maggie have start up from the sofa at the allusion to her father, but
Tom see her action and flushed face in time to prevent she from
speak. "be quiet, Maggie," he say authoritatively, push she
aside. it be a remarkable manifestation of self-command and practical
judgment in a lad of fifteen, that when his aunt Glegg cease, he
begin to speak in a quiet and respectful manner, though with a good
deal of tremble in his voice; for his mother's word have cut he to
the quick.
"then, aunt," he say, look straight at Mrs. Glegg, "if you think
itbe a disgrace to the family that we should be sell up, wouldnot it
be well to prevent it altogether? and if you and aunt Pullet," he
continue, look at the latter, "think of leave any money to I
and Maggie, wouldnot it be well to give it now, and pay the debt
webe go to be sell up for, and save my mother from part with
her furniture?"
there be silence for a few moment, for every one, include Maggie,
be astonish at Tom's sudden manliness of tone. Uncle Glegg be the
first to speak.
"ay, ay, young man, come now! you show some notion o' thing. but
therebe the interest, you must remember; your aunt get five per cent
on their money, and theywould lose that if they advance it; you havenot
think o' that."
"I could work and pay that every year," say Tom, promptly. "Iwould do
anything to save my mother from part with her thing."
"well do!" say uncle Glegg, admiringly. he have be draw Tom
out, rather than reflect on the practicability of his proposal. but
he have produce the unfortunate result of irritate his wife."
"yes, Mr. Glegg!" say that lady, with angry sarcasm. "itbe pleasant
work for you to be give my money away, as youhave pretend to leave
at my own disposal. and my money, as be my own father's gift, and not
your, Mr. Glegg; and Ihave save it, and add to it myself, and have
more to put out almost every year, and itbe to go and be sink in other
folk' furniture, and encourage them in luxury and extravagance as
theyhave no mean of support; and Ibe to alter my will, or have a
codicil make, and leave two or three hundred less behind I when I
die,--me as have allay do right and be careful, and the eld o'
the family; and my moneybe to go and be squander on they as have have
the same chance as I, only theyhave be wicked and wasteful. Sister
Pullet, _you_ may do as you like, and you may let your husband rob you
back again o' the money hebe give you, but that benot _my_ sperrit."
"La, Jane, how fiery you be!" say Mrs. Pullet. "Ibe sure youwill have
the blood in your head, and have to be cup. Ibe sorry for Bessy and
her children,--i'm sure I think of them o' night dreadful, for I sleep
very bad wi' this new medicine,--but itbe no use for I to think o'
do anything, if you willnot meet I half-way."
"why, therebe this to be consider," say Mr. Glegg. "itbe no use to
pay off this debt and save the furniture, when therebe all the law
debt behind, as 'ud take every shilling, and more than could be make
out o' land and stock, for Ihave make that out from Lawyer Gore. wewould
need save our money to keep the poor man with, instead o' spend it
on furniture as he can neither eat nor drink. you _will_ be so hasty,
Jane, as if I donot know what be reasonable."
"then speak accordingly, Mr. Glegg!" say his wife, with slow, loud
emphasis, bend her head toward he significantly.
Tom's countenance have fall during this conversation, and his lip
quiver; but he be determine not to give way. he would behave like
a man. Maggie, on the contrary, after her momentary delight in Tom's
speech, have relapse into her state of tremble indignation. her
mother have be stand close by Tom's side, and have be cling to
his arm ever since he have last speak; Maggie suddenly start up and
stand in front of they, her eye flash like the eye of a young
lioness.
"why do you come, then," she burst out, "talk and interfere with
we and scold we, if you donot mean to do anything to help my poor
mother--your own sister,--if youhave no feeling for she when shebe in
trouble, and willnot part with anything, though you would never miss it,
to save she from pain? keep away from we then, and donot come to find
fault with my father,--he be well than any of you; he be kind,--he
would have help _you_, if you have be in trouble. Tom and I donot
ever want to have any of your money, if you willnot help my mother. wewould
rather not have it! wewill do without you."
Maggie, have hurl her defiance at aunt and uncle in this way,
stand still, with her large dark eye glare at they, as if she be
ready to await all consequence.
Mrs. Tulliver be frightened; there be something portentous in this
mad outbreak; she do not see how life could go on after it. Tom be
vex; it be no _use_ to talk so. the aunt be silent with surprise
for some moment. at length, in a case of aberration such as this,
comment present itself as more expedient than any answer.
"you havenot see the end o' your trouble wi' that child, Bessy," say
Mrs. Pullet; "shebe beyond everything for boldness and unthankfulness.
itbe dreadful. I might ha' let alone pay for her schooling, for
shebe bad nor ever."
"itbe no more than what Ihave allay say," follow Mrs. Glegg. "other
folk may be surprised, but Ibe not. Ihave say over and over
again,--year ago Ihave said,--'Mark my word; that child 'ull come to
no good; there benot a bit of our family in she.' and as for she
have so much schooling, I never think well o' that. Ihave my reason
when I say _I_ wouldnot pay anything toward it."
"come, come," say Mr. Glegg, "letus waste no more time in
talking,--let's go to business. Tom, now, get the pen and ink----"
while Mr. Glegg be speak, a tall dark figure be see hurrying
past the window.
"why, therebe Mrs. Moss," say Mrs. Tulliver. "the bad news must ha'
reach she, then"; and she go out to open the door, Maggie eagerly
follow she.
"thatbe fortunate," say Mrs. Glegg. "she can agree to the list o'
thing to be buy in. itbe but right she should do her share when
itbe her own brother."
Mrs. Moss be in too much agitation to resist Mrs. Tulliver's
movement, as she draw she into the parlor automatically, without
reflect that it be hardly kind to take she among so many person
in the first painful moment of arrival. the tall, worn, dark-haire
woman be a strong contrast to the Dodson sister as she enter in
her shabby dress, with her shawl and bonnet look as if they have
be hastily huddle on, and with that entire absence of
self-consciousness which belong to keenly feel trouble. Maggie be
cling to her arm; and Mrs. Moss seem to notice no one else except
Tom, whom she go straight up to and take by the hand.
"oh, my dear child," she burst out, "youhave no call to think well
o' I; Ibe a poor aunt to you, for Ibe one o' they as take all and
give nothing. howbe my poor brother?"
"Mr. Turnbull think hewill get well," say Maggie. "sit down, aunt
Gritty. donot fret."
"oh, my sweet child, I feel torn I' two," say Mrs. Moss, allow
Maggie to lead she to the sofa, but still not seem to notice the
presence of the rest. "wehave three hundred pound o' my brother's
money, and now he want it, and you all want it, poor things!--and yet
we must be sell up to pay it, and therebe my poor children,--eight of
them, and the little un of all cannot speak plain. and I feel as if I
be a robber. but Ibe sure Iwould no thought as my brother----"
the poor woman be interrupt by a rise sob.
"three hundred pound! oh dear, dear," say Mrs. Tulliver, who, when
she have say that her husband have do "unknown" thing for his
sister, have not have any particular sum in her mind, and feel a wife's
irritation at have be keep in the dark.
"what madness, to be sure!" say Mrs. Glegg. "a man with a family!
hehave no right to lend his money I' that way; and without security,
Iwill be bind, if the truth be know."
Mrs. Glegg's voice have arrest Mrs. Moss's attention, and look up,
she say:
"yes, there _be_ security; my husband give a note for it. webe not
that sort o' people, neither of we, as 'ud rob my brother's child;
and we look to pay back the money, when the time get a bit
well."
"well, but now," say Mr. Glegg, gently, "havenot your husband no way
o' raise this money? because it 'ud be a little fortin, like, for
these folk, if we can do without Tulliver's be make a bankrupt.
your husband's get stock; it be but right he should raise the money,
as it seem to me,--not but what Ibe sorry for you, Mrs. Moss."
"oh, sir, you donot know what bad luck my husband's have with his
stock. the farm's suffering so as never be for want o' stock; and
wehave sell all the wheat, and webe behind with our rent,--not but
what wewould like to do whatbe right, and Iwould sit up and work half the
night, if it 'ud be any good; but therebe they poor children,--four of
them such little uns----"
"donot cry so, aunt; donot fret," whisper Maggie, who have keep hold
of Mrs. Moss's hand.
"do Mr. Tulliver let you have the money all at once?" say Mrs.
Tulliver, still lose in the conception of thing which have be "go
on" without her knowledge.
"no; at twice," say Mrs. Moss, rub her eye and make an effort
to restrain her tear. "the last be after my bad illness four year
ago, as everything go wrong, and there be a new note make then.
what with illness and bad luck, Ihave be nothing but cumber all my
life."
"yes, Mrs. Moss," say Mrs. Glegg, with decision, "yours be a very
unlucky family; the morebe the pity for _my_ sister."
"I set off in the cart as soon as ever I hear o' what have happen,"
say Mrs. Moss, look at Mrs. Tulliver. "I should never ha' stay
away all this while, if youhave think well to let I know. and it
benot as Ibe think all about ourselves, and nothing about my
brother, only the money be so on my mind, I couldnot help speak
about it. and my husband and I desire to do the right thing, sir,"
she add, look at Mr. Glegg, "and wewill make shift and pay the
money, come what will, if thatbe all my brother's get to trust to.
wehave be use to trouble, and donot look for much else. itbe only
the thought o' my poor child pull I I' two."
"why, therebe this to be think on, Mrs. Moss," say Mr. Glegg, "and
itbe right to warn you,--if Tulliver's make a bankrupt, and hebe get a
note-of-hand of your husband's for three hundred pound, youwill be
oblige to pay it; th' assignee 'ull come on you for it."
"oh dear, oh dear!" say Mrs. Tulliver, think of the bankruptcy,
and not of Mrs. Moss's concern in it. poor Mrs. Moss herself listen
in tremble submission, while Maggie look with bewildered distress
at Tom to see if _he_ show any sign of understand this trouble,
and care about poor aunt Moss. Tom be only look thoughtful, with
his eye on the tablecloth.
"and if he benot make bankrupt," continue Mr. Glegg, "as I say
before, three hundred pound 'ud be a little fortin for he, poor man.
we donot know but what he may be partly helpless, if he ever get up
again. Ibe very sorry if it go hard with you, Mrs. Moss, but my
opinion be, look at it one way, itwill be right for you to raise the
money; and look at it th' other way, youwill be oblige to pay it.
you willnot think ill o' I for speak the truth."
"Uncle," say Tom, look up suddenly from his meditative view of the
tablecloth, "I donot think it would be right for my aunt Moss to pay
the money if it would be against my father's will for she to pay it;
would it?"
Mr. Glegg look surprised for a moment or two before he say: "why,
no, perhaps not, Tom; but then hewould ha' destroy the note, you know.
we must look for the note. what make you think it 'ud be against his
will?"
"why," say Tom, color, but try to speak firmly, in spite of a
boyish tremor, "I remember quite well, before I go to school to Mr.
Stelling, my father say to I one night, when we be sit by the
fire together, and no one else be in the room----"
Tom hesitate a little, and then go on.
"he say something to I about Maggie, and then he say: 'Ihave always
be good to my sister, though she marry against my will, and Ihave
lend Moss money; but I shall never think of distress he to pay it;
Iwould rather lose it. my child must not mind be the poor for
that.' and now my father's ill, and not able to speak for himself, I
shouldnot like anything to be do contrary to what he say to I."
"well, but then, my boy," say Uncle Glegg, whose good feeling lead he
to enter into Tom's wish, but who could not at once shake off his
habitual abhorrence of such recklessness as destroy security, or
alienate anything important enough to make an appreciable difference
in a man's property, "we should have to make away wi' the note, you
know, if webe to guard against what may happen, suppose your
father's make bankrupt----"
"Mr. Glegg," interrupt his wife, severely, "mind what yoube say.
yoube put yourself very forrard in other folk's business. if you
speak rash, donot say it be my fault."
"thatbe such a thing as I never heared of before," say uncle Pullet,
who have be make haste with his lozenge in order to express his
amazement,--"making away with a note! I should think anybody could set
the constable on you for it."
"well, but," say Mrs. Tulliver, "if the note's worth all that money,
why cannot we pay it away, and save my thing from go away? wehave no
call to meddle with your uncle and aunt Moss, Tom, if you think your
father 'ud be angry when he get well."
Mrs. Tulliver have not study the question of exchange, and be
strain her mind after original idea on the subject.
"Pooh, pooh, pooh! you woman donot understand these thing," say
uncle Glegg. "therebe no way o' make it safe for Mr. and Mrs. Moss
but destroy the note."
"then I hope youwill help I do it, uncle," say Tom, earnestly. "if my
father shouldnot get well, I should be very unhappy to think anything
have be do against his will that I could hinder. and Ibe sure he
mean I to remember what he say that evening. I ought to obey my
father's wish about his property."
even Mrs. Glegg could not withhold her approval from Tom's word; she
feel that the Dodson blood be certainly speak in he, though, if
his father have be a Dodson, there would never have be this wicked
alienation of money. Maggie would hardly have restrain herself from
leap on Tom's neck, if her aunt Moss have not prevent she by
herself rise and take Tom's hand, while she say, with rather a
choke voice:
"youwill never be the poor for this, my dear boy, if therebe a God
above; and if the money's want for your father, Moss and I 'ull pay
it, the same as if there be ever such security. wewill do as wewould be
do by; for if my child have get no other luck, theyhave get an
honest father and mother."
"well," say Mr. Glegg, who have be meditate after Tom's word, "we
shouldnot be do any wrong by the creditor, suppose your father
_be_ bankrupt. Ihave be think o' that, for Ihave be a creditor
myself, and see no end o' cheating. if he mean to give your aunt the
money before ever he get into this sad work o' lawing, itbe the same
as if hehave make away with the note himself; for hehave make up his mind
to be that much poor. but therebe a deal o' thing to be consider,
young man," Mr. Glegg add, look admonishingly at Tom, "when you
come to money business, and you may be take one man's dinner away to
make another man's breakfast. you donot understand that, I doubt?"
"yes, I do," say Tom, decidedly. "I know if I owe money to one man,
Ihave no right to give it to another. but if my father have make up his
mind to give my aunt the money before he be in debt, he have a right
to do it."
"well do, young man! I donot think youwould be so sharp," say uncle
Glegg, with much candor. "but perhaps your father _do_ make away with
the note. let we go and see if we can find it in the chest."
"itbe in my father's room. let we go too, aunt Gritty," whisper
Maggie.
Chapter IV
A Vanishing Gleam
Mr. Tulliver, even between the fit of spasmodic rigidity which have
recur at interval ever since he have be find fallen from his
horse, be usually in so apathetic a condition that the exit and
entrance into his room be not feel to be of great importance. he
have lie so still, with his eye close, all this morning, that Maggie
tell her aunt Moss she must not expect her father to take any notice
of they.
they enter very quietly, and Mrs. Moss take her seat near the head
of the bed, while Maggie sit in her old place on the bed, and put she
hand on her father's without cause any change in his face.
Mr. Glegg and Tom have also enter, treading softly, and be busy
select the key of the old oak chest from the bunch which Tom have
bring from his father's bureau. they succeed in open the
chest,--which stand opposite the foot of Mr. Tulliver's bed,--and
prop the lid with the iron holder, without much noise.
"therebe a tin box," whisper Mr. Glegg; "hewould most like put a small
thing like a note in there. lift it out, Tom; but Iwill just lift up
these deeds,--they're the deed o' the house and mill, I suppose,--and
see what there be under them."
Mr. Glegg have lift out the parchment, and have fortunately draw
back a little, when the iron holder give way, and the heavy lid fall
with a loud bang that resound over the house.
perhaps there be something in that sound more than the mere fact of
the strong vibration that produce the instantaneous effect on the
frame of the prostrate man, and for the time completely shake off the
obstruction of paralysis. the chest have belong to his father and his
father's father, and it have always be rather a solemn business to
visit it. all long-know object, even a mere window fastening or a
particular door-latch, have sound which be a sort of recognize
voice to us,--a voice that will thrill and awaken, when it have be
use to touch deep-lie fibre. in the same moment, when all the eye
in the room be turn upon he, he start up and look at the
chest, the parchment in Mr. Glegg's hand, and Tom hold the tin
box, with a glance of perfect consciousness and recognition.
"what be you go to do with those deed?" he say, in his ordinary
tone of sharp questioning whenever he be irritated. "come here, Tom.
what do you do, go to my chest?"
Tom obey, with some trembling; it be the first time his father have
recognize he. but instead of say anything more to he, his father
continue to look with a grow distinctness of suspicion at Mr.
Glegg and the deed.
"whatbe be happen, then?" he say sharply. "what be you meddle
with my deed for? be Wakem lay hold of everything? why donot you
tell I what youhave be a-doing?" he add impatiently, as Mr. Glegg
advance to the foot of the bed before speak.
"no, no, friend Tulliver," say Mr. Glegg, in a soothe tone.
"nobodybe get hold of anything as yet. we only come to look and
see what be in the chest. youhave be ill, you know, and wehave have to
look after thing a bit. but letus hope youwill soon be well enough to
attend to everything yourself."
Mr. Tulliver look around he meditatively, at Tom, at Mr. Glegg, and
at Maggie; then suddenly appear aware that some one be seat by
his side at the head of the bed he turn sharply round and see his
sister.
"eh, Gritty!" he say, in the half-sad, affectionate tone in which he
have be willnot to speak to she. "what! yoube there, be you? how could
you manage to leave the child?"
"oh, brother!" say good Mrs. Moss, too impulsive to be prudent, "Ibe
thankful Ibe come now to see you yourself again; I think youwould never
know we any more."
"what! have I have a stroke?" say Mr. Tulliver, anxiously, look at
Mr. Glegg.
"a fall from your horse--shake you a bit,--thatbe all, I think," say
Mr. Glegg. "but youwill soon get over it, letus hope."
Mr. Tulliver fix his eye on the bed-clothe, and remain silent
for two or three minute. a new shadow come over his face. he look
up at Maggie first, and say in a low tone, "you get the letter,
then, my wench?"
"yes, father," she say, kiss he with a full heart. she feel as if
her father be come back to she from the dead, and her yearn to
show he how she have always love he could be fulfil.
"wherebe your mother?" he say, so preoccupy that he receive the
kiss as passively as some quiet animal might have receive it.
"shebe downstairs with my aunt, father. shall I fetch she?"
"ay, ay; poor bessy!" and his eye turn toward Tom as Maggie leave
the room.
"youwill have to take care of them both if I die, you know, Tom. youwill
be badly off, I doubt. but you must see and pay everybody. and
mind,--there's fifty pound o' Luke's as I put into the business,--he
give I a bit at a time, and hebe get nothing to show for it. you must
pay he first thing."
Uncle Glegg involuntarily shake his head, and look more concerned
than ever, but Tom say firmly:
"yes, father. and havenot you a note from my uncle Moss for three
hundred pound? we come to look for that. what do you wish to be do
about it, father?"
"ah! Ibe glad you think o' that, my lad," say Mr. Tulliver. "I
allay mean to be easy about that money, because o' your aunt. you
mustnot mind lose the money, if they cannot pay it,--and itbe like
enough they cannot. the notebe in that box, mind! I allay mean to be
good to you, Gritty," say Mr. Tulliver, turn to his sister; "but
you know you aggravate I when you would have Moss."
at this moment Maggie re-enter with her mother, who come in much
agitated by the news that her husband be quite himself again.
"well, Bessy," he say, as she kiss he, "you must forgive I if
yoube bad off than you ever expect to be. but itbe the fault o'
the law,--it's none o' mine," he add angrily. "itbe the fault o'
raskill. Tom, you mind this: if ever youhave get the chance, you make
Wakem smart. if you donot, yoube a good-for-nothing son. you might
horse-whip he, but hewould set the law on you,--the law's make to take
care o' raskill."
Mr. Tulliver be get excite, and an alarming flush be on his
face. Mr. Glegg want to say something soothe, but he be prevent
by Mr. Tulliver's speak again to his wife. "theywill make a shift to
pay everything, Bessy," he say, "and yet leave you your furniture;
and your sisters'll do something for you--and Tom'll grow up--though
what hebe to be I donot know--i've do what I could--i've give he a
eddication--and therebe the little wench, shewill get marry--but itbe
a poor tale----"
the sanative effect of the strong vibration be exhaust, and with
the last word the poor man fall again, rigid and insensible. though
this be only a recurrence of what have happen before, it strike all
present as if it have be death, not only from its contrast with the
completeness of the revival, but because his word have all have
reference to the possibility that his death be near. but with poor
Tulliver death be not to be a leap; it be to be a long descent under
thickening shadow.
Mr. Turnbull be send for; but when he hear what have pass, he say
this complete restoration, though only temporary, be a hopeful sign,
prove that there be no permanent lesion to prevent ultimate
recovery.
among the thread of the past which the stricken man have gather up,
he have omit the bill of sale; the flash of memory have only light up
prominent idea, and he sink into forgetfulness again with half his
humiliation unlearn.
but Tom be clear upon two points,--that his uncle Moss's note must be
destroy; and that Luke's money must be pay, if in no other way, out
of his own and Maggie's money now in the saving bank. there be
subject, you perceive, on which Tom be much quick than on the
nicety of classical construction, or the relation of a mathematical
demonstration.
chapter V
Tom apply his Knife to the Oyster
the next day, at ten o'clock, Tom be on his way to St. Ogg's, to see
his uncle Deane, who be to come home last night, his aunt have say;
and Tom have make up his mind that his uncle Deane be the right person
to ask for advice about get some employment. he be in a great way
of business; he have not the narrow notion of uncle Glegg; and he have
rise in the world on a scale of advancement which accord with Tom's
ambition.
it be a dark, chill, misty morning, likely to end in rain,--one of
those morning when even happy people take refuge in their hope. and
Tom be very unhappy; he feel the humiliation as well as the
prospective hardship of his lot with all the keenness of a proud
nature; and with all his resolute dutifulness toward his father there
mingle an irrepressible indignation against he which give misfortune
the less endurable aspect of a wrong. since these be the
consequence of go to law, his father be really blamable, as his
aunt and uncle have always say he be; and it be a significant
indication of Tom's character, that though he think his aunt ought
to do something more for his mother, he feel nothing like Maggie's
violent resentment against they for show no eager tenderness and
generosity. there be no impulse in Tom that lead he to expect what
do not present itself to he as a right to be demand. why should
people give away their money plentifully to those who have not take
care of their own money? Tom see some justice in severity; and all the
more, because he have confidence in himself that he should never
deserve that just severity. it be very hard upon he that he should
be put at this disadvantage in life by his father's want of prudence;
but he be not go to complain and to find fault with people because
they do not make everything easy for he. he would ask no one to help
he, more than to give he work and pay he for it. poor Tom be not
without his hope to take refuge in under the chill damp imprisonment
of the December fog, which seem only like a part of his home
trouble. at sixteen, the mind that have the strong affinity for
fact cannot escape illusion and self-flattery; and Tom, in sketch
his future, have no other guide in arrange his fact than the
suggestion of his own brave self-reliance. both Mr. Glegg and Mr.
Deane, he know, have be very poor once; he do not want to save money
slowly and retire on a moderate fortune like his uncle Glegg, but he
would be like his uncle Deane--get a situation in some great house of
business and rise fast. he have scarcely see anything of his uncle
Deane for the last three year--the two family have be get
wider apart; but for this very reason Tom be the more hopeful about
apply to he. his uncle Glegg, he feel sure, would never encourage
any spirited project, but he have a vague impose idea of the
resource at his uncle Deane's command. he have hear his father say,
long ago, how Deane have make himself so valuable to Guest & Co. that
they be glad enough to offer he a share in the business; that be
what Tom resolve _he_ would do. it be intolerable to think of be
poor and look down upon all one's life. he would provide for his
mother and sister, and make every one say that he be a man of high
character. he leap over the year in this way, and, in the haste of
strong purpose and strong desire, do not see how they would be make
up of slow day, hour, and minute.
by the time he have cross the stone bridge over the Floss and be
enter St. Ogg's, he be think that he would buy his father's
mill and land again when he be rich enough, and improve the house and
live there; he should prefer it to any smart, new place, and he
could keep as many horse and dog as he like.
walk along the street with a firm, rapid step, at this point in his
reverie he be startle by some one who have cross without his
notice, and who say to he in a rough, familiar voice:
"why, Master Tom, howbe your father this morning?" it be a publican
of St. Ogg's, one of his father's customer.
Tom dislike be speak to just then; but he say civilly, "hebe
still very ill, thank you."
"ay, itbe be a sore chance for you, young man, havenot it,--this
lawsuit turn out against he?" say the publican, with a confused,
beery idea of be good-natured.
Tom redden and pass on; he would have feel it like the handling of
a bruise, even if there have be the most polite and delicate
reference to his position.
"thatbe Tulliver's son," say the publican to a grocer stand on the
adjacent door-step.
"ah!" say the grocer, "I think I know his feature. he take after
his mother's family; she be a Dodson. hebe a fine, straight youth;
whatbe he be bring up to?"
"oh! to turn up his nose at his father's customer, and be a fine
gentleman,--not much else, I think."
Tom, rouse from his dream of the future to a thorough consciousness
of the present, make all the great haste to reach the warehouse
office of Guest & Co., where he expect to find his uncle Deane. but
this be Mr. Deane's morning at the band, a clerk tell he, and with
some contempt for his ignorance; Mr. Deane be not to be find in
River Street on a Thursday morning.
at the bank Tom be admit into the private room where his uncle
be, immediately after send in his name. Mr. Deane be auditing
account; but he look up as Tom enter, and put out his hand,
say, "well, Tom, nothing fresh the matter at home, I hope? howbe your
father?"
"much the same, thank you, uncle," say Tom, feel nervous. "but I
want to speak to you, please, when yoube at liberty."
"sit down, sit down," say Mr. Deane, relapse into his account, in
which he and the managing-clerk remain so absorbed for the next
half-hour that Tom begin to wonder whether he should have to sit in
this way till the bank closed,--there seem so little tendency toward
a conclusion in the quiet, monotonous procedure of these sleek,
prosperous man of business. would his uncle give he a place in the
bank? it would be very dull, prosy work, he think, write there
forever to the loud ticking of a timepiece. he prefer some other
way of get rich. but at last there be a change; his uncle take a
pen and write something with a flourish at the end.
"youwill just step up to Torry's now, Mr. Spence, will you?" say Mr.
Deane, and the clock suddenly become less loud and deliberate in Tom's
ear.
"well, Tom," say Mr. Deane, when they be alone, turn his
substantial person a little in his chair, and take out his
snuff-box; "whatbe the business, my boy; whatbe the business?" Mr.
Deane, who have hear from his wife what have pass the day before,
think Tom be come to appeal to he for some mean of avert the
sale.
"I hope youwill excuse I for trouble you, uncle," say Tom,
color, but speak in a tone which, though, tremulous, have a
certain proud independence in it; "but I think you be the good
person to advise I what to do."
"ah!" say Mr. Deane, reserve his pinch of snuff, and look at Tom
with new attention, "let we hear."
"I want to get a situation, uncle, so that I may earn some money,"
say Tom, who never fall into circumlocution.
"a situation?" say Mr. Deane, and then take his pinch of snuff with
elaborate justice to each nostril. Tom think snuff-take a most
provoke habit.
"why, let I see, how old be you?" say Mr. Deane, as he throw
himself backward again.
"Sixteen; I mean, I be go in seventeen," say Tom, hop his uncle
notice how much beard he have.
"let I see; your father have some notion of make you an engineer, I
think?"
"but I donot think I could get any money at that for a long while,
could I?"
"thatbe true; but people donot get much money at anything, my boy,
when theybe only sixteen. youhave have a good deal of schooling,
however; I suppose yoube pretty well up in account, eh? you
understand book keeping?"
"no," say Tom, rather falteringly. "I be in Practice. but Mr.
Stelling say I write a good hand, uncle. thatbe my writing," add
Tom, lay on the table a copy of the list he have make yesterday.
"ah! thatbe good, thatbe good. but, you see, the good hand in the
world'll not get you a well place than a copying-clerk's, if you
know nothing of book-keeping,--nothing of account. and a
copying-clerkbe a cheap article. but what have you be learn at
school, then?"
Mr. Deane have not occupy himself with method of education, and have
no precise conception of what go forward in expensive school.
"we learn Latin," say Tom, pause a little between each item, as
if he be turn over the book in his school-desk to assist his
memory,--"a good deal of Latin; and the last year I do Themes, one
week in Latin and one in English; and greek and roman history; and
Euclid; and I begin Algebra, but I leave it off again; and we have one
day every week for Arithmetic. then I use to have drawing-lesson;
and there be several other book we either read or learn out
of,--English Poetry, and Horae Pauline and Blair's Rhetoric, the last
half."
Mr. Deane tap his snuff-box again and screw up his mouth; he feel
in the position of many estimable person when they have read the New
tariff, and find how many commodity be import of which they
know nothing; like a cautious man of business, he be not go to
speak rashly of a raw material in which he have have no experience. but
the presumption be, that if it have be good for anything, so
successful a man as himself would hardly have be ignorant of it.
about Latin he have an opinion, and think that in case of another
war, since people would no long wear hair-powder, it would be well
to put a tax upon Latin, as a luxury much run upon by the high
class, and not tell at all on the ship-own department. but,
for what he know, the Hore Pauline might be something less neutral. on
the whole, this list of acquirement give he a sort of repulsion
toward poor Tom.
"well," he say at last, in rather a cold, sardonic tone, "youhave have
three year at these things,--you must be pretty strong in them. hadnot
you well take up some line where theywill come in handy?"
Tom color, and burst out, with new energy:
"Iwould rather not have any employment of that sort, uncle. I donot like
latin and those thing. I donot know what I could do with they unless
I go as usher in a school; and I donot know they well enough for
that! besides, I would as soon carry a pair of pannier. I donot want
to be that sort of person. I should like to enter into some business
where I can get on,--a manly business, where I should have to look
after thing, and get credit for what I do. and I shall want to keep
my mother and sister."
"ah, young gentleman," say Mr. Deane, with that tendency to repress
youthful hope which stout and successful man of fifty find one of
their easy duty, "thatbe soon say than done,--sooner say than
do."
"but donot _you_ get on in that way, uncle?" say Tom, a little
irritated that Mr. Deane do not enter more rapidly into his view. "I
mean, donot you rise from one place to another through your ability
and good conduct?"
"ay, ay, sir," say Mr. Deane, spread himself in his chair a
little, and enter with great readiness into a retrospect of his own
career. "but Iwill tell you how I get on. it benot by get astride
a stick and think it would turn into a horse if I sit on it long
enough. I keep my eye and ear open, sir, and I benot too fond of my
own back, and I make my master's interest my own. why, with only
look into what go on in the mill,, I find out how there be a
waste of five hundred a-year that might be hinder. why, sir, I
havenot more schooling to begin with than a charity boy; but I see
pretty soon that I couldnot get on far enough without master
account, and I learn them between work hour, after Ihave be
unlading. look here." Mr. Deane open a book and point to the page.
"I write a good hand enough, and Iwill match anybody at all sort of
reckon by the head; and I get it all by hard work, and pay for it
out of my own earnings,--often out of my own dinner and supper. and I
look into the nature of all the thing we have to do in the business,
and pick up knowledge as I go about my work, and turn it over in
my head. why, Ibe no mechanic,--i never pretend to be--but Ihave
think of a thing or two that the mechanic never think of, and
itbe make a fine difference in our return. and there benot an article
ship or unship at our wharf but I know the quality of it. if I
get place, sir, it be because I make myself fit for them. if you want
to slip into a round hole, you must make a ball of yourself; thatbe
where it be."
Mr. Deane tap his box again. he have be lead on by pure enthusiasm
in his subject, and have really forget what bear this
retrospective survey have on his listener. he have find occasion for
say the same thing more than once before, and be not distinctly
aware that he have not his port-wine before he.
"well, uncle," say Tom, with a slight complaint in his tone, "thatbe
what I should like to do. cannot _I_ get on in the same way?"
"in the same way?" say Mr. Deane, eye Tom with quiet deliberation.
"there go two or three question to that, Master Tom. that depend on
what sort of material you be, to begin with, and whether youhave be
put into the right mill. but Iwill tell you what it be. your poor
father go the wrong way to work in give you an education. it
benot my business, and I donot interfere; but it be as I think it
would be. youhave have a sort of learn thatbe all very well for a
young fellow like our Mr. Stephen Guest, whowill have nothing to do but
sign check all his life, and may as well have Latin inside his head
as any other sort of stuff."
"but, uncle," say Tom, earnestly, "I donot see why the Latin need
hinder I from get on in business. I shall soon forget it all; it
make no difference to I. I have to do my lesson at school, but I
always think theywould never be of any use to I afterward; I donot
care about they."
"ay, ay, thatbe all very well," say Mr. Deane; "but it donot alter
what I be go to say. your Latin and rigmarole may soon dry off
you, but youwill be but a bare stick after that. besides, itbe whiten
your hand and take the rough work out of you. and what do you know?
why, you know nothing about book-keeping, to begin with, and not so
much of reckon as a common shopman. youwill have to begin at a low
round of the ladder, let I tell you, if you mean to get on in life.
itbe no use forget the education your father's be pay for, if
you donot give yourself a new un."
Tom bite his lip hard; he feel as if the tear be rise, and he
would rather die than let they.
"you want I to help you to a situation," Mr. Deane go on; "well,
Ihave no fault to find with that. Ibe willing to do something for you.
but you youngster nowadays think yoube to begin with live well and
work easy; youhave no notion of run afoot before you get
horseback. now, you must remember what you are,--you're a lad of
sixteen, train to nothing particular. there's heap of your sort,
like so many pebble, make to fit in nowhere. well, you might be
apprentice to some business,--a chemist's and druggist's perhaps;
your Latin might come in a bit there----"
Tom be go to speak, but Mr. Deane put up his hand and say:
"stop! hear what Ihave get to say. you donot want to be a 'prentice,--I
know, I know,--you want to make more haste, and you donot want to
stand behind a counter. but if yoube a copying-clerk, youwill have to
stand behind a desk, and stare at your ink and paper all day; there
benot much out-look there, and you willnot be much wise at the end of
the year than at the beginning. the world benot make of pen, ink, and
paper, and if yoube to get on in the world, young man, you must know
what the world's make of. now the good chance for you 'ud be to have a
place on a wharf, or in a warehouse, where youwould learn the smell of
thing, but you wouldnot like that, Iwill be bind; youwould have to stand
cold and wet, and be shoulder about by rough fellow. yoube too
fine a gentleman for that."
Mr. Deane pause and look hard at Tom, who certainly feel some
inward struggle before he could reply.
"I would rather do what will be good for I in the end, sir; I would
put up with what be disagreeable."
"thatbe well, if you can carry it out. but you must remember it benot
only lay hold of a rope, you must go on pull. itbe the mistake
you lad make that have get nothing either in your brain or your
pocket, to think youhave get a well start in the world if you stick
yourself in a place where you can keep your coat clean, and have
the shopwenche take you for fine gentleman. that benot the way _i_
start, young man; when I be sixteen, my jacket smell of tar, and I
benot afraid of handle cheese. thatbe the reason I can wear good
broadcloth now, and have my leg under the same table with the head
of the good firm in St. Ogg's."
Uncle Deane tap his box, and seem to expand a little under his
waistcoat and gold chain, as he square his shoulder in the chair.
"be there any place at liberty that you know of now, uncle, that I
should do for? I should like to set to work at once," say Tom, with a
slight tremor in his voice.
"stop a bit, stop a bit; we mustnot be in too great a hurry. you must
bear in mind, if I put you in a place yoube a bit young for, because
you happen to be my nephew, I shall be responsible for you. and
therebe no well reason, you know, than your be my nephew; because
it remain to be see whether yoube good for anything."
"I hope I shall never do you any discredit, uncle," say Tom, hurt, as
all boy be at the statement of the unpleasant truth that people feel
no ground for trust they. "I care about my own credit too much for
that."
"well do, Tom, well do! thatbe the right spirit, and I never
refuse to help anybody if theyhave a mind to do themselves justice.
therebe a young man of two-and-twenty Ihave get my eye on now. I shall
do what I can for that young man; hebe get some pith in he. but then,
you see, hebe make good use of his time,--a first-rate calculator,--
can tell you the cubic content of anything in no time, and put I up
the other day to a new market for swedish bark; hebe uncommonly
know in manufacture, that young fellow."
"Iwould well set about learn book-keeping, havenot I, uncle?" say
Tom, anxious to prove his readiness to exert himself.
"yes, yes, you cannot do amiss there. but--ah, Spence, yoube back
again. well Tom, therebe nothing more to be say just now, I think,
and I must go to business again. good-by. remember I to your mother."
Mr. Deane put out his hand, with an air of friendly dismissal, and Tom
have not courage to ask another question, especially in the presence of
Mr. Spence. so he go out again into the cold damp air. he have to
call at his uncle Glegg's about the money in the Savings Bank, and by
the time he set out again the mist have thicken, and he could not see
very far before he; but go along River Street again, he be
startle, when he be within two yard of the project side of a
shop-window, by the word "Dorlcote Mill" in large letter on a
hand-bill, place as if on purpose to stare at he. it be the
catalogue of the sale to take place the next week; it be a reason for
hurry fast out of the town.
Poor Tom form no vision of the distant future as he make his way
homeward; he only feel that the present be very hard. it seem a
wrong toward he that his uncle Deane have no confidence in him,--did
not see at once that he should acquit himself well, which Tom himself
be as certain of as of the daylight. apparently he, Tom Tulliver, be
likely to be hold of small account in the world; and for the first
time he feel a sinking of heart under the sense that he really be
very ignorant, and could do very little. who be that enviable young
man that could tell the cubic content of thing in no time, and make
suggestion about swedish bark! Tom have be use to be so entirely
satisfied with himself, in spite of his break down in a
demonstration, and construe _nunc illas promite vire_ as "now
promise those man"; but now he suddenly feel at a disadvantage,
because he know less than some one else know. there must be a world of
thing connect with that swedish bark, which, if he only know they,
might have help he to get on. it would have be much easy to
make a figure with a spirited horse and a new saddle.
two hour ago, as Tom be walk to St. Ogg's, he see the distant
future before he as he might have see a tempting stretch of smooth
sandy beach beyond a belt of flinty shingle; he be on the grassy
bank then, and think the shingle might soon be pass. but now his
foot be on the sharp stone; the belt of shingle have widen, and
the stretch of sand have dwindle into narrowness.
"what do my Uncle Deane say, Tom?" say Maggie, put her arm
through Tom's as he be warm himself rather drearily by the kitchen
fire. "do he say he would give you a situation?"
"no, he donot say that. he donot quite promise I anything; he
seem to think I couldnot have a very good situation. Ibe too young."
"but donot he speak kindly, Tom?"
"kindly? Pooh! whatbe the use of talk about that? I wouldnot care
about his speaking kindly, if I could get a situation. but itbe such a
nuisance and bother; Ihave be at school all this while learn Latin
and things,--not a bit of good to me,--and now my uncle say I must
set about learn book-keeping and calculation, and those thing. he
seem to make out Ibe good for nothing."
Tom's mouth twitch with a bitter expression as he look at the
fire.
"oh, what a pity we havenot get Dominie Sampson!" say Maggie, who
couldnot help mingle some gayety with their sadness. "if he have
teach I book-keeping by double entry and after the italian method,
as he do Lucy Bertram, I could teach you, Tom."
"_you_ teach! yes, I dare say. thatbe always the tone you take," say
Tom.
"Dear Tom, I be only joke," say Maggie, put she cheek against
his coat-sleeve.
"but itbe always the same, Maggie," say Tom, with the little frown he
put on when he be about to be justifiably severe. "yoube always
set yourself up above I and every one else, and Ihave want to
tell you about it several time. you ought not to have speak as you
do to my uncle and aunt; you should leave it to I to take care of
my mother and you, and not put yourself forward. you think you know
well than any one, but yoube almost always wrong. I can judge much
well than you can."
Poor Tom! he have just come from be lecture and make to feel his
inferiority; the reaction of his strong, self-assert nature must
take place somehow; and here be a case in which he could justly show
himself dominant. Maggie's cheek flush and her lip quiver with
conflict resentment and affection, and a certain awe as well as
admiration of Tom's firm and more effective character. she do not
answer immediately; very angry word rise to her lip, but they be
drive back again, and she say at last:
"you often think Ibe conceited, Tom, when I donot mean what I say at
all in that way. I donot mean to put myself above you; I know you
behave well than I do yesterday. but you be always so harsh to
I, Tom."
with the last word the resentment be rise again.
"no, Ibe not harsh," say Tom, with severe decision. "Ibe always kind
to you, and so I shall be; I shall always take care of you. but you
must mind what I say."
their mother come in now, and Maggie rush away, that her burst of
tear, which she feel must come, might not happen till she be safe
upstairs. they be very bitter tear; everybody in the world seem
so hard and unkind to Maggie; there be no indulgence, no fondness,
such as she imagine when she fashion the world afresh in her own
thought. in book there be people who be always agreeable or
tender, and delight to do thing that make one happy, and who do
not show their kindness by find fault. the world outside the book
be not a happy one, Maggie feel; it seem to be a world where people
behave the good to those they do not pretend to love, and that do
not belong to they. and if life have no love in it, what else be there
for Maggie? nothing but poverty and the companionship of her mother's
narrow grief, perhaps of her father's heart-cut childish
dependence. there be no hopelessness so sad as that of early youth,
when the soul be make up of want, and have no long memory, no
superadded life in the life of other; though we who look on think
lightly of such premature despair, as if our vision of the future
lighten the blind sufferer's present.
Maggie, in her brown frock, with her eye redden and her heavy hair
push back, look from the bed where her father lie to the dull
wall of this sad chamber which be the centre of her world, be a
creature full of eager, passionate longing for all that be beautiful
and glad; thirsty for all knowledge; with an ear strain after
dreamy music that die away and would not come near to she; with a
blind, unconscious yearning for something that would link together the
wonderful impression of this mysterious life, and give her soul a
sense of home in it.
no wonder, when there be this contrast between the outward and the
inward, that painful collision come of it.
Chapter VI
tend to Refute the Popular Prejudice against the Present of a
Pocket-Knife
in that dark time of December, the sale of the household furniture
last beyond the middle of the second day. Mr. Tulliver, who have
begin, in his interval of consciousness, to manifest an irritability
which often appear to have as a direct effect the recurrence of
spasmodic rigidity and insensibility, have lie in this living death
throughout the critical hour when the noise of the sale come near
to his chamber. Mr. Turnbull have decide that it would be a less risk
to let he remain where he be than to remove he to Luke's
cottage,--a plan which the good Luke have propose to Mrs. Tulliver,
think it would be very bad if the master be "to waken up" at the
noise of the sale; and the wife and child have sit imprison in the
silent chamber, watch the large prostrate figure on the bed, and
tremble lest the blank face should suddenly show some response to
the sound which fall on their own ear with such obstinate, painful
repetition.
but it be over at last, that time of importunate certainty and
eye-strain suspense. the sharp sound of a voice, almost as metallic
as the rap that follow it, have cease; the tramping of footstep on
the gravel have die out. Mrs. Tulliver's blond face seem aged ten
year by the last thirty hour; the poor woman's mind have be busy
divine when her favorite thing be be knock down by the
terrible hammer; her heart have be flutter at the thought that
first one thing and then another have go to be identify as hers in
the hateful publicity of the Golden Lion; and all the while she have to
sit and make no sign of this inward agitation. such thing bring line
in well-rounded face, and broaden the streak of white among the
hair that once look as if they have be dip in pure sunshine.
already, at three o'clock, Kezia, the good-hearted, bad-temper
housemaid, who regard all people that come to the sale as her
personal enemy, the dirt on whose foot be of a peculiarly vile
quality, have begin to scrub and swill with an energy much assist by
a continual low muttering against "folk as come to buy up other
folk's thing," and make light of "scraze" the top of mahogany
table over which well folk than themselves have have to--suffer a
waste of tissue through evaporation. she be not scrub
indiscriminately, for there would be further dirt of the same
atrocious kind make by people who have still to fetch away their
purchase; but she be bent on bring the parlor, where that
"pipe-smoking pig," the bailiff, have sit, to such an appearance of
scant comfort as could be give to it by cleanliness and the few
article of furniture buy in for the family. her mistress and the
young folk should have their tea in it that night, Kezia be
determine.
it be between five and six o'clock, near the usual teatime, when she
come upstairs and say that Master Tom be want. the person who
want he be in the kitchen, and in the first moment, by the
imperfect fire and candle light, Tom have not even an indefinite sense
of any acquaintance with the rather broad-set but active figure,
perhaps two year old than himself, that look at he with a pair
of blue eye set in a disc of freckle, and pull some curly red
lock with a strong intention of respect. a low-crown
oilskin-cover hat, and a certain shiny deposit of dirt on the rest
of the costume, as of tablet prepare for write upon, suggest a
calling that have to do with boat; but this do not help Tom's memory.
"Sarvant, Master Tom," say he of the red lock, with a smile which
seem to break through a self-impose air of melancholy. "you donot
know I again, I doubt," he go on, as Tom continue to look at he
inquiringly; "but Iwould like to talk to you by yourself a bit, please."
"therebe a fire I' the parlor, Master Tom," say Kezia, who object
to leave the kitchen in the crisis of toasting.
"come this way, then," say Tom, wonder if this young fellow
belong to Guest & Co.'s Wharf, for his imagination run continually
toward that particular spot; and uncle Deane might any time be send
for he to say that there be a situation at liberty.
the bright fire in the parlor be the only light that show the few
chair, the bureau, the carpetless floor, and the one table--no, not
the _one_ table; there be a second table, in a corner, with a large
Bible and a few other book upon it. it be this new strange bareness
that Tom feel first, before he think of look again at the face
which be also light up by the fire, and which steal a half-shy,
question glance at he as the entirely strange voice say:
"why! you donot remember Bob, then, as you gen the pocket-knife to,
Mr. Tom?"
the rough-handle pocket-knife be take out in the same moment, and
the large blade open by way of irresistible demonstration.
"what! Bob Jakin?" say Tom, not with any cordial delight, for he feel
a little ashamed of that early intimacy symbolize by the
pocket-knife, and be not at all sure that Bob's motif for recall
it be entirely admirable.
"ay, ay, Bob Jakin, if Jakin it must be, 'cause therebe so many bob
as you go arter the squerril with, that day as I plump right down
from the bough, and bruise my shin a good un--but I get the squerril
tight for all that, an' a scratter it be. an' this littlish blade's
break, you see, but I wouldnot hev a new un put in, 'cause they might
be cheatin' I an' givin' I another knife instid, for there benot
such a blade I' the country,--it's get use to my hand, like. an'
there be niver nobody else gen I nothing but what I get by my own
sharpness, only you, Mr. Tom; if it benot Bill Fawks as gen I the
terri pup istid o' drowndin't it, an' I have to jaw he a good un
afore hewould give it I."
Bob speak with a sharp and rather treble volubility, and get through
his long speech with surprising despatch, give the blade of his
knife an affectionate rub on his sleeve when he have finish.
"well, Bob," say Tom, with a slight air of patronage, the foregoing
reminscence have dispose he to be as friendly as be become,
though there be no part of his acquaintance with Bob that he
remember well than the cause of their parting quarrel; "be there
anything I can do for you?"
"why, no, Mr. Tom," answer Bob, shut up his knife with a click
and return it to his pocket, where he seem to be feel for
something else. "I shouldnot ha' come back upon you now ye're I'
trouble, an' folk say as the master, as I use to frighten the bird
for, an' he flog I a bit for fun when he catch I eatin' the
turnip, as they say hewill niver lift up his head no more,--i shouldnot
ha' come now to ax you to gi' I another knife 'cause you gen I one
afore. if a chap give I one black eye, thatbe enough for I; I
sha'n't ax he for another afore I sarve he out; an' a good turn's
worth as much as a bad un, anyhow. I shall niver grow down'ards again,
Mr. Tom, an' you war the little chap as I like the good when _I_ war
a little chap, for all you leather I, and wouldnot look at I
again. therebe Dick Brumby, there, I could leather he as much as Iwould
a mind; but lor! you get tired o' leatherin' a chap when you can
niver make he see what you want he to shy at. I'n see chap as 'ud
stand starin' at a bough till their eye shoot out, afore theywould see as
a bird's tail warn't a leaf. itbe poor work go wi' such raff. but
you war allay a rare un at shy, Mr. Tom, an' I could trusten to
you for droppin' down wi' your stick in the nick o' time at a runnin'
rat, or a stoat, or that, when I war a-beatin' the bush."
Bob have draw out a dirty canvas bag, and would perhaps not have
pause just then if Maggie have not enter the room and dart a look
of surprise and curiosity at he, whereupon he pull his red lock
again with due respect. but the next moment the sense of the altered
room come upon Maggie with a force that overpower the thought of
Bob's presence. her eye have immediately glance from he to the place
where the bookcase have hang; there be nothing now but the oblong
unfade space on the wall, and below it the small table with the Bible
and the few other book.
"oh, Tom!" she burst out, clasp her hand, "where be the book? I
think my uncle Glegg say he would buy they. donot he? be those
all theyhave leave we?"
"I suppose so," say Tom, with a sort of desperate indifference. "why
should they buy many book when they buy so little furniture?"
"oh, but, Tom," say Maggie, her eye fill with tear, as she
rush up to the table to see what book have be rescue. "our dear
old Pilgrim's progress that you color with your little paint; and
that picture of Pilgrim with a mantle on, look just like a
turtle--oh dear!" Maggie go on, half sob as she turn over the
few book, "I think we should never part with that while we live;
everything be go away from we; the end of our life will have
nothing in it like the beginning!"
Maggie turn away from the table and throw herself into a chair, with
the big tear ready to roll down her cheek, quite blind to the
presence of Bob, who be look at she with the pursuant gaze of an
intelligent dumb animal, with perception more perfect than his
comprehension.
"well, Bob," say Tom, feel that the subject of the book be
unseasonable, "I suppose you just come to see I because webe in
trouble? that be very good-natured of you."
"Iwill tell you how it be, Master Tom," say Bob, begin to untwist
his canvas bag. "you see, I'n be with a barge this two 'ear; thatbe
how I'n be gettin' my livin',--if it benot when I be tentin' the
furnace, between while, at Torry's mill. but a fortni't ago Ihave a
rare bit o' luck,--I allays think I be a lucky chap, for I niver
set a trap but what I catch something; but this benot trap, it be
a fire I' Torry's mill, an' I douse it, else it 'ud set th' oil
alight, an' the genelman gen I ten suvreign; he gen I them himself
last week. an' he say first, I be a sperrited chap,--but I know
that afore,--but then he out wi' the ten suvreign, an' that war
summat new. here they be, all but one!" here Bob empty the canvas
bag on the table. "an' when Iwould get them, my head be all of a boil
like a kettle o' broth, thinkin' what sort o' life I should take to,
for there war a many trade Iwould think on; for as for the barge, Ibe
clean tired out wi't, for it pull the day out till theybe as long
as pig' chitterling. an' I think first Iwould ha' ferret an' dog,
an' be a rat-catcher; an' then I think as I should like a big way
o' life, as I donot know so well; for I'n see to the bottom o'
rat-catching; an' I think, an' thought, till at last I settle Iwould
be a packman,--for theybe knowin' feller, the packman are,--an' Iwould
carry the light thing I could I' my pack; an' therewould be a use for
a feller's tongue, as be no use neither wi' rat nor barge. an' I
should go about the country far an' wide, an' come round the woman wi'
my tongue, an' get my dinner hot at the public,--lors! it 'ud be a
lovely life!"
Bob pause, and then say, with defiant decision, as if resolutely
turn his back on that paradisaic picture:
"but I donot mind about it, not a chip! an' i'n change one o' the
suvreign to buy my mother a goose for dinner, an' i'n buy a blue
plush wescoat, an' a sealskin cap,--for if I mean to be a packman,
Iwould do it respectable. but I donot mind about it, not a chip! my yead
benot a turnip, an' I shall p'r'ap have a chance o' douse another
fire afore long. Ibe a lucky chap. so Iwill thank you to take the nine
suvreign, Mr. Tom, and set yoursen up with them somehow, if itbe true
as the master's break. they maynot go fur enough, but theywill help."
Tom be touch keenly enough to forget his pride and suspicion.
"yoube a very kind fellow, Bob," he say, color, with that little
diffident tremor in his voice which give a certain charm even to Tom's
pride and severity, "and I sha'n't forget you again, though I donot
know you this evening. but I cannot take the nine sovereign; I should
be take your little fortune from you, and they wouldnot do I much
good either."
"wouldnot they, Mr. Tom?" say Bob, regretfully. "now donot say so
'cause you think I want them. I benot a poor chap. my mother get a
good penn'orth wi' pick feather an' thing; an' if she eat
nothing but bread-an'-water, it run to fat. an' Ibe such a lucky
chap; an' I doubt you benot quite so lucky, Mr. Tom,--th' old master
benot, anyhow,--an' so you might take a slice o' my luck, an' no harm
do. lor! I find a leg o' pork I' the river one day; it have tumble
out o' one o' they round-sterne Dutchmen, Iwill be bind. come, think
well on it, Mr. Tom, for old 'quinetance' sake, else I shall think
you bear I a grudge."
Bob push the sovereign forward, but before Tom could speak Maggie,
clasp her hand, and look penitently at Bob. say:
"oh, Ibe so sorry, Bob; I never think you be so good. why, I think
yoube the kind person in the world!"
Bob have not be aware of the injurious opinion for which Maggie be
perform an inward act of penitence, but he smile with pleasure at
this handsome eulogy,--especially from a young lass who, as he
inform his mother that evening, have "such uncommon eye, they look
somehow as they make he feel nohow."
"no, indeed Bob, I cannot take they," say Tom; "but donot think I feel
your kindness less because I say no. I donot want to take anything
from anybody, but to work my own way. and those sovereign wouldnot
help I much--they wouldnot really--if I be to take they. let I
shake hand with you instead."
Tom put out his pink palm, and Bob be not slow to place his hard,
grimy hand within it.
"let I put the sovereign in the bag again," say Maggie; "and youwill
come and see we when youhave buy your pack, Bob."
"itbe like as if Iwould come out o' make believe, o' purpose to show them
you," say Bob, with an air of discontent, as Maggie give he the bag
again, "a-take them back I' this way. I _be_ a bit of a do, you know;
but it benot that sort o' do,--it's on'y when a fellerbe a big rogue,
or a big flat, I like to let he in a bit, thatbe all."
"now, donot you be up to any trick, Bob," say Tom, "else youwill get
transport some day."
"no, no; not I, Mr. Tom," say Bob, with an air of cheerful
confidence. "therebe no law again' flea-bite. if I benot to take a
fool in now and then, hewould niver get any wiser. but, lor! hev a
suvreign to buy you and Miss summat, on'y for a token--just to match
my pocket-knife."
while Bob be speak he lay down the sovereign, and resolutely
twist up his bag again. Tom push back the gold, and say, "no,
indeed, Bob; thank you heartily, but I cannot take it." and Maggie,
take it between her finger, hold it up to Bob and say, more
persuasively:
"not now, but perhaps another time. if ever Tom or my father want
help that you can give, wewill let you know; willnot we, Tom? thatbe what
you would like,--to have we always depend on you as a friend that we
can go to,--isn't it, Bob?"
"yes, Miss, and thank you," say Bob, reluctantly take the money;
"thatbe what Iwould like, anything as you like. an' I wish you good-by,
Miss, and good-luck, Mr. Tom, and thank you for shake hand wi' me,
_though_ you wouldnot take the money."
Kezia's entrance, with very black look, to inquire if she shouldnot
bring in the tea now, or whether the toast be to get harden to a
brick, be a seasonable check on Bob's flux of word, and hasten his
parting bow.
Chapter VII
how a hen take to Stratagem
the day pass, and Mr. Tulliver show, at least to the eye of the
medical man, strong and strong symptom of a gradual return to his
normal condition; the paralytic obstruction be, little by little,
lose its tenacity, and the mind be rise from under it with fitful
struggle, like a living creature make its way from under a great
snowdrift, that slide and slide again, and shut up the newly make
opening.
Time would have seem to creep to the watcher by the bed, if it have
only be measure by the doubtful, distant hope which keep count of
the moment within the chamber; but it be measure for they by a
fast-approach dread which make the night come too quickly. while
Mr. Tulliver be slowly become himself again, his lot be hasten
toward its moment of most palpable change. the tax-master have do
their work like any respectable gunsmith conscientiously prepare the
musket, that, duly point by a brave arm, will spoil a life or two.
allocatur, filing of bill in Chancery, decree of sale, be legal
chain-shot or bomb-shell that can never hit a solitary mark, but must
fall with widespread shattering. so deeply inherent be it in this life
of our that man have to suffer for each other's sin, so inevitably
diffusive be human suffering, that even justice make its victim, and
we can conceive no retribution that do not spread beyond its mark in
pulsation of unmerited pain.
by the beginning of the second week in January, the bill be out
advertise the sale, under a decree of Chancery, of Mr. Tulliver's
farming and other stock, to be follow by a sale of the mill and
land, hold in the proper after-dinner hour at the Golden Lion. the
miller himself, unaware of the lapse of time, fancy himself still in
that first stage of his misfortune when expedient might be think
of; and often in his conscious hour talk in a feeble, disjointed
manner of plan he would carry out when he "get well." the wife and
child be not without hope of an issue that would at least save
Mr. Tulliver from leave the old spot, and seek an entirely
strange life. for uncle Deane have be induce to interest himself in
this stage of the business. it would not, he acknowledge, be a bad
speculation for Guest & Co. to buy Dorlcote Mill, and carry on the
business, which be a good one, and might be increase by the addition
of steam power; in which case Tulliver might be retain as manager.
still, Mr. Deane would say nothing decide about the matter; the fact
that Wakem hold the mortgage on the land might put it into his head to
bid for the whole estate, and far, to outbid the cautious firm of
Guest &Co., who do not carry on business on sentimental ground. Mr.
Deane be oblige to tell Mrs. Tulliver something to that effect, when
he ride over to the mill to inspect the book in company with Mrs.
Glegg; for she have observe that "if Guest &Co. would only think about
it, Mr. Tulliver's father and grandfather have be carry on
Dorlcote Mill long before the oil-mill of that firm have be so much
as thought of."
Mr. Deane, in reply, doubt whether that be precisely the relation
between the two mill which would determine their value as
investment. as for uncle Glegg, the thing lie quite beyond his
imagination; the good-natured man feel sincere pity for the Tulliver
family, but his money be all lock up in excellent mortgage, and he
could run no risk; that would be unfair to his own relative; but he
have make up his mind that Tulliver should have some new flannel
waistcoat which he have himself renounce in favor of a more elastic
commodity, and that he would buy Mrs. Tulliver a pound of tea now and
then; it would be a journey which his benevolence delight in
beforehand, to carry the tea and see her pleasure on be assure it
be the good black.
still, it be clear that Mr. Deane be kindly dispose toward the
Tullivers. one day he have bring Lucy, who be come home for the
Christmas holiday, and the little blond angel-head have press itself
against Maggie's dark cheek with many kiss and some tear. these
fair slim daughter keep up a tender spot in the heart of many a
respectable partner in a respectable firm, and perhaps Lucy's anxious,
pity question about her poor cousin help to make uncle Deane
more prompt in find Tom a temporary place in the warehouse, and in
put he in the way of get evening lesson in book-keeping and
calculation.
that might have cheer the lad and feed his hope a little, if there
have not come at the same time the much-dread blow of find that
his father must be a bankrupt, after all; at least, the creditor must
be ask to take less than their due, which to Tom's untechnical mind
be the same thing as bankruptcy. his father must not only be say to
have "lose his property," but to have "failed,"--the word that carry
the bad obloquy to Tom's mind. for when the defendant's claim for
cost have be satisfy, there would remain the friendly bill of Mr.
Gore, and the deficiency at the bank, as well as the other debt which
would make the asset shrink into unequivocal disproportion; "not more
than ten or twelve shilling in the pound," predict Mr. Deane, in a
decide tone, tighten his lip; and the word fall on Tom like a
scalding liquied, leave a continual smart.
he be sadly in want of something to keep up his spirit a little in
the unpleasant newness of his position,--suddenly transport from the
easy carpet _ennui_ of study-hour at Mr. Stelling's, and the busy
idleness of castle-building in a "last half" at school, to the
companionship of sack and hide, and bawl man thunder down
heavy weight at his elbow. the first step toward get on in the
world be a chill, dusty, noisy affair, and imply go without
one's tea in order to stay in St. Ogg's and have an evening lesson
from a one-armed elderly clerk, in a room smell strongly of bad
tobacco. Tom's young pink-and-white face have its color very much
deaden by the time he take off his hat at home, and sit down with
keen hunger to his supper. no wonder he be a little cross if his
mother or Maggie speak to he.
but all this while Mrs. Tulliver be brood over a scheme by which
she, and no one else, would avert the result most to be dread, and
prevent Wakem from entertain the purpose of bidding for the mill.
imagine a truly respectable and amiable hen, by some portentous
anomaly, take to reflection and invent combination by which she
might prevail on Hodge not to wring her neck, or send she and her
chick to market; the result could hardly be other than much cackling
and flutter. Mrs. Tulliver, see that everything have go wrong,
have begin to think she have be too passive in life; and that, if she
have apply her mind to business, and take a strong resolution now
and then, it would have be all the well for she and her family.
nobody, it appear, have think of go to speak to Wakem on this
business of the mill; and yet, Mrs. Tulliver reflect, it would have
be quite the short method of secure the right end. it would
have be of no use, to be sure, for Mr. Tulliver to go,--even if he
have be able and willing,--for he have be "go to law against
Wakem" and abuse he for the last ten year; Wakem be always likely
to have a spite against he. and now that Mrs. Tulliver have come to
the conclusion that her husband be very much in the wrong to bring
she into this trouble, she be inclined to think that his opinion of
Wakem be wrong too. to be sure, Wakem have "put the bailie in the
house, and sell they up"; but she suppose he do that to please the
man that lend Mr. Tulliver the money, for a lawyer have more folk to
please than one, and he benot likely to put Mr. Tulliver, who have
go to law with he, above everybody else in the world. the attorney
might be a very reasonable man; why not? he have marry a Miss Clint,
and at the time Mrs. Tulliver have hear of that marriage, the summer
when she wear her blue satin spencer, and have not yet any thought of
Mr. Tulliver, she know no harm of Wakem. and certainly toward herself,
whom he know to have be a Miss Dodson, it be out of all possibility
that he could entertain anything but good-will, when it be once
bring home to his observation that she, for her part, have never
want to go to law, and indeed be at present dispose to take Mr.
Wakem's view of all subject rather than her husband's. in fact, if
that attorney see a respectable matron like herself dispose "to give
he good word," why shouldnot he listen to her representation? for
she would put the matter clearly before he, which have never be do
yet. and he would never go and bid for the mill on purpose to spite
she, an innocent woman, who think it likely enough that she have
dance with he in their youth at Squire Darleigh's, for at those big
dance she have often and often dance with young man whose name she
have forget.
Mrs. Tulliver hide these reasoning in her own bosom; for when she have
throw out a hint to Mr. Deane and Mr. Glegg that she wouldnot mind
go to speak to Wakem herself, they have say, "no, no, no," and
"Pooh, pooh," and "let Wakem alone," in the tone of man who be not
likely to give a candid attention to a more definite exposition of her
project; still less dare she mention the plan to Tom and Maggie, for
"the child be always so against everything their mother say";
and Tom, she observe, be almost as much set against Wakem as his
father be. but this unusual concentration of thought naturally give
Mrs. Tulliver an unusual power of device and determination: and a day
or two before the sale, to be hold at the Golden Lion, when there be
no long any time to be lose, she carry out her plan by a
stratagem. there be pickle in question, a large stock of pickle
and ketchup which Mrs. Tulliver possess, and which Mr. Hyndmarsh,
the grocer, would certainly purchase if she could transact the
business in a personal interview, so she would walk with Tom to St.
Oggbe that morning; and when Tom urge that she might let the pickle
be at present,--he donot like she to go about just yet,--she appear
so hurt at this conduct in her son, contradict she about pickle
which she have make after the family receipt inherit from his own
grandmother, who have die when his mother be a little girl, that he
give way, and they walk together until she turn toward Danish
Street, where Mr. Hyndmarsh retail his grocery, not far from the
office of Mr. Wakem.
that gentleman be not yet come to his office; would Mrs. Tulliver sit
down by the fire in his private room and wait for he? she have not
long to wait before the punctual attorney enter, knit his brow
with an examine glance at the stout blond woman who rise, curtsying
deferentially,--a tallish man, with an aquiline nose and abundant
iron-gray hair. you have never see Mr. Wakem before, and be possibly
wonder whether he be really as eminent a rascal, and as crafty,
bitter an enemy of honest humanity in general, and of Mr. Tulliver in
particular, as he be represent to be in that eidolon or portrait of
he which we have see to exist in the miller's mind.
it be clear that the irascible miller be a man to interpret any
chance-shot that graze he as an attempt on his own life, and be
liable to entanglement in this puzzle world, which, due
consideration have to his own infallibility, require the hypothesis of
a very active diabolical agency to explain they. it be still possible
to believe that the attorney be not more guilty toward he than an
ingenious machine, which perform its work with much regularity, be
guilty toward the rash man who, venture too near it, be catch up by
some fly-wheel or other, and suddenly convert into unexpected
mince-meat.
but it be really impossible to decide this question by a glance at his
person; the line and light of the human countenance be like other
symbols,--not always easy to read without a key. on an _a priori_ view
of Wakem's aquiline nose, which offend Mr. Tulliver, there be not
more rascality than in the shape of his stiff shirt-collar, though
this too along with his nose, might have become fraught with damnatory
meaning when once the rascality be ascertain.
"Mrs. Tulliver, I think?" say Mr. Wakem.
"yes, sir; Miss Elizabeth Dodson as be."
"pray be seat. you have some business with I?"
"well, sir, yes," say Mrs. Tulliver, begin to feel alarmed at her
own courage, now she be really in presence of the formidable man, and
reflect that she have not settle with herself how she should begin.
Mr. Wakem feel in his waistcoat pocket, and look at she in silence.
"I hope, sir," she begin at last,--"I hope, sir, yoube not a-thinking
as _i_ bear you any ill-will because o' my husband's lose his
lawsuit, and the bailie be put in, and the linen be sold,--oh
dear!--for I benot bring up in that way. Ibe sure you remember my
father, sir, for he be close friend with Squire Darleigh, and we
allay go to the dance there, the Miss dodsons,--nobody could be
more look on,--and justly, for there be four of we, and yoube
quite aware as Mrs. Glegg and Mrs. Deane be my sister. and as for
go to law and lose money, and have sale before yoube dead, I
never see anything o' that before I be marry, nor for a long while
after. and Ibe not to be answerable for my bad luck I' marry out o'
my own family into one where the going-on be different. and as for
be draw in t' abuse you as other folk abuse you, sir, _that_ I
niver be, and nobody can say it of I."
Mrs. Tulliver shake her head a little, and look at the hem of her
pocket-handkerchief.
"Ihave no doubt of what you say, Mrs. Tulliver," say Mr. Wakem, with
cold politeness. "but you have some question to ask I?"
"well, sir, yes. but thatbe what Ihave say to myself,--I've say youwould
have some nat'ral feeling; and as for my husband, as havenot be
himself for this two month, Ibe not a-defend he, in no way, for
be so hot about th' erigation,--not but what therebe bad man, for
he never wrong nobody of a shilling nor a penny, not willingly; and
as for his fieriness and lawing, what could I do? and he strike as if
it be with death when he get the letter as say youwould the hold upo'
the land. but I cannot believe but what youwill behave as a gentleman."
"what do all this mean, Mrs. Tulliver?" say Mr. Wakem rather
sharply. "what do you want to ask I?"
"why, sir, if youwill be so good," say Mrs. Tulliver, start a
little, and speak more hurriedly,--"if youwill be so good not to buy
the mill an' the land,--the land wouldnot so much matter, only my
husband ull' be like mad at your have it."
something like a new thought flash across Mr. Wakem's face as he
say, "who tell you I mean to buy it?"
"why, sir, itbe none o' my inventing, and I should never ha' thought
of it; for my husband, as ought to know about the law, he allay use
to say as lawyer have never no call to buy anything,--either land or
houses,--for they allay get them into their hand other way. an' I
should think that 'ud be the way with you, sir; and I niver say as
youwould be the man to do contrairy to that."
"ah, well, who be it that _do_ say so?" say Wakem, open his
desk, and move thing about, with the accompaniment of an almost
inaudible whistle.
"why, sir, it be Mr. Glegg and Mr. Deane, as have all the management;
and Mr. Deane think as Guest &Co. 'ud buy the mill and let Mr.
Tulliver work it for them, if you donot bid for it and raise the
price. and it 'ud be such a thing for my husband to stay where he be,
if he could get his living: for it be his father's before he, the
mill be, and his grandfather build it, though I benot fond o' the
noise of it, when first I be marry, for there be no mill in our
family,--not the dodson's,--and if Ihave know as the mill have so much
to do with the law, it wouldnot have be I as 'ud have be the
first Dodson to marry one; but I go into it blindfold, that I do,
erigation and everything."
"what! Guest &Co. would keep the mill in their own hand, I suppose,
and pay your husband wage?"
"oh dear, sir, itbe hard to think of," say poor Mrs. Tulliver, a
little tear make its way, "as my husband should take wage. but it
'ud look more like what use to be, to stay at the mill than to go
anywhere else; and if youwill only think--if you be to bid for the
mill and buy it, my husband might be strike bad than he be before,
and niver get well again as hebe get now."
"well, but if I buy the mill, and allow your husband to act as my
manager in the same way, how then?" say Mr. Wakem.
"oh, sir, I doubt he could niver be get to do it, not if the very mill
stand still to beg and pray of he. for your name's like poison to
he, itbe so as never be; and he look upon it as youhave be the
ruin of he all along, ever since you set the law on he about the
road through the meadow,--that's eight year ago, and hebe be go
on ever since--as Ihave allay tell he he be wrong----"
"hebe a pig-head, foul-mouthed fool!" burst out Mr. Wakem,
forget himself.
"oh dear, sir!" say Mrs. Tulliver, frighten at a result so
different from the one she have fix her mind on; "I wouldnot wish to
contradict you, but itbe like enough hebe change his mind with this
illness,--he's forget a many thing he use to talk about. and you
wouldnot like to have a corpse on your mind, if he be to die; and
they _do_ say as itbe allay unlucky when Dorlcote Mill change hand,
and the water might all run away, and _then_--not as Ibe wish you
any ill-luck, sir, for I forgot to tell you as I remember your wedding
as if it be yesterday; Mrs. Wakem be a Miss Clint, I know _that;_
and my boy, as there benot a nicer, handsomer, straight boy nowhere,
go to school with your son----"
Mr. Wakem rise, open the door, and call to one of his clerk.
"you must excuse I for interrupt you, Mrs. Tulliver; I have
business that must be attend to; and I think there be nothing more
necessary to be say."
"but if you _would_ bear it in mind, sir," say Mrs. Tulliver, rise,
"and not run against I and my child; and Ibe not deny Mr.
Tulliverbe be in the wrong, but hebe be punish enough, and
therebe bad man, for itbe be give to other folk have be his
fault. hebe do nobody any harm but himself and his family,--the
morebe the pity,--and I go and look at the bare shelf every day, and
think where all my thing use to stand."
"yes, yes, Iwill bear it in mind," say Mr. Wakem, hastily, look
toward the open door.
"and if youwould please not to say as Ihave be to speak to you, for my
son 'ud be very angry with I for demean myself, I know he would,
and Ihave trouble enough without be scold by my child."
Poor Mrs. Tulliver's voice tremble a little, and she could make no
answer to the attorney's "good morning," but curtsy and walk out
in silence.
"which day be it that Dorlcote Mill be to be sell? wherebe the bill?"
say Mr. Wakem to his clerk when they be alone.
"next Friday be the day,--friday at six o'clock."
"oh, just run to Winship's the auctioneer, and see if hebe at home. I
have some business for he; ask he to come up."
although, when Mr. Wakem enter his office that morning, he have have
no intention of purchase Dorlcote Mill, his mind be already make
up. Mrs. Tulliver have suggest to he several determine motif,
and his mental glance be very rapid; he be one of those man who can
be prompt without be rash, because their motif run in fix
track, and they have no need to reconcile conflicting aim.
to suppose that Wakem have the same sort of inveterate hatred toward
Tulliver that Tulliver have toward he would be like suppose that a
pike and a roach can look at each other from a similar point of view.
the roach necessarily abhor the mode in which the pike get his
living, and the pike be likely to think nothing far even of the
most indignant roach than that he be excellent good eating; it could
only be when the roach choke he that the pike could entertain a
strong personal animosity. if Mr. Tulliver have ever seriously injure
or thwart the attorney, Wakem would not have refuse he the
distinction of be a special object of his vindictiveness. but when
Mr. Tulliver call Wakem a rascal at the market dinner-table, the
attorney' client be not a whit incline to withdraw their business
from he; and if, when Wakem himself happen to be present, some
jocose cattle-feeder, stimulate by opportunity and brandy, make a
thrust at he by allude to old lady' will, he maintain perfect
_sing froid_, and know quite well that the majority of substantial man
then present be perfectly content with the fact that "Wakem be
Wakem"; that be to say, a man who always know the step-stone that
would carry he through very muddy bit of practice. a man who have
make a large fortune, have a handsome house among the tree at Tofton,
and decidedly the fine stock of port-wine in the neighborhood of St.
Ogg's, be likely to feel himself on a level with public opinion. and
I be not sure that even honest Mr. Tulliver himself, with his general
view of law as a cockpit, might not, under opposite circumstance,
have see a fine appropriateness in the truth that "Wakem be Wakem";
since I have understand from person verse in history, that mankind
be not disposed to look narrowly into the conduct of great victor
when their victory be on the right side. Tulliver, then, could be no
obstruction to Wakem; on the contrary, he be a poor devil whom the
lawyer have defeat several time; a hot-temper fellow, who would
always give you a handle against he. Wakem's conscience be not
uneasy because he have use a few trick against the miller; why should
he hate that unsuccessful plaintiff, that pitiable, furious bull
entangle in the mesh of a net?
still, among the various excess to which human nature be subject,
moralist have never number that of be too fond of the people who
openly revile we. the successful yellow candidate for the borough of
Old Topping, perhaps, feel no pursuant meditative hatred toward the
blue editor who console his subscriber with vituperative rhetoric
against yellow man who sell their country, and be the demon of
private life; but he might not be sorry, if law and opportunity
favor, to kick that blue editor to a deep shade of his favorite
color. prosperous man take a little vengeance now and then, as they
take a diversion, when it come easily in their way, and be no
hindrance to business; and such small unimpassioned revenge have an
enormous effect in life, run through all degree of pleasant
infliction, block the fit man out of place, and blacken
character in unpremeditated talk. still more, to see people who have
be only insignificantly offensive to we reduce in life and
humiliate, without any special effort of ours, be apt to have a
soothing, flattering influence. providence or some other prince of
this world, it appear, have undertake the task of retribution for we;
and really, by an agreeable constitution of thing, our enemy
somehow _donot_ prosper.
Wakem be not without this parenthetic vindictiveness toward the
uncomplimentary miller; and now Mrs. Tulliver have put the notion into
his head, it present itself to he as a pleasure to do the very
thing that would cause Mr. Tulliver the most deadly mortification,--
and a pleasure of a complex kind, not make up of crude malice, but
mingle with it the relish of self-approbation. to see an enemy
humiliate give a certain contentment, but this be jejune compare
with the highly blent satisfaction of see he humiliate by your
benevolent action or concession on his behalf. that be a sort of
revenge which fall into the scale of virtue, and Wakem be not without
an intention of keep that scale respectably fill. he have once
have the pleasure of put an old enemy of his into one of the St.
Ogg's alm-house, to the rebuilding of which he have give a large
subscription; and here be an opportunity of provide for another by
make he his own servant. such thing give a completeness to
prosperity, and contribute element of agreeable consciousness that
be not dream of by that short-sight, overheat vindictiveness
which go out its way to wreak itself in direct injury. and Tulliver,
with his rough tongue file by a sense of obligation, would make a
well servant than any chance-fellow who be cap-in-hand for a
situation. Tulliver be know to be a man of proud honesty, and Wakem
be too acute not to believe in the existence of honesty. he be give
too observing individual, not to judging of they accord to maxim,
and no one know well than he that all man be not like himself.
besides, he intend to overlook the whole business of land and mill
pretty closely; he be fond of these practical rural matter. but
there be good reason for purchase Dorlcote Mill, quite apart from
any benevolent vengeance on the miller. it be really a capital
investment; besides, Guest &Co. be go to bid for it. Mr. Guest
and Mr. Wakem be on friendly dining term, and the attorney like to
predominate over a ship-owner and mill-owner who be a little too loud
in the town affair as well as in his table-talk. for Wakem be not a
mere man of business; he be consider a pleasant fellow in the upper
circle of St. Ogg's--chat amusingly over his port-wine, do a
little amateur farming, and have certainly be an excellent husband
and father; at church, when he go there, he sit under the handsome
of mural monument erect to the memory of his wife. Most man would
have marry again under his circumstance, but he be say to be more
tender to his deformed son than most man be to their good-shapen
offspring. not that Mr. Wakem have not other son beside Philip; but
toward they he hold only a chiaroscuro parentage, and provide for
they in a grade of life duly beneath his own. in this fact, indeed,
there lie the clenching motive to the purchase of Dorlcote Mill. while
Mrs. Tulliver be talk, it have occur to the rapid-minded lawyer,
among all the other circumstance of the case, that this purchase
would, in a few year to come, furnish a highly suitable position for
a certain favorite lad whom he mean to bring on in the world.
these be the mental condition on which Mrs. Tulliver have undertake
to act persuasively, and have fail; a fact which may receive some
illustration from the remark of a great philosopher, that fly-fisher
fail in prepare their bait so as to make it alluring in the right
quarter, for want of a due acquaintance with the subjectivity of
fish.
Chapter VIII
Daylight on the wreck
it be a clear frosty January day on which Mr. Tulliver first come
downstair. the bright sun on the chestnut bough and the roof
opposite his window have make he impatiently declare that he would be
cage up no long; he think everywhere would be more cheery under
this sunshine than his bedroom; for he know nothing of the bareness
below, which make the flood of sunshine importunate, as if it have an
unfeele pleasure in show the empty place, and the mark where
well-know object once have be. the impression on his mind that it
be but yesterday when he receive the letter from Mr. Gore be so
continually imply in his talk, and the attempt to convey to he the
idea that many week have pass and much have happen since then have
be so soon sweep away by recurrent forgetfulness, that even Mr.
Turnbull have begin to despair of prepare he to meet the fact by
previous knowledge. the full sense of the present could only be
impart gradually by new experience,--not by mere word, which must
remain weak than the impression leave by the _old_ experience. this
resolution to come downstairs be hear with trembling by the wife and
child. Mrs. Tulliver say Tom must not go to St. Ogg's at the usual
hour, he must wait and see his father downstairs; and Tom comply,
though with an intense inward shrink from the painful scene. the
heart of all three have be more deeply dejected than ever during the
last few day. for Guest & Co. have not buy the mill; both mill and
land have be knock down to Wakem, who have be over the premise,
and have lay before Mr. Deane and Mr. Glegg, in Mrs. Tulliver's
presence, his willingness to employ Mr. Tulliver, in case of his
recovery, as a manager of the business. this proposition have
occasion much family debating. uncle and aunt be almost
unanimously of opinion that such an offer ought not to be reject
when there be nothing in the way but a feeling in Mr. Tulliver's
mind, which, as neither aunt nor uncle share it, be regard as
entirely unreasonable and childish,--indeed, as a transferring toward
Wakem of that indignation and hatred which Mr. Tulliver ought properly
to have direct against himself for his general quarrelsomeness, and
his special exhibition of it in go to law. here be an opportunity
for Mr. Tulliver to provide for his wife and daughter without any
assistance from his wife's relation, and without that too evident
descent into pauperism which make it annoying to respectable people
to meet the degraded member of the family by the wayside. Mr.
Tulliver, Mrs. Glegg consider, must be make to feel, when he come to
his right mind, that he could never humble himself enough; for _that_
have come which she have always foresee would come of his insolence in
time past "to they as be the good friend hewould get to look to." Mr
Glegg and Mr. Deane be less stern in their view, but they both of
they think Tulliver have do enough harm by his hot-temper
crotchet and ought to put they out of the question when a livelihood
be offer he; Wakem show a right feeling about the matter,--_he_
have no grudge against Tulliver.
Tom have protest against entertain the proposition. he shouldnot
like his father to be under Wakem; he think it would look
mean-spirited; but his mother's main distress be the utter
impossibility of ever "turn Mr. Tulliver round about Wakem," or
get he to hear reason; no, they would all have to go and live in
a pigsty on purpose to spite Wakem, who speak "so as nobody could be
fair." indeed, Mrs. Tulliver's mind be reduce to such confusion by
live in this strange medium of unaccountable sorrow, against which
she continually appeal by ask, "oh dear, what _have_ I do to
deserve bad than other woman?" that Maggie begin to suspect her poor
mother's wit be quite go.
"Tom," she say, when they be out of their father's room together,
"we _must_ try to make father understand a little of what have happen
before he go downstairs. but we must get my mother away. she will
say something that will do harm. ask Kezia to fetch she down, and keep
she engage with something in the kitchen."
Kezia be equal to the task. have declare her intention of stay
till the master could get about again, "wage or no wage," she have
find a certain recompense in keep a strong hand over her mistress,
scold she for "moithere" herself, and go about all day without
change her cap, and look as if she be "mush." altogether, this
time of trouble be rather a saturnalian time to Kezia; she could
scold her better with unreproved freedom. on this particular occasion
there be dry clothe to be fetch in; she wish to know if one
pair of hand could do everything in-door and out, and observe that
_she_ should have think it would be good for Mrs. Tulliver to put on
her bonnet, and get a breath of fresh air by do that needful piece
of work. poor Mrs. Tulliver go submissively downstairs; to be
order about by a servant be the last remnant of her household
dignities,--she would soon have no servant to scold she. Mr. Tulliver
be rest in his chair a little after the fatigue of dressing, and
Maggie and Tom be seat near he, when Luke enter to ask if he
should help master downstairs.
"ay, ay, Luke; stop a bit, sit down," say Mr. Tulliver point his
stick toward a chair, and look at he with that pursuant gaze which
convalescent person often have for those who have tend they,
remind one of an infant gaze about after its nurse. for Luke have
be a constant night-watcher by his master's bed.
"howbe the water now, eh, Luke?" say Mr. Tulliver. "Dix havenot be
choke you up again, eh?"
"no, sir, itbe all right."
"ay, I think not; he willnot be in a hurry at that again, now Riley's
be to settle he. that be what I say to Riley yesterday--I
said----"
Mr. Tulliver lean forward, rest his elbow on the armchair, and
look on the ground as if in search of something, strive after
vanish image like a man struggle against a doze. Maggie look
at Tom in mute distress, their father's mind be so far off the
present, which would by-and-by thrust itself on his wandering
consciousness! Tom be almost ready to rush away, with that impatience
of painful emotion which make one of the difference between youth
and maiden, man and woman.
"Father," say Maggie, lay her hand on his, "donot you remember
that Mr. Riley be dead?"
"dead?" say Mr. Tulliver, sharply, look in her face with a
strange, examine glance.
"yes, he die of apoplexy nearly a year ago. I remember hear you
say you have to pay money for he; and he leave his daughter badly off;
one of they be under-teacher at Miss Firniss's, where Ihave be to
school, you know."
"ah?" say her father, doubtfully, still look in her face. but as
soon as Tom begin to speak he turn to look at _he_ with the same
inquire glance, as if he be rather surprised at the presence of
these two young people. whenever his mind be wander in the far
past, he fall into this oblivion of their actual face; they be not
those of the lad and the little wench who belong to that past.
"itbe a long while since you have the dispute with Dix, father," say
Tom. "I remember your talk about it three year ago, before I go
to school at Mr. Stelling's. Ihave be at school there three year;
donot you remember?"
Mr. Tulliver throw himself backward again, lose the childlike
outward glance under a rush of new idea, which divert he from
external impression.
"ay, ay," he say, after a minute or two, "Ihave pay a deal o'
money--I be determine my son should have a good eddication; Ihave none
myself, and Ihave feel the miss of it. and hewill want no other fortin,
thatbe what I say--if Wakem be to get the well of I again----"
the thought of Wakem rouse new vibration, and after a moment's pause
he begin to look at the coat he have on, and to feel in his
side-pocket. then he turn to Tom, and say in his old sharp way,
"where have they put Gore's letter?"
it be close at hand in a drawer, for he have often ask for it
before.
"you know what there be in the letter, father?" say Tom, as he give
it to he.
"to be sure I do," say Mr. Tulliver, rather angrily. "what o' that?
if Furley cannot take to the property, somebody else can; therebe
plenty o' people in the world besides Furley. but itbe hinder--my
not be well--go and tell them to get the horse in the gig, Luke; I
can get down to St. Ogg's well enough--Gore's expect I."
"no, dear father!" Maggie burst out entreatingly; "itbe a very long
while since all that; youhave be ill a great many weeks,--more than
two month; everything be change."
Mr. Tulliver look at they all three alternately with a startled
gaze; the idea that much have happen of which he know nothing have
often transiently arrest he before, but it come upon he now with
entire novelty.
"yes, father," say Tom, in answer to the gaze. "you neednot trouble
your mind about business until you be quite well; everything be
settle about that for the present,--about the mill and the land and
the debt."
"whatbe settle, then?" say his father, angrily.
"donot you take on too much bout it, sir," say Luke. "youwould ha' pay
iverybody if you could,--thatbe what I say to Master tom,--i say
youwould ha' pay iverybody if you could."
Good Luke feel, after the manner of content hard-work man whose
life have be spend in servitude, that sense of natural fitness in
rank which make his master's downfall a tragedy to he. he be urge,
in his slow way, to say something that would express his share in the
family sorrow; and these word, which he have use over and over again
to Tom when he want to decline the full payment of his fifty pound
out of the child's money, be the most ready to his tongue. they
be just the word to lay the most painful hold on his master's
bewildered mind.
"pay everybody?" he say, with vehement agitation, his face flush,
and his eye light up. "why--what--have they make I a _bankrupt?_"
"oh, father, dear father!" say Maggie, who think that terrible word
really represent the fact; "bear it well, because we love you; your
child will always love you. Tom will pay they all; he say he will,
when hebe a man."
she feel her father begin to tremble; his voice tremble too, as
he say, after a few moment:
"ay, my little wench, but I shall never live twice o'er."
"but perhaps you will live to see I pay everybody, father," say Tom,
speak with a great effort.
"ah, my lad," say Mr. Tulliver, shake his head slowly, "but whatbe
broke can never be whole again; it 'ud be your doing, not mine." then
look up at he, "yoube only sixteen; itbe an up-hill fight for
you, but you mustnot throw it at your father; the raskill have be
too many for he. Ihave give you a good eddication,--that'll start
you."
something in his throat half choke the last word; the flush, which
have alarm his child because it have so often precede a recurrence
of paralysis, have subside, and his face look pale and tremulous.
Tom say nothing; he be still struggle against his inclination to
rush away. his father remain quiet a minute or two, but his mind do
not seem to be wander again.
"have they sell I up, then?" he say more clamly, as if he be
possess simply by the desire to know what have happen.
"everything be sell, father; but we donot know all about the mill and
the land yet," say Tom, anxious to ward off any question lead to
the fact that Wakem be the purchaser.
"you must not be surprised to see the room look very bare downstair,
father," say Maggie; "but therebe your chair and the bureau;
_theybe_ not go."
"let we go; help I down, luke,--i'll go and see everything," say Mr.
Tulliver, lean on his stick, and stretch out his other hand
toward Luke.
"ay, sir," say Luke, as he give his arm to his master, "youwill make
up your mind to't a bit well when youhave see iverything; youwill get
use to't. thatbe what my mother say about her shortness o'
breath,--she say shebe make friend wi't now, though she fight
again' it sore when it just come on."
Maggie run on before to see that all be right in the dreary parlor,
where the fire, dull by the frosty sunshine, seem part of the
general shabbiness. she turn her father's chair, and push aside
the table to make an easy way for he, and then stand with a beat
heart to see he enter and look round for the first time. Tom advance
before he, carry the leg-rest, and stand beside Maggie on the
hearth. of those two young heart Tom's suffer the most unmixed
pain, for Maggie, with all her keen susceptibility, yet feel as if the
sorrow make large room for her love to flow in, and give
breathing-space to her passionate nature. no true boy feel that; he
would rather go and slay the nemean lion, or perform any round of
heroic labor, than endure perpetual appeal to his pity, for evil
over which he can make no conquest.
Mr. Tulliver pause just inside the door, rest on Luke, and look
round he at all the bare place, which for he be fill with the
shadow of depart objects,--the daily companion of his life. his
faculty seem to be renew their strength from get a footing
on this demonstration of the sens.
"ah!" he say slowly, move toward his chair, "theyhave sell I
up--they've sell I up."
then seat himself, and lay down his stick, while Luke leave the
room, he look round again.
"theyhave leave the big Bible," he say. "itbe get everything in,--when
I be bear and marry; bring it I, Tom."
the quarto Bible be lay open before he at the fly-leaf, and while
he be read with slowly travel eye Mrs. Tulliver enter the
room, but stand in mute surprise to find her husband down already, and
with the great Bible before he.
"ah," he say, look at a spot where his finger rest, "my mother
be Margaret Beaton; she die when she be forty-seven,--her benot a
long-live family; webe our mother's child, Gritty and I are,--we
shall go to our last bed before long."
he seem to be pause over the record of his sister's birth and
marriage, as if it be suggest new thought to he; then he
suddenly look up at Tom, and say, in a sharp tone of alarm:
"they havenot come upo' Moss for the money as I lend he, have they?"
"no, father," say Tom; "the note be burn."
Mr. Tulliver turn his eye on the page again, and presently say:
"ah--Elizabeth Dodson--itbe eighteen year since I marry her----"
"come next Ladyday," say Mrs. Tulliver, go up to his side and
look at the page.
her husband fix his eye earnestly on her face.
"poor Bessy," he say, "you be a pretty lass then,--everybody say
so,--and I use to think you keep your good look rarely. but yoube
sorely aged; donot you bear I ill-will--I mean to do well by you--we
promise one another for well or for worse----"
"but I never think it 'ud be so for bad as this," say poor Mrs.
Tulliver, with the strange, scared look that have come over she of
late; "and my poor father give I away--and to come on so all at
once----"
"oh, mother!" say Maggie, "donot talk in that way."
"no, I know you willnot let your poor mother speak--thatbe be the way
all my life--your father never minded what I say--it 'ud have be o'
no use for I to beg and pray--and it 'ud be no use now, not if I be
to go down o' my hand and knees----"
"donot say so, Bessy," say Mr. Tulliver, whose pride, in these first
moment of humiliation, be in abeyance to the sense of some justice
in his wife's reproach. "it therebe anything leave as I could do to
make you amend, I wouldnot say you nay."
"then we might stay here and get a living, and I might keep among my
own sisters,--and I be such a good wife to you, and never cross
you from week's end to week's end--and they all say so--they say it
'ud be nothing but right, only yoube so turn against Wakem."
"Mother," say Tom, severely, "this be not the time to talk about
that."
"let she be," say Mr. Tulliver. "say what you mean, Bessy."
"why, now the mill and the land's all Wakem's, and hebe get everything
in his hand, whatbe the use o' set your face against he, when he
say you may stay here, and speak as fair as can be, and say you may
manage the business, and have thirty shilling a-week, and a horse to
ride about to market? and where have we get to put our head? we must
go into one o' the cottage in the village,--and I and my child
bring down to that,--and all because you must set your mind against
folk till therebe no turn you."
Mr. Tulliver have sink back in his chair trembling.
"you may do as you like wi' me, Bessy," he say, in a low voice; "Ihave
be the bringing of you to poverty--this world's too many for I--I'm
nought but a bankrupt; itbe no use stand up for anything now."
"Father," say Tom, "I donot agree with my mother or my uncle, and I
donot think you ought to submit to be under Wakem. I get a pound
a-week now, and you can find something else to do when you get well."
"say no more, Tom, say no more; Ihave have enough for this day. give I
a kiss, Bessy, and let we bear one another no ill-will; we shall never
be young again--this worldbe be too many for I."
chapter IX
An Item add to the Family Register
that first moment of renunciation and submission be follow by day
of violent struggle in the miller's mind, as the gradual access of
bodily strength bring with it increase ability to embrace in one
view all the conflict condition under which he find himself.
feeble limb easily resign themselves to be tether, and when we be
subdue by sickness it seem possible to we to fulfil pledge which
the old vigor come back and break. there be time when poor
Tulliver think the fulfilment of his promise to Bessy be something
quite too hard for human nature; he have promise she without know
what she be go to say,--she might as well have ask he to carry
a ton weight on his back. but again, there be many feeling argue
on her side, besides the sense that life have be make hard to she by
have marry he. he see a possibility, by much pinching, of save
money out of his salary toward pay a second dividend to his
creditor, and it would not be easy elsewhere to get a situation such
as he could fill.
he have lead an easy life, order much and work little, and have no
aptitude for any new business. he must perhaps take to day-labor, and
his wife must have help from her sisters,--a prospect doubly bitter to
he, now they have let all Bessy's precious thing be sell, probably
because they like to set she against he, by make she feel that he
have bring she to that pass. he listen to their admonitory talk,
when they come to urge on he what he be bind to do for poor Bessy's
sake, with avert eye, that every now and then flash on they
furtively when their back be turn. nothing but the dread of
need their help could have make it an easy alternative to take
their advice.
but the strong influence of all be the love of the old premise
where he have run about when he be a boy, just as Tom have do after
he. the Tullivers have live on this spot for generation, and he have
sit listen on a low stool on winter evening while his father
talk of the old half-timbere mill that have be there before the
last great flood which damage it so that his grandfather pull it
down and build the new one. it be when he get able to walk about and
look at all the old object that he feel the strain of his clinging
affection for the old home as part of his life, part of himself. he
couldnot bear to think of himself live on any other spot than this,
where he know the sound of every gate door, and feel that the shape
and color of every roof and weather-stain and broken hillock be good,
because his grow sens have be feed on they. our instructed
vagrancy, which be hardly time to linger by the hedgerow, but run
away early to the tropic, and be at home with palm and
banyans,--which be nourish on book of travel and stretch the
theatre of its imagination to the Zambesi,--can hardly get a dim
notion of what an old-fashioned man like Tulliver feel for this spot,
where all his memory centre, and where life seem like a familiar
smooth-handle tool that the finger clutch with love ease. and just
now he be live in that freshen memory of the far-off time which
come to we in the passive hour of recovery from sickness.
"ay, Luke," he say one afternoon, as he stand look over the
orchard gate, "I remember the day they plant those apple-tree. my
father be a huge man for planting,--it be like a merry-making to he
to get a cart full o' young tree; and I use to stand I' the cold
with he, and follow he about like a dog."
then he turn round, and lean against the gate-post, look at the
opposite building.
"the old mill 'ud miss I, I think, Luke. therebe a story as when the
mill change hand, the river's angry; Ihave hear my father say it
many a time. therebe no telling whether there maynot be summat _in_
the story, for this be a puzzle world, and Old Harry's get a finger
in it--itbe be too many for I, I know."
"ay, sir," say Luke, with soothe sympathy, "what wi' the rust on
the wheat, an' the firin' o' the rick an' that, as Ihave see I' my
time,--thing often look comical; therebe the bacon fat wi' our last
pig run away like butter,--it leave nought but a scratchin'."
"itbe just as if it be yesterday, now," Mr. Tulliver go on, "when
my father begin the malting. I remember, the day they finish the
malt-house, I think summat great be to come of it; for we'd a
plum-pudding that day and a bit of a feast, and I say to my
mother,--she be a fine dark-eyed woman, my mother was,--the little
wench 'ull be as like she as two pea." here Mr. Tulliver put his
stick between his leg, and take out his snuff-box, for the great
enjoyment of this anecdote, which drop from he in fragment, as if
he every other moment lose narration in vision. "I be a little chap
no higher much than my mother's knee,--she be sore fond of we
child, Gritty and me,--and so I say to she, 'mother,' I say,
'shall we have plum-pudding _every_ day because o' the malt-house? she
use to tell I o' that till her die day. she be but a young woman
when she die, my mother be. but itbe forty good year since they
finish the malt-house, and it benot many day out of them all as I
havenot look out into the yard there, the first thing in the
morning,--all weather, from year's end to year's end. I should go off
my head in a new place. I should be like as if Ihave lose my way. itbe
all hard, whichever way I look at it,--the harness 'ull gall I, but
it 'ud be summat to draw along the old road, instead of a new un."
"ay, sir," say Luke, "youwould be a deal well here nor in some new
place. I cannot abide new place mysen: thing be allays
awk'ard,--narrow-wheel waggin, belike, and the stile all another
sort, an' oat-cake I' some place, tow'rt th' head o' the Floss,
there. itbe poor work, change your country-side."
"but I doubt, Luke, theywill be for get rid o' Ben, and make you
do with a lad; and I must help a bit wi' the mill. youwill have a bad
place."
"ne'er mind, sir," say Luke, "I sha'n't plague mysen. I'n be wi'
you twenty year, an' you cannot get twenty year wi' whistlin' for them,
no more nor you can make the tree grow: you mun wait till God
A'mighty send them. I cannot abide new victual nor new face, _i_
can't,--you niver know but what theywill gripe you."
the walk be finish in silence after this, for Luke have disburthene
himself of thought to an extent that leave his conversational
resource quite barren, and Mr. Tulliver have relapse from his
recollection into a painful meditation on the choice of hardship
before he. Maggie notice that he be unusually absent that evening
at tea; and afterward he sit lean forward in his chair, look at
the ground, move his lip, and shake his head from time to time.
then he look hard at Mrs. Tulliver, who be knit opposite he,
then at Maggie, who, as she bent over her sewing, be intensely
conscious of some drama go forward in her father's mind. suddenly
he take up the poker and break the large coal fiercely.
"dear heart, Mr. Tulliver, what can you be think of?" say his
wife, look up in alarm; "itbe very wasteful, break the coal, and
wehave get hardly any large coal left, and I donot know where the rest
be to come from."
"I donot think yoube quite so well to-night, be you, father?" say
Maggie; "you seem uneasy."
"why, how be it Tom donot come?" say Mr. Tulliver, impatiently.
"dear heart, be it time? I must go and get his supper," say Mrs.
Tulliver, lay down her knitting, and leave the room.
"itbe nigh upon half-past eight," say Mr. Tulliver. "hewill be here
soon. go, go and get the big Bible, and open it at the beginning,
where everythingbe set down. and get the pen and ink."
Maggie obey, wonder; but her father give no further order, and
only sit listen for Tom's footfall on the gravel, apparently
irritate by the wind, which have rise, and be roar so as to drown
all other sound. there be a strange light in his eye that rather
frighten Maggie; _she_ begin to wish that Tom would come, too.
"there he be, then," say Mr. Tulliver, in an excited way, when the
knock come at last. Maggie go to open the door, but her mother come
out of the kitchen hurriedly, say, "stop a bit, Maggie; Iwill open
it."
Mrs. Tulliver have begin to be a little frightened at her boy, but she
be jealous of every office other do for he.
"your supperbe ready by the kitchen-fire, my boy," she say, as he
take off his hat and coat. "you shall have it by yourself, just as you
like, and I willnot speak to you."
"I think my father want Tom, mother," say Maggie; "he must come into
the parlor first."
Tom enter with his usual sadden evening face, but his eye fall
immediately on the open Bible and the inkstand, and he glance with a
look of anxious surprise at his father, who be saying,--
"come, come, yoube late; I want you."
"be there anything the matter, father?" say Tom.
"you sit down, all of you," say Mr. Tulliver, peremptorily.
"and, Tom, sit down here; Ihave get something for you to write I' the
Bible."
they all three sit down, look at he. he begin to speak slowly,
look first at his wife.
"Ihave make up my mind, Bessy, and Iwill be as good as my word to you.
therewill be the same grave make for we to lie down in, and we mustnot
be bear one another ill-will. Iwill stop in the old place, and Iwill
serve under Wakem, and Iwill serve he like an honest man; therebe no
Tulliver but whatbe honest, mind that, Tom,"--here his voice
rose,--"they'll have it to throw up against I as I pay a dividend,
but it benot my fault; it be because therebe raskill in the world.
theyhave be too many for I, and I must give in. Iwill put my neck in
harness,--for youhave a right to say as Ihave bring you into trouble,
Bessy,--and Iwill serve he as honest as if he be no raskill; Ibe an
honest man, though I shall never hold my head up no more. Ibe a tree
as be break--a tree as be break."
he pause and look on the ground. then suddenly raise his head, he
say, in a loud yet deep tone:
"but I willnot forgive he! I know what they say, he never mean I any
harm. thatbe the way Old Harry prop up the rascal. hebe be at the
bottom of everything; but hebe a fine gentleman,--I know, I know. I
shouldnot ha' go to law, they say. but who make it so as there be
no arbitratin', and no justice to be get? it signify nothing to he,
I know that; hebe one o' they fine gentleman as get money by do
business for poor folk, and when hebe make beggar of them hewill
give them charity. I willnot forgive he! I wish he might be punish
with shame till his own son 'ud like to forget he. I wish he may do
summat as theywould make he work at the treadmill! but he won't,--he's
too big a raskill to let the law lay hold on he. and you mind this,
tom,--you never forgive he neither, if you mean to be my son.
therewill maybe come a time when you may make he feel; itwill never
come to I; I'n get my head under the yoke. now write--write it I' the
Bible."
"oh, father, what?" say Maggie, sink down by his knee, pale and
trembling. "itbe wicked to curse and bear malice."
"it benot wicked, I tell you," say her father, fiercely. "itbe wicked
as the raskill should prosper; itbe the Devil's doing. do as I tell
you, Tom. Write."
"what be I to write?" say Tom, with gloomy submission.
"write as your father, Edward Tulliver, take service under John Wakem,
the man as have help to ruin he, because Iwould promise my wife to
make she what amend I could for her trouble, and because I want to
die in th' old place where I be bear and my father be bear. put that
I' the right word--you know how--and then write, as I donot forgive
Wakem for all that; and for all Iwill serve he honest, I wish evil may
befall he. write that."
there be a dead silence as Tom's pen move along the paper; Mrs.
Tulliver look scared, and Maggie tremble like a leaf.
"now let I hear what youhave write," say Mr. Tulliver, Tom read aloud
slowly.
"now write--write as youwill remember what Wakembe do to your father,
and youwill make he and his feel it, if ever the day come. and sign
your name Thomas Tulliver."
"oh no, father, dear father!" say Maggie, almost choke with fear.
"you shouldnot make Tom write that."
"be quiet, Maggie!" say Tom. "I _shall_ write it."
Book IV
_the Valley of Humiliation_
chapter I
a Variation of Protestantism Unknown to Bossuet
Journeying down the Rhone on a summer's day, you have perhaps feel the
sunshine make dreary by those ruin village which stud the bank in
certain part of its course, tell how the swift river once rise,
like an angry, destroy god, sweep down the feeble generation
whose breath be in their nostril, and make their dwelling a
desolation. strange contrast, you may have think, between the
effect produce on we by these dismal remnant of commonplace
house, which in their good day be but the sign of a sordid life,
belong in all its detail to our own vulgar era, and the effect
produce by those ruin on the castle Rhine, which have crumble and
mellow into such harmony with the green and rocky steep that they
seem to have a natural fitness, like the mountain-pine; nay, even in
the day when they be build they must have have this fitness, as if
they have be raise by an earth-bear race, who have inherit from
their mighty parent a sublime instinct of form. and that be a day of
romance; if those robber-baron be somewhat grim and drunken ogre,
they have a certain grandeur of the wild beast in them,--they be
forest boar with tusk, tear and rending, not the ordinary
domestic grunter; they represent the demon force forever in
collision with beauty, virtue, and the gentle us of life; they make
a fine contrast in the picture with the wandering minstrel, the
soft-lipped princess, the pious recluse, and the timid Israelite. that
be a time of color, when the sunlight fall on glance steel and
float banner; a time of adventure and fierce struggle,--nay, of
living, religious art and religious enthusiasm; for be not
cathedral build in those day, and do not great emperor leave their
western palace to die before the infidel stronghold in the sacred
East? therefore it be that these rhine castle thrill I with a sense
of poetry; they belong to the grand historic life of humanity, and
raise up for I the vision of an echo. but these dead-tint,
hollow-eye, angular skeleton of village on the Rhone oppress I
with the feeling that human life--very much of it--be a narrow, ugly,
grovel existence, which even calamity do not elevate, but rather
tend to exhibit in all its bare vulgarity of conception; and I have a
cruel conviction that the life these ruin be the trace of be
part of a gross sum of obscure vitality, that will be sweep into the
same oblivion with the generation of ant and beaver.
perhaps something akin to this oppressive feeling may have weigh
upon you in watch this old-fashioned family life on the bank of
the Floss, which even sorrow hardly suffice to lift above the level
of the tragi-comic. it be a sordid life, you say, this of the
Tullivers and dodson, irradiate by no sublime principle, no
romantic vision, no active, self-renounce faith; move by none of
those wild, uncontrollable passion which create the dark shadow of
misery and crime; without that primitive, rough simplicity of want,
that hard, submissive, ill-pay toil, that childlike spelling-out of
what nature have write, which give its poetry to peasant life. here
one have conventional worldly notion and habit without instruction
and without polish, surely the most prosaic form of human life; proud
respectability in a gig of unfashionable build; worldliness without
side-dish. observe these people narrowly, even when the iron hand
of misfortune have shake they from their unquestione hold on the
world, one see little trace of religion, still less of a
distinctively christian creed. their belief in the Unseen, so far as
it manifest itself at all, seem to be rather a pagan kind; their
moral notion, though hold with strong tenacity, seem to have no
standard beyond hereditary custom. you could not live among such
people; you be stifle for want of an outlet toward something
beautiful, great, or noble; you be irritated with these dull man and
woman, as a kind of population out of keep with the earth on which
they live,--with this rich plain where the great river flow forever
onward, and link the small pulse of the old english town with the
beating of the world's mighty heart. a vigorous superstition, that
lash its god or lash its own back, seem to be more congruous
with the mystery of the human lot, than the mental condition of these
emmet-like Dodsons and Tullivers.
I share with you this sense of oppressive narrowness; but it be
necessary that we should feel it, if we care to understand how it
act on the life of Tom and Maggie,--how it have act on young
nature in many generation, that in the onward tendency of human
thing have rise above the mental level of the generation before
they, to which they have be nevertheless tie by the strong
fibre of their heart. the suffering, whether of martyr or victim,
which belong to every historical advance of mankind, be represent
in this way in every town, and by hundred of obscure hearth; and we
need not shrink from this comparison of small thing with great; for
do not science tell we that its high strive be after the
ascertainment of a unity which shall bind the small thing with the
great? in natural science, I have understand, there be nothing
petty to the mind that have a large vision of relation, and to which
every single object suggest a vast sum of condition. it be surely
the same with the observation of human life.
certainly the religious and moral idea of the Dodsons and Tullivers
be of too specific a kind to be arrive at deductively, from the
statement that they be part of the protestant population of Great
Britain. their theory of life have its core of soundness, as all
theory must have on which decent and prosperous family have be
rear and have flourish; but it have the very slight tincture of
theology. if, in the maiden day of the Dodson sister, their bible
open more easily at some part than other, it be because of dried
tulip-petal, which have be distribute quite impartially, without
preference for the historical, devotional, or doctrinal. their
religion be of a simple, semi-pagan kind, but there be no heresy in
it,--if heresy properly mean choice,--for they donot know there be
any other religion, except that of chapel-goer, which appear to run
in family, like asthma. how _should_ they know? the vicar of their
pleasant rural parish be not a controversialist, but a good hand at
whist, and one who have a joke always ready for a bloom female
parishioner. the religion of the dodson consist in revering
whatever be customary and respectable; it be necessary to be
baptize, else one could not be bury in the church-yard, and to take
the sacrament before death, as a security against more dimly
understand peril; but it be of equal necessity to have the proper
pall-bearer and well-cure ham at one's funeral, and to leave an
unimpeachable will. a Dodson would not be tax with the omission of
anything that be become, or that belong to that eternal fitness
of thing which be plainly indicate in the practice of the most
substantial parishioner, and in the family traditions,--such as
obedience to parent, faithfulness to kindre, industry, rigid
honesty, thrift, the thorough scouring of wooden and copper utensil,
the hoarding of coin likely to disappear from the currency, the
production of first-rate commodity for the market, and the general
preference of whatever be home-make. the Dodsons be a very proud
race, and their pride lie in the utter frustration of all desire to
tax they with a breach of traditional duty or propriety. a wholesome
pride in many respect, since it identify honor with perfect
integrity, thoroughness of work, and faithfulness to admit rule;
and society owe some worthy quality in many of her member to
mother of the Dodson class, who make their butter and their fromenty
well, and would have feel disgrace to make it otherwise. to be honest
and poor be never a Dodson motto, still less to seem rich though
be poor; rather, the family badge be to be honest and rich, and
not only rich, but rich than be suppose. to live respect, and
have the proper bearer at your funeral, be an achievement of the
end of existence that would be entirely nullify if, on the reading
of your will, you sink in the opinion of your fellow-man, either by
turn out to be poor than they expect, or by leave your money
in a capricious manner, without strict regard to degree of kin. the
right thing must always be do toward kindre. the right thing be to
correct they severely, if they be other than a credit to the family,
but still not to alienate from they the small rightful share in the
family shoebuckle and other property. a conspicuous quality in the
Dodson character be its genuineness; its vice and virtue alike be
phase of a proud honest egoism, which have a hearty dislike to
whatever make against its own credit and interest, and would be
frankly hard of speech to inconvenient "kin," but would never forsake
or ignore them,--would not let they want bread, but only require they
to eat it with bitter herb.
the same sort of traditional belief run in the Tulliver vein, but it
be carry in rich blood, have element of generous imprudence,
warm affection, and hot-temper rashness. Mr. Tulliver's grandfather
have be hear to say that he be descend from one Ralph Tulliver, a
wonderfully clever fellow, who have ruin himself. it be likely enough
that the clever Ralph be a high liver, ride spirited horse, and be
very decidedly of his own opinion. on the other hand, nobody have ever
hear of a Dodson who have ruin himself; it be not the way of that
family.
if such be the view of life on which the Dodsons and Tullivers have
be rear in the praiseworthy past of Pitt and high price, you will
infer from what you already know concern the state of society in
St. Ogg's, that there have be no highly modifying influence to act on
they in their mature life. it be still possible, even in that later
time of anti-catholic preaching, for people to hold many pagan idea,
and believe themselves good church-people, notwithstanding; so we need
hardly feel any surprise at the fact that Mr. Tulliver, though a
regular church-goer, record his vindictiveness on the fly-leaf of
his Bible. it be not that any harm could be say concern the vicar
of that charming rural parish to which Dorlcote Mill belong; he be
a man of excellent family, an irreproachable bachelor, of elegant
pursuits,--had take honor, and hold a fellowship. Mr. Tulliver
regard he with dutiful respect, as he do everything else belong
to the church-service; but he consider that church be one thing and
common-sense another, and he want nobody to tell _he_ what
commonsense be. certain seed which be require to find a nidus for
themselves under unfavorable circumstance have be supply by
nature with an apparatus of hook, so that they will get a hold on
very unreceptive surface. the spiritual seed which have be scatter
over Mr. Tulliver have apparently be destitute of any corresponding
provision, and have slip off to the wind again, from a total
absence of hook.
Chapter II
the Torn Nest be pierce by the Thorns
there be something sustain in the very agitation that accompany
the first shock of trouble, just as an acute pain be often a
stimulus, and produce an excitement which be transient strength. it
be in the slow, change life that follow; in the time when sorrow have
become stale, and have no long an emotive intensity that counteract
its pain; in the time when day follow day in dull, unexpectant
sameness, and trial be a dreary routine,--it be then that despair
threaten; it be then that the peremptory hunger of the soul be feel,
and eye and ear be strain after some unlearned secret of our
existence, which shall give to endurance the nature of satisfaction.
this time of utmost need be come to Maggie, with her short span of
thirteen year. to the usual precocity of the girl, she add that
early experience of struggle, of conflict between the inward impulse
and outward fact, which be the lot of every imaginative and passionate
nature; and the year since she hammer the nail into her wooden
Fetish among the worm-eat shelf of the attic have be fill with
so eager a life in the triple world of reality, Books, and Waking
Dreams, that Maggie be strangely old for her year in everything
except in her entire want of that prudence and self-command which be
the quality that make Tom manly in the midst of his intellectual
boyishness. and now her lot be begin to have a still, sad
monotony, which throw she more than ever on her inward self. her
father be able to attend to business again, his affair be settle,
and he be act as Wakem's manager on the old spot. Tom go to and
fro every morning and evening, and become more and more silent in the
short interval at home; what be there to say? one day be like
another; and Tom's interest in life, drive back and crush on every
other side, be concentrate itself into the one channel of ambitious
resistance to misfortune. the peculiarity of his father and mother
be very irksome to he, now they be lay bare of all the soften
accompaniment of an easy, prosperous home; for Tom have very clear,
prosaic eye, not apt to be dim by mist of feeling or imagination.
Poor Mrs. Tulliver, it seem, would never recover her old self, her
placid household activity; how could she? the object among which she
mind have move complacently be all gone,--all the little hope and
scheme and speculation, all the pleasant little care about her
treasure which have make the world quite comprehensible to she for a
quarter of a century, since she have make her first purchase of the
sugar-tong, have be suddenly snatch away from she, and she
remain bewildered in this empty life. why that should have happen
to she which have not happen to other woman remain an insoluble
question by which she express her perpetual ruminate comparison of
the past with the present. it be piteous to see the comely woman
get thin and more worn under a bodily as well as mental
restlessness, which make she often wander about the empty house after
her work be do, until Maggie, become alarmed about she, would
seek she, and bring she down by tell she how it vex Tom that she
be injure her health by never sit down and rest herself. yet
amidst this helpless imbecility there be a touching trait of humble,
self-devote maternity, which make Maggie feel tenderly toward her
poor mother amidst all the little wear grief cause by her mental
feebleness. she would let Maggie do none of the work that be heavy
and most soil to the hand, and be quite peevish when Maggie
attempt to relieve she from her grate-brushing and scour: "let it
alone, my dear; your hand 'ull get as hard as hard," she would say;
"itbe your mother's place to do that. I cannot do the sewing--my eye
fail I." and she would still brush and carefully tend Maggie's hair,
which she have become reconcile to, in spite of its refusal to curl,
now it be so long and massy. Maggie be not her pet child, and, in
general, would have be much well if she have be quite different;
yet the womanly heart, so bruised in its small personal desire, find
a future to rest on in the life of this young thing, and the mother
please herself with wear out her own hand to save the hand that
have so much more life in they.
but the constant presence of her mother's regretful bewilderment be
less painful to Maggie than that of her father's sullen,
incommunicative depression. as long as the paralysis be upon he, and
it seem as if he might always be in a childlike condition of
dependence,--as long as he be still only half awaken to his
trouble,--maggie have feel the strong tide of pity love almost as an
inspiration, a new power, that would make the most difficult life easy
for his sake; but now, instead of childlike dependence, there have come
a taciturn, hard concentration of purpose, in strange contrast with
his old vehement communicativeness and high spirit; and this last
from day to day, and from week to week, the dull eye never brighten
with any eagerness or any joy. it be something cruelly incomprehensible
to youthful nature, this sombre sameness in middle-aged and elderly
people, whose life have result in disappointment and discontent, to
whose face a smile become so strange that the sad line all about
the lip and brow seem to take no notice of it, and it hurry away
again for want of a welcome. "why will they not kindle up and be
glad sometimes?" think young elasticity. "it would be so easy if they
only like to do it." and these leaden cloud that never part be apt
to create impatience even in the filial affection that stream forth in
nothing but tenderness and pity in the time of more obvious affliction.
Mr. Tulliver linger nowhere away from home; he hurry away from
market, he refuse all invitation to stay and chat, as in old time,
in the house where he call on business. he could not be reconcile
with his lot. there be no attitude in which his pride do not feel
its bruise; and in all behavior toward he, whether kind or cold, he
detect an allusion to the change in his circumstance. even the day
on which Wakem come to ride round the land and inquire into the
business be not so black to he as those market-day on which he have
meet several creditor who have accept a composition from he. to save
something toward the repayment of those creditor be the object
toward which he be now bend all his thought and effort; and
under the influence of this all-compelling demand of his nature, the
somewhat profuse man, who hat to be stint or to stint any one else
in his own house, be gradually metamorphose into the keen-eye
grudg of morsel. Mrs. Tulliver could not economize enough to
satisfy he, in their food and firing; and he would eat nothing
himself but what be of the coarse quality. Tom, though depress
and strongly repel by his father's sullenness, and the dreariness
of home, enter thoroughly into his father's feeling about pay
the creditor; and the poor lad bring his first quarter's money,
with a delicious sense of achievement, and give it to his father to
put into the tin box which hold the saving. the little store of
sovereign in the tin box seem to be the only sight that bring a
faint beam of pleasure into the miller's eyes,--faint and transient,
for it be soon dispel by the thought that the time would be
long--perhaps long than his life,--before the narrow saving could
remove the hateful incubus of debt. a deficit of more than five
hundred pound, with the accumulate interest, seem a deep pit to
fill with the saving from thirty shilling a-week, even when Tom's
probable saving be to be add. on this one point there be entire
community of feeling in the four widely differ being who sit round
the die fire of stick, which make a cheap warmth for they on the
verge of bedtime. Mrs. Tulliver carry the proud integrity of the
Dodsons in her blood, and have be bring up to think that to wrong
people of their money, which be another phrase for debt, be a sort
of moral pillory; it would have be wickedness, to her mind, to have
run counter to her husband's desire to "do the right thing," and
retrieve his name. she have a confused, dreamy notion that, if the
creditor be all pay, her plate and linen ought to come back to
she; but she have an inbreed perception that while people owe money
they be unable to pay, they couldnot rightly call anything their
own. she murmur a little that Mr. Tulliver so peremptorily refuse
to receive anything in repayment from Mr. and Mrs. Moss; but to all
his requirement of household economy she be submissive to the point
of deny herself the cheap indulgence of mere flavor; her only
rebellion be to smuggle into the kitchen something that would make
rather a well supper than usual for Tom.
these narrow notion about debt, hold by the old fashioned Tullivers,
may perhaps excite a smile on the face of many reader in these day
of wide commercial view and wide philosophy, accord to which
everything right itself without any trouble of our. the fact that my
tradesman be out of pocket by I be to be look at through the serene
certainty that somebody else's tradesman be in pocket by somebody
else; and since there must be bad debt in the world, why, it be mere
egoism not to like that we in particular should make they instead of
our fellow-citizen. I be tell the history of very simple people,
who have never have any illuminate doubt as to personal integrity and
honor.
under all this grim melancholy and narrowing concentration of desire,
Mr. Tulliver retain the feeling toward his "little wench" which make
her presence a need to he, though it would not suffice to cheer he.
she be still the desire of his eye; but the sweet spring of fatherly
love be now mingle with bitterness, like everything else. when
Maggie lay down her work at night, it be her habit to get a low
stool and sit by her father's knee, lean her cheek against it. how
she wish he would stroke her head, or give some sign that he be
soothe by the sense that he have a daughter who love he! but now she
get no answer to her little caress, either from her father or from
tom,--the two idol of her life. Tom be weary and abstract in the
short interval when he be at home, and her father be bitterly
preoccupy with the thought that the girl be grow up, be
shoot up into a woman; and how be she to do well in life? she have
a poor chance for marry, down in the world as they be. and he
hat the thought of she marry poorly, as her aunt Gritty have do;
_that_ would be a thing to make he turn in his grave,--the little
wench so pull down by child and toil, as her aunt Moss be. when
uncultured mind, confine to a narrow range of personal experience,
be under the pressure of continued misfortune, their inward life be
apt to become a perpetually repeat round of sad and bitter thought;
the same word, the same scene, be revolve over and over again, the
same mood accompany they; the end of the year find they as much
what they be at the beginning as if they be machine set to a
recurrent series of movement.
the sameness of the day be break by few visitor. uncle and aunt
pay only short visit now; of course, they could not stay to meal,
and the constraint cause by Mr. Tulliver's savage silence, which
seem to add to the hollow resonance of the bare, uncarpeted room
when the aunt be talk, heighten the unpleasantness of these
family visit on all side, and tend to make they rare. as for other
acquaintance, there be a chill air surround those who be down in
the world, and people be glad to get away from they, as from a cold
room; human being, mere man and woman, without furniture, without
anything to offer you, who have cease to count as anybody, present an
embarrassing negation of reason for wish to see they, or of
subject on which to converse with they. at that distant day, there
be a dreary isolation in the civilized christian society of these
realm for family that have drop below their original level,
unless they belong to a sectarian church, which get some warmth of
brotherhood by wall in the sacred fire.
Chapter III
A Voice from the Past
one afternoon, when the chestnut be come into flower, Maggie have
bring her chair outside the front door, and be seat there with a
book on her knee. her dark eye have wander from the book, but they
do not seem to be enjoy the sunshine which pierce the screen of
jasmine on the project porch at her right, and throw leafy shadow
on her pale round cheek; they seem rather to be search for
something that be not disclose by the sunshine. it have be a more
miserable day than usual; her father, after a visit of Wakem's have have
a paroxysm of rage, in which for some trifling fault he have beat the
boy who serve in the mill. once before, since his illness, he have have
a similar paroxysm, in which he have beat his horse, and the scene
have leave a last terror in Maggie's mind. the thought have rise,
that some time or other he might beat her mother if she happen to
speak in her feeble way at the wrong moment. the keenest of all dread
with she be lest her father should add to his present misfortune the
wretchedness of do something irretrievably disgraceful. the
batter school-book of Tom's which she hold on her knee could give
she no fortitude under the pressure of that dread; and again and again
her eye have fill with tear, as they wander vaguely, see
neither the chestnut-tree, nor the distant horizon, but only future
scene of home-sorrow.
suddenly she be rouse by the sound of the opening gate and of
footstep on the gravel. it be not Tom who be enter, but a man in
a sealskin cap and a blue plush waistcoat, carry a pack on his
back, and follow closely by a bullterrier of brindled coat and
defiant aspect.
"oh, Bob, itbe you!" say Maggie, start up with a smile of pleased
recognition, for there have be no abundance of kind act to efface
the recollection of Bob's generosity; "Ibe so glad to see you."
"thank you, Miss," say Bob, lift his cap and show a delighted
face, but immediately relieve himself of some accompany
embarrassment by look down at his dog, and say in a tone of
disgust, "get out wi' you, you thunderin' sawney!"
"my brother be not at home yet, Bob," say Maggie; "he be always at
St. Oggbe in the daytime."
"well, Miss," say Bob, "I should be glad to see Mr. Tom, but that
benot just what Ibe come for,--look here!"
Bob be in the act of deposit his pack on the door-step, and with
it a row of small book fasten together with string.
apparently, however, they be not the object to which he wish to
call Maggie's attention, but rather something which he have carry
under his arm, wrap in a red handkerchief.
"see here!" he say again, lay the red parcel on the other and
unfold it; "you willnot think Ibe a-makin' too free, Miss, I hope,
but I light on these book, and I think they might make up to you
a bit for they as youhave lose; for I hear you speak o' picturs,--an'
as for pictur, _look_ here!"
the opening of the red handkerchief have disclose a superannuated
"Keepsake" and six or seven number of a "Portrait Gallery," in royal
octavo; and the emphatic request to look refer to a portrait of
George the Fourth in all the majesty of his depressed cranium and
voluminous neckcloth.
"therebe all sort o' genelman here," Bob go on, turn over the
leaf with some excitement, "wi' all sort o' nones,--an' some bald
an' some wi' wigs,--parlament genelman, I reckon. an' here," he add,
open the "Keepsake,"--"_here's_ lady for you, some wi' curly hair
and some wi' smooth, an' some a-smile wi' their head o' one side,
an' some as if they be go to cry,--look here,--a-sittin' on the
ground out o' door, dress like the lady i'n see get out o' the
carriage at the ball in th' Old Hall there. my eye! I wonder what
the chap wear as go a-courtin' them! I sot up till the clock be go
twelve last night, a-lookin' at 'em,--i did,--till they star at I
out o' the pictur as if theywould know when I speak to them. but, lor! I
shouldnot know what to say to them. theywill be more fittin' company for
you, Miss; and the man at the book-stall, he say they bang
iverything for pictur; he say they be a fust-rate article."
"and youhave buy they for I, Bob?" say Maggie, deeply touch by
this simple kindness. "how very, very good of you! but Ibe afraid you
give a great deal of money for they."
"not I!" say Bob. "Iwould ha' gev three time the money if theywill make
up to you a bit for they as be sell away from you, Miss. for I'n
niver forget how you look when you fret about the book bein'
go; itbe stick by I as if it be a pictur hingin' before I. an'
when I see'd the book open upo' the stall, wi' the lady lookin' out of
it wi' eye a bit like your'n when you be frettin',--you'll excuse my
takin' the liberty, Miss,--I think Iwould make free to buy it for you,
an' then I buy the book full o' genelman to match; an' then"--here
Bob take up the small string packet of books--"i think you might
like a bit more print as well as the pictur, an' I get these for a
sayso,--they're cram-full o' print, an' I think theywould do no harm
comin' along wi' these bettermost book. an' I hope you willnot say I
nay, an' tell I as you willnot have them, like Mr. Tom do wi' the
suvreign."
"no, indeed, Bob," say Maggie, "Ibe very thankful to you for thinking
of I, and be so good to I and Tom. I donot think any one ever do
such a kind thing for I before. I havenot many friend who care for
I."
"Hev a dog, miss!--they're well friend nor any Christian," say
Bob, lay down his pack again, which he have take up with the
intention of hurry away; for he feel considerable shyness in
talk to a young lass like Maggie, though, as he usually say of
himself, "his tongue overrun he" when he begin to speak. "I cannot
give you Mumps, 'cause hewould break his heart to go away from I--eh,
Mumps, what do you say, you riff-raff?" (Mumps decline to express
himself more diffusely than by a single affirmative movement of his
tail.) "but Iwould get you a pup, Miss, an' welcome."
"no, thank you, Bob. we have a yard dog, and I maynot keep a dog of my
own."
"eh, thatbe a pity; else therebe a pup,--if you donot mind about it
not be thoroughbre; its mother act in the Punch show,--an
uncommon sensible bitch; she mean more sense wi' her bark nor half
the chap can put into their talk from breakfast to sundown. therebe
one chap carry pots,--a poor, low trade as any on the road,--he
say, 'why Toby's nought but a mongrel; therebe nought to look at in
she.' but I say to he, 'why, what be you yoursen but a mongrel?
there benot much pickin' o' _your_ feyther an' mother, to look at
you.' not but I like a bit o' breed myself, but I cannot abide to see
one cur grinnin' at another. I wish you good evenin', Miss," say Bob,
abruptly take up his pack again, under the consciousness that his
tongue be act in an undisciplined manner.
"willnot you come in the evening some time, and see my brother, Bob?"
say Maggie.
"yes, Miss, thank you--another time. youwill give my duty to he, if
you please. eh, hebe a fine grow chap, Mr. Tom be; he take to
growin' I' the leg, an' _i_ donot."
the pack be down again, now, the hook of the stick have somehow
go wrong.
"you donot call Mumps a cur, I suppose?" say Maggie, divine that
any interest she show in Mumps would be gratify to his master.
"no, Miss, a fine way off that," say Bob, with pity smile; "mump
be as fine a cross as youwill see anywhere along the Floss, an' i'n
be up it wi' the barge times enow. why, the gentry stop to look at
he; but you willnot catch Mumps a-look at the gentry much,--he minds
his own business, he do."
the expression of Mump's face, which seem to be tolerate the
superfluous existence of object in general, be strongly confirmatory
of this high praise.
"he look dreadfully surly," say Maggie. "would he let I pat he?"
"ay, that would he, and thank you. he know his company, Mumps do.
he benot a dog as 'ull be catch wi' gingerbread; hewould smell a thief a
good deal strong nor the gingerbread, he would. lor, I talk to he
by th' hour together, when Ibe walk I' lone place, and if i'n do
a bit o' mischief, I allay tell he. I'n get no secret but what
Mumps know them. he know about my big thumb, he do."
"your big thumb--whatbe that, Bob?" say Maggie.
"thatbe what it be, Miss," say Bob, quickly, exhibit a singularly
broad speciman of that difference between the man and the monkey. "it
tell I' measure out the flannel, you see. I carry flannel, 'cause
itbe light for my pack, an' itbe dear stuff, you see, so a big thumb
tell. I clap my thumb at the end o' the yard and cut o' the hither
side of it, and the old woman benot up to't."
"but Bob," say Maggie, look serious, "thatbe cheat; I donot
like to hear you say that."
"donot you, Miss?" say Bob regretfully. "then Ibe sorry I say it.
but Ibe so used to talk to Mumps, an' he donot mind a bit o'
cheating, when itbe they skinflint woman, as haggle an' haggle, an'
'ud like to get their flannel for nothing, an' 'ud niver ask
theirselve how I get my dinner out on't. I niver cheat anybody as
donot want to cheat I, miss,--lor, Ibe a honest chap, I be; only I
must hev a bit o' sport, an' now I donot go wi' th' ferret, I'n get
no varmint to come over but they haggle woman. I wish you good
evening, Miss."
"good-by, Bob. thank you very much for bring I the book. and come
again to see Tom."
"yes, Miss," say Bob, move on a few step; then turn half round
he say, "Iwill leave off that trick wi' my big thumb, if you donot
think well on I for it, Miss; but it 'ud be a pity, it would. I
couldnot find another trick so good,--an' what 'ud be the use o'
havin' a big thumb? it might as well ha' be narrow."
Maggie, thus exalt into Bob's exalt Madonna, laugh in spite of
herself; at which her worshipper's blue eye twinkle too, and under
these favor auspex he touch his cap and walk away.
the day of chivalry be not go, notwithstanding Burke's grand dirge
over they; they live still in that far-off worship pay by many a
youth and man to the woman of whom he never dream that he shall touch
so much as her little finger or the hem of her robe. Bob, with the
pack on his back, have as respectful an adoration for this dark-eye
maiden as if he have be a knight in armor call aloud on her name
as he prick on to the fight.
that gleam of merriment soon die away from Maggie's face, and perhaps
only make the return gloom deep by contrast. she be too
dispirit even to like answer question about Bob's present of
book, and she carry they away to her bedroom, lay they down
there and seat herself on her one stool, without care to look at
they just yet. she lean her cheek against the window-frame, and
think that the light-hearted Bob have a lot much happy than her.
Maggie's sense of loneliness, and utter privation of joy, have deepen
with the brightness of advance spring. all the favorite outdoor
nook about home, which seem to have do their part with her
parent in nurture and cherish she, be now mix up with the
home-sadness, and gather no smile from the sunshine. every
affection, every delight the poor child have have, be like an ache
nerve to she. there be no music for her any more,--no piano, no
harmonized voice, no delicious string instrument, with their
passionate cry of imprison spirit send a strange vibration
through her frame. and of all her school-life there be nothing leave
she now but her little collection of school-book, which she turn
over with a sickening sense that she know they all, and they be all
barren of comfort. even at school she have often wish for book with
_more_ in they; everything she learn there seem like the end of
long thread that snap immediately. and now--without the indirect
charm of school-emulation--Telemaque be mere bran; so be the hard,
dry question on Christian Doctrine; there be no flavor in they, no
strength. sometimes Maggie think she could have be content with
absorb fancy; if she could have have all Scott's novel and all
Byron's poems!--then, perhaps, she might have find happiness enough
to dull her sensibility to her actual daily life. and yet they be
hardly what she want. she could make dream-world of her own, but no
dream-world would satisfy she now. she want some explanation of this
hard, real life,--the unhappy-look father, seat at the dull
breakfast-table; the childish, bewildered mother; the little sordid
task that fill the hour, or the more oppressive emptiness of
weary, joyless leisure; the need of some tender, demonstrative love;
the cruel sense that Tom donot mind what she think or feel, and
that they be no long playfellow together; the privation of all
pleasant thing that have come to _her_ more than to others,--she
want some key that would enable she to understand, and in
understanding, to endure, the heavy weight that have fall on her
young heart. if she have be teach "real learning and wisdom, such as
great man know," she think she should have hold the secret of life;
if she have only book, that she might learn for herself what wise man
know! saint and martyr have never interest Maggie so much as sage
and poet. she know little of saint and martyr, and have gather, as
a general result of her teaching, that they be a temporary provision
against the spread of Catholicism, and have all die at Smithfield.
in one of these meditation it occur to she that she have forget
Tom's school-book, which have be send home in his trunk. but she
find the stock unaccountably shrink down to the few old one which
have be well thumbed,--the Latin Dictionary and Grammar, a Delectus,
a tear Eutropius, the well-wear Virgil, Aldrich's Logic, and the
exasperating Euclid. still, Latin, Euclid, and Logic would surely be a
considerable step in masculine wisdom,--in that knowledge which make
man content, and even glad to live. not that the yearning for
effectual wisdom be quite unmixed; a certain mirage would now and
then rise on the desert of the future, in which she seem to see
herself honor for her surprising attainment. and so the poor child,
with her soul's hunger and her illusion of self-flattery, begin to
nibble at this thick-rinded fruit of the tree of knowledge, fill
her vacant hour with Latin, geometry, and the form of the syllogism,
and feel a gleam of triumph now and then that her understanding be
quite equal to these peculiarly masculine study. for a week or two
she go on resolutely enough, though with an occasional sinking of
heart, as if she have set out toward the Promised Land alone, and find
it a thirsty, trackless, uncertain journey. in the severity of her
early resolution, she would take Aldrich out into the field, and then
look off her book toward the sky, where the lark be twinkle, or to
the reed and bush by the river, from which the waterfowl rustle
forth on its anxious, awkward flight,--with a startled sense that the
relation between Aldrich and this live world be extremely remote
for she. the discouragement deepen as the day go on, and the
eager heart gain fast and fast on the patient mind. somehow,
when she sit at the window with her book, her eye _would_ fix
themselves blankly on the outdoor sunshine; then they would fill with
tear, and sometimes, if her mother be not in the room, the study
would all end in sobbing. she rebel against her lot, she faint
under its loneliness, and fit even of anger and hatred toward her
father and mother, who be so unlike what she would have they to be;
toward Tom, who check she, and meet her thought or feel always by
some thwarting difference,--would flow out over her affection and
conscience like a lava stream, and frighten she with a sense that it
be not difficult for she to become a demon. then her brain would be
busy with wild romance of a flight from home in search of something
less sordid and dreary; she would go to some great man--Walter Scott,
perhaps--and tell he how wretched and how clever she be, and he
would surely do something for she. but, in the middle of her vision,
her father would perhaps enter the room for the evening, and,
surprise that she sit still without notice he, would say
complainingly, "come, be I to fetch my slipper myself?" the voice
pierce through Maggie like a sword; there be another sadness besides
her own, and she have be think of turn she back on it and
forsake it.
this afternoon, the sight of Bob's cheerful freckle face have give
her discontent a new direction. she think it be part of the
hardship of her life that there be lay upon she the burthen of
large want than other seem to feel,--that she have to endure this
wide, hopeless yearning for that something, whatever it be, that be
great and well on this earth. she wish she could have be like
Bob, with his easily satisfied ignorance, or like Tom, who have
something to do on which he could fix his mind with a steady purpose,
and disregard everything else. poor child! as she lean her head
against the window-frame, with her hand clasp tighter and tight,
and her foot beat the ground, she be as lonely in her trouble as
if she have be the only gril in the civilized world of that day who
have come out of her school-life with a soul untraine for inevitable
struggle, with no other part of her inherit share in the hard-win
treasure of thought which generation of painful toil have lay up
for the race of man, than shred and patch of feeble literature and
false history, with much futile information about Saxon and other
king of doubtful example, but unhappily quite without that knowledge
of the irreversible law within and without she, which, govern the
habit, become morality, and develop the feeling of submission
and dependence, become religion,--as lonely in her trouble as if
every other girl besides herself have be cherish and watch over
by elder mind, not forgetful of their own early time, when need be
keen and impulse strong.
at last Maggie's eye glance down on the book that lie on the
window-shelf, and she half forsook her reverie to turn over listlessly
the leaf of the "Portrait Gallery," but she soon push this aside
to examine the little row of book tie together with string.
"Beauties of the Spectator," "Rasselas," "economy of Human Life,"
"Gregory's Letters,"--she know the sort of matter that be inside all
these; the "Christian year,"--that seem to be a hymnbook, and she
lay it down again; but _Thomas a kempis?_--the name have come across
she in her reading, and she feel the satisfaction, which every one
know, of get some idea to attach to a name that stray solitary
in the memory. she take up the little, old, clumsy book with some
curiosity; it have the corner turn down in many place, and some
hand, now forever quiet, have make at certain passage strong
pen-and-ink mark, long since brown by time. Maggie turn from leaf
to leaf, and read where the quiet hand point: "know that the love of
thyself doth hurt thee more than anything in the world.... if thou
seek this or that, and wouldst be here or there to enjoy thy own
will and pleasure, thou shalt never be quiet nor free from care; for
in everything somewhat will be want, and in every place there will
be some that will cross thee.... both above and below, which way
soever thou dost turn thee, everywhere thou shalt find the Cross; and
everywhere of necessity thou must have patience, if thou wilt have
inward peace, and enjoy an everlasting crown.... if thou desir to
mount unto this height, thou must set out courageously, and lie the
axe to the root, that thou mayest pluck up and destroy that hide
inordinate inclination to thyself, and unto all private and earthly
good. on this sin, that a man inordinately loveth himself, almost all
dependeth, whatsoever be thoroughly to be overcome; which evil being
once overcome and subdue, there will presently ensue great peace and
tranquillity.... it be but little thou sufferest in comparison of they
that have suffer so much, be so strongly tempt, so grievously
afflict, so many way try and exercise. Thou ought therefore
to call to mind the more heavy suffering of other, that thou mayest
the easy bear thy little adversity. and if they seem not little
unto thee, beware lest thy impatience be the cause thereof.... bless
be those ear that receive the whisper of the divine voice, and
listen not to the whispering of the world. blessed be those ear
which hearken not unto the voice which soundeth outwardly, but unto
the Truth, which teacheth inwardly."
a strange thrill of awe pass through Maggie while she read, as if
she have be waken in the night by a strain of solemn music, tell
of being whose soul have be astir while hers be in stupor. she
go on from one brown mark to another, where the quiet hand seem to
point, hardly conscious that she be read, seem rather to listen
while a low voice say;
"why dost thou here gaze about, since this be not the place of thy
rest? in heaven ought to be thy dwelling, and all earthly thing be
to be look on as they forward thy journey thither. all thing pass
away, and thou together with they. beware thou cleavest not unto they,
lest thou be entangle and perish.... if a man should give all his
substance, yet it be as nothing. and if he should do great penance,
yet be they but little. and if he should attain to all knowledge, he
be yet far off. and if he should be of great virtue, and very fervent
devotion, yet be there much wanting; to wit, one thing, which be most
necessary for he. what be that? that have leave all, he leave
himself, and go wholly out of himself, and retain nothing of
self-love.... I have often say unto thee, and now again I say the
same, Forsake thyself, resign thyself, and thou shalt enjoy much
inward peace.... then shall all vain imagination, evil perturbation,
and superfluous care fly away; then shall immoderate fear leave thee,
and inordinate love shall die."
Maggie draw a long breath and push her heavy hair back, as if to see
a sudden vision more clearly. here, then, be a secret of life that
would enable she to renounce all other secret; here be a sublime
height to be reach without the help of outward thing; here be
insight, and strength, and conquest, to be win by mean entirely
within her own soul, where a supreme teacher be wait to be hear.
it flash through she like the suddenly apprehend solution of a
problem, that all the misery of her young life have come from fix
her heart on her own pleasure, as if that be the central necessity
of the universe; and for the first time she see the possibility of
shift the position from which she look at the gratification of
her own desires,--of take she stand out of herself, and look at
her own life as an insignificant part of a divinely guide whole. she
read on and on in the old book, devour eagerly the dialogue with
the invisible teacher, the pattern of sorrow, the source of all
strength; return to it after she have be call away, and read
till the sun go down behind the willow. with all the hurry of an
imagination that could never rest in the present, she sit in the
deepening twilight form plan of self-humiliation and entire
devotedness; and in the ardor of first discovery, renunciation seem
to she the entrance into that satisfaction which she have so long be
craving in vain. she have not perceive--how could she until she have
live longer?--the inmost truth of the old monk's out-pouring, that
renunciation remain sorrow, though a sorrow bear willingly. Maggie
be still pant for happiness, and be in ecstasy because she have
find the key to it. she know nothing of doctrine and system, of
mysticism or quietism; but this voice out of the far-off middle age
be the direct communication of a human soul's belief and experience,
and come to Maggie as an unquestioned message.
I suppose that be the reason why the small old-fashioned book, for
which you need only pay sixpence at a book-stall, work miracle to
this day, turn bitter water into sweetness; while expensive
sermon and treatise, newly issue, leave all thing as they be
before. it be write down by a hand that wait for the heart's
prompt; it be the chronicle of a solitary, hidden anguish,
struggle, trust, and triumph, not write on velvet cushion to teach
endurance to those who be treading with bleed foot on the stone.
and so it remain to all time a lasting record of human need and
human consolation; the voice of a brother who, age ago, feel and
suffer and renounced,--in the cloister, perhaps, with serge gown and
tonsure head, with much chant and long fast, and with a fashion
of speech different from ours,--but under the same silent far-off
heaven, and with the same passionate desire, the same striving, the
same failure, the same weariness.
in write the history of unfashionable family, one be apt to fall
into a tone of emphasis which be very far from be the tone of good
society, where principle and belief be not only of an extremely
moderate kind, but be always presuppose, no subject be eligible
but such as can be touch with a light and graceful irony. but then
good society have its claret and its velvet carpet, its
dinner-engagement six week deep, its opera and its faery ball-room;
rid off its _ennui_ on thoroughbred horse; lounge at the club; have
to keep clear of crinoline vortex; get its science do by Faraday,
and its religion by the superior clergy who be to be meet in the good
houses,--how should it have time or need for belief and emphasis? but
good society, float on gossamer wing of light irony, be of very
expensive production; require nothing less than a wide and arduous
national life condense in unfragrant deafen factory, cramp
itself in mine, sweat at furnace, grind, hammer, weave
under more or less oppression of carbonic acid, or else, spread over
sheepwalk, and scatter in lonely house and hut on the clayey or
chalky corn-land, where the rainy day look dreary. this wide
national life be base entirely on emphasis,--the emphasis of want,
which urge it into all the activity necessary for the maintenance
of good society and light irony; it spend its heavy year often in a
chill, uncarpeted fashion, amidst family discord unsoftene by long
corridor. under such circumstance, there be many among its myriad
of soul who have absolutely need an emphatic belief, life in this
unpleasurable shape demand some solution even to unspeculative
minds,--just as you inquire into the stuffing of your couch when
anything gall you there, whereas eider-down and perfect french
spring excite no question. some have an emphatic belief in alcohol,
and seek their _ekstasis_ or outside standing-ground in gin; but the
rest require something that good society call "enthusiasm," something
that will present motif in an entire absence of high prize;
something that will give patience and feed human love when the limb
ache with weariness, and human look be hard upon we; something,
clearly, that lie outside personal desire, that include resignation
for ourselves and active love for what be not ourselves. now and then
that sort of enthusiasm find a far-echo voice that come from an
experience spring out of the deep need; and it be by be
bring within the long linger vibration of such a voice that
Maggie, with her girl's face and unnoted sorrow, find an effort and
a hope that help she through year of loneliness, make out a faith
for herself without the aid of established authority and appoint
guide; for they be not at hand, and her need be press. from
what you know of she, you will not be surprised that she throw some
exaggeration and wilfulness, some pride and impetuosity, even into her
self-renunciation; her own life be still a drama for she, in which
she demand of herself that her part should be play with intensity.
and so it come to pass that she often lose the spirit of humility by
be excessive in the outward act; she often strove after too high a
flight, and come down with her poor little half-fledge wing dabble
in the mud. for example, she not only determine to work at plain
sewing, that she might contribute something toward the fund in the tin
box, but she go, in the first instance, in her zeal of
self-mortification, to ask for it at a linen shop in St. Ogg's,
instead of get it in a more quiet and indirect way; and could see
nothing but what be entirely wrong and unkind, nay, persecuting, in
Tom's reproof of she for this unnecessary act. "I donot like _my_
sister to do such thing," say Tom, "_Iwill_ take care that the debt
be pay, without your lower yourself in that way." surely there
be some tenderness and bravery mingle with the worldliness and
self-assertion of that little speech; but Maggie hold it as dross,
overlook the grain of gold, and take Tom's rebuke as one of she
outward cross. Tom be very hard to she, she use to think, in she
long night-watchings,--to she who have always love he so; and then
she strove to be content with that hardness, and to require nothing.
that be the path we all like when we set out on our abandonment of
egoism,--the path of martyrdom and endurance, where the palm-branch
grow, rather than the steep highway of tolerance, just allowance, and
self-blame, where there be no leafy honor to be gather and wear.
the old book, Virgil, Euclid, and Aldrich--that wrinkle fruit of the
tree of knowledge--have be all lay by; for Maggie have turn she
back on the vain ambition to share the thought of the wise. in her
first ardor she fling away the book with a sort of triumph that she
have rise above the need of they; and if they have be her own, she
would have burn they, believe that she would never repent. she
read so eagerly and constantly in her three book, the Bible, Thomas a
Kempis, and the "Christian Year" (no long reject as a
"hymn-book"), that they fill her mind with a continual stream of
rhythmic memory; and she be too ardently learn to see all nature
and life in the light of her new faith, to need any other material for
her mind to work on, as she sit with her well-ply needle, make
shirt and other complicated stitching, falsely call "plain,"--by
no mean plain to Maggie, since wristband and sleeve and the like have
a capability of be sew in wrong side outward in moment of mental
wandering.
hang diligently over her sewing, Maggie be a sight any one might
have be pleased to look at. that new inward life of her,
notwithstanding some volcanic upheaving of imprison passion, yet
shine out in her face with a tender soft light that mingle itself as
add loveliness with the gradually enrich color and outline of her
blossoming youth. her mother feel the change in she with a sort of
puzzled wonder that Maggie should be "grow up so good"; it be
amazing that this once "contrairy" child be become so submissive, so
backward to assert her own will. Maggie use to look up from her work
and find her mother's eye fix upon she; they be watch and
wait for the large young glance, as if her eld frame get some
needful warmth from it. the mother be get fond of her tall, brown
girl,--the only bit of furniture now on which she could bestow her
anxiety and pride; and Maggie, in spite of her own ascetic wish to
have no personal adornment, be oblige to give way to her mother
about her hair, and submit to have the abundant black lock plait
into a coronet on the summit of her head, after the pitiable fashion
of those antiquated time.
"let your mother have that bit o' pleasure, my dear," say Mrs.
Tulliver; "Iwould trouble enough with your hair once."
so Maggie, glad of anything that would soothe her mother, and cheer
their long day together, consent to the vain decoration, and show
a queenly head above her old frock, steadily refuse, however, to
look at herself in the glass. Mrs. Tulliver like to call the father's
attention to Maggie's hair and other unexpected virtue, but he have a
brusk reply to give.
"I know well enough what shewould be, before now,--it's nothing new to
I. but itbe a pity she benot make o' commoner stuff; shewill be throw
away, I doubt,--there'll be nobody to marry she as be fit for she."
and Maggie's grace of mind and body feed his gloom. he sit patiently
enough while she read he a chapter, or say something timidly when
they be alone together about trouble be turn into a blessing.
he take it all as part of his daughter's goodness, which make his
misfortune the sadder to he because they damage her chance in life.
in a mind charge with an eager purpose and an unsatisfied
vindictiveness, there be no room for new feeling; Mr. Tulliver do
not want spiritual consolation--he want to shake off the degradation
of debt, and to have his revenge.
Book v
_wheat and Tares_
chapter I
in the Red Deeps
the family sitting-room be a long room with a window at each end; one
look toward the croft and along the Ripple to the bank of the
Floss, the other into the mill-yard. Maggie be sit with her work
against the latter window when she see Mr. Wakem enter the yard, as
usual, on his fine black horse; but not alone, as usual. some one be
with him,--a figure in a cloak, on a handsome pony. Maggie have hardly
time to feel that it be Philip come back, before they be in front
of the window, and he be raise his hat to she; while his father,
catch the movement by a side-glance, look sharply round at they
both.
Maggie hurry away from the window and carry her work upstairs; for
Mr. Wakem sometimes come in and inspect the book, and Maggie feel
that the meeting with Philip would be rob of all pleasure in the
presence of the two father. some day, perhaps, she could see he when
they could just shake hand, and she could tell he that she
remember his goodness to Tom, and the thing he have say to she in
the old day, though they could never be friend any more. it be not
at all agitate to Maggie to see Philip again; she retain she
childish gratitude and pity toward he, and remember his cleverness;
and in the early week of her loneliness she have continually recall
the image of he among the people who have be kind to she in life,
often wish she have he for a brother and a teacher, as they have
fancy it might have be, in their talk together. but that sort of
wish have be banish along with other dream that savor of
seek her own will; and she think, besides, that Philip might be
alter by his life abroad,--he might have become worldly, and really
not care about she say anything to he now. and yet his face be
wonderfully little altered,--it be only a large, more manly copy of
the pale, small-feature boy's face, with the gray eye, and the
boyish wave brown hair; there be the old deformity to awaken the
old pity; and after all her meditation, Maggie feel that she really
_should_ like to say a few word to he. he might still be melancholy,
as he always use to be, and like she to look at he kindly. she
wonder if he remember how he use to like her eye; with that
think Maggie glance toward the square looking-glass which be
condemn to hang with its face toward the wall, and she half start
from her seat to reach it down; but she check herself and snatch
up her work, try to repress the rise wish by force her memory
to recall snatch of hymn, until she see Philip and his father
return along the road, and she could go down again.
it be far on in June now, and Maggie be incline to lengthen the
daily walk which be her one indulgence; but this day and the
following she be so busy with work which must be finish that she
never go beyond the gate, and satisfy her need of the open air by
sit out of door. one of her frequent walk, when she be not
oblige to go to St. Ogg's, be to a spot that lie beyond what be
call the "hill,"--an insignificant rise of ground crown by tree,
lie along the side of the road which run by the gate of Dorlcote
Mill. Insignificant I call it, because in height it be hardly more
than a bank; but there may come moment when Nature make a mere bank
a means toward a fateful result; and that be why I ask you to imagine
this high bank crown with tree, make an uneven wall for some
quarter of a mile along the left side of Dorlcote Mill and the
pleasant field behind it, bound by the murmur Ripple. just where
this line of bank slop down again to the level, a by-road turn off
and lead to the other side of the rise, where it be break into very
capricious hollow and mound by the working of an exhausted
stone-quarry, so long exhaust that both mound and hollow be now
clothe with bramble and tree, and here and there by a stretch of
grass which a few sheep keep close-nibble. in her childish day
Maggie hold this place, call the Red Deeps, in very great awe, and
need all her confidence in Tom's bravery to reconcile she to an
excursion thither,--visions of robber and fierce animal haunt
every hollow. but now it have the charm for she which any break
ground, any mimic rock and ravine, have for the eye that rest
habitually on the level; especially in summer, when she could sit on a
grassy hollow under the shadow of a branch ash, stoop aslant
from the steep above she, and listen to the hum of insect, like
tiny bell on the garment of Silence, or see the sunlight pierce
the distant bough, as if to chase and drive home the truant heavenly
blue of the wild hyacinth. in this June time, too, the dog-rose be
in their glory, and that be an additional reason why Maggie should
direct her walk to the Red Deeps, rather than to any other spot, on
the first day she be free to wander at her will,--a pleasure she
love so well, that sometimes, in her ardor of renunciation, she
think she ought to deny herself the frequent indulgence in it.
you may see she now, as she walk down the favorite turning and enter
the deep by a narrow path through a group of Scotch fir, her tall
figure and old lavender gown visible through an hereditary black silk
shawl of some wide-mesh net-like material; and now she be sure of
be unseen she take off her bonnet and tie it over her arm. one
would certainly suppose she to be far on in life than she
seventeenth year--perhaps because of the slow resign sadness of the
glance from which all search and unrest seem to have depart; perhaps
because her broad-cheste figure have the mould of early womanhood.
Youth and health have withstand well the involuntary and voluntary
hardship of her lot, and the night in which she have lie on the hard
floor for a penance have leave no obvious trace; the eye be liquid,
the brown cheek be firm and round, the full lip be red. with her
dark coloring and jet crown surmount her tall figure, she seem to
have a sort of kinship with the grand Scotch fir, at which she be
look up as if she love they well. yet one have a sense of
uneasiness in look at her,--a sense of oppose element, of which
a fierce collision be imminent; surely there be a hushed expression,
such as one often see in old face under borderless cap, out of
keep with the resistant youth, which one expect to flash out in a
sudden, passionate glance, that will dissipate all the quietude, like
a damp fire leap out again when all seem safe.
but Maggie herself be not uneasy at this moment. she be clamly
enjoy the free air, while she look up at the old fir-tree, and
think that those broken end of branch be the record of past
storm, which have only make the red stem soar higher. but while her
eye be still turn upward, she become conscious of a move shadow
cast by the evening sun on the grassy path before she, and look down
with a startled gesture to see Philip Wakem, who first raise his hat,
and then, blush deeply, come forward to she and put out his hand.
Maggie, too, color with surprise, which soon give way to pleasure.
she put out her hand and look down at the deformed figure before she
with frank eye, fill for the moment with nothing but the memory of
her child's feelings,--a memory that be always strong in she. she be
the first to speak.
"you startle I," she say, smile faintly; "I never meet any one
here. how come you to be walk here? do you come to meet _I?_"
it be impossible not to perceive that Maggie feel herself a child
again.
"yes, I do," say Philip, still embarrassed; "I wish to see you
very much. I watch a long while yesterday on the bank near your
house to see if you would come out, but you never come. then I watch
again to-day, and when I see the way you take, I keep you in sight and
come down the bank, behind there. I hope you will not be displease
with I."
"no," say Maggie, with simple seriousness, walk on as if she mean
Philip to accompany she, "Ibe very glad you come, for I wish very
much to have an opportunity of speak to you. Ihave never forget
how good you be long ago to Tom, and I too; but I be not sure that
you would remember we so well. Tom and I have have a great deal of
trouble since then, and I think _that_ make one think more of what
happen before the trouble come."
"I cannot believe that you have think of I so much as I have think
of you," say Philip, timidly. "do you know, when I be away, I make a
picture of you as you look that morning in the study when you say
you would not forget I."
Philip draw a large miniature-case from his pocket, and open it.
Maggie see her old self lean on a table, with her black lock
hang down behind her ear, look into space, with strange, dreamy
eye. it be a water-color sketch, of real merit as a portrait.
"oh dear," say Maggie, smiling, and flush with pleasure, "what a
queer little girl I be! I remember myself with my hair in that way,
in that pink frock. I really _be_ like a gypsy. I dare say I be now,"
she add, after a little pause; "be I like what you expect I to
be?"
the word might have be those of a coquette, but the full, bright
glance Maggie turn on Philip be not that of a coquette. she really
do hope he like her face as it be now, but it be simply the rise
again of her innate delight in admiration and love. Philip meet her
eye and look at she in silence for a long moment, before he say
quietly, "no, Maggie."
the light die out a little from Maggie's face, and there be a slight
trembling of the lip. her eyelid fall lower, but she do not turn
away her head, and Philip continue to look at she. then he say
slowly:
"you be very much more beautiful than I think you would be."
"be I?" say Maggie, the pleasure return in a deep flush. she
turn her face away from he and take some step, look straight
before she in silence, as if she be adjust her consciousness to
this new idea. girl be so accustomed to think of dress as the main
ground of vanity, that, in abstain from the look-glass, Maggie
have think more of abandon all care for adornment than of
renounce the contemplation of her face. compare herself with
elegant, wealthy young lady, it have not occur to she that she
could produce any effect with her person. Philip seem to like the
silence well. he walk by her side, watch her face, as if that
sight leave no room for any other wish. they have pass from among the
fir-tree, and have now come to a green hollow almost surround by an
amphitheatre of the pale pink dog-rose. but as the light about they
have brighten, Maggie's face have lose its glow.
she stand still when they be in the hollow, and look at Philip
again, she say in a serious, sad voice:
"I wish we could have be friends,--i mean, if it would have be
good and right for we. but that be the trial I have to bear in
everything; I may not keep anything I use to love when I be little.
the old book go; and Tom be different, and my father. it be like
death. I must part with everything I care for when I be a child. and
I must part with you; we must never take any notice of each other
again. that be what I want to speak to you for. I want to let you
know that Tom and I cannot do as we like about such thing, and that if
I behave as if I have forget all about you, it be not out of envy or
pride--or--or any bad feeling."
Maggie speak with more and more sorrowful gentleness as she go on,
and her eye begin to fill with tear. the deepening expression of
pain on Philip's face give he a strong resemblance to his boyish
self, and make the deformity appeal more strongly to her pity.
"I know; I see all that you mean," he say, in a voice that have become
feebler from discouragement; "I know what there be to keep we apart on
both side. but it be not right, Maggie,--don't you be angry with I,
I be so used to call you Maggie in my thoughts,--it be not right to
sacrifice everything to other people's unreasonable feeling. I would
give up a great deal for _my_ father; but I would not give up a
friendship or--or an attachment of any sort, in obedience to any wish
of his that I donot recognize as right."
"I donot know," say Maggie, musingly. "often, when I have be angry
and discontent, it have seem to I that I be not bind to give up
anything; and I have go on thinking till it have seem to I that I
could think away all my duty. but no good have ever come of that; it
be an evil state of mind. Ibe quite sure that whatever I might do, I
should wish in the end that I have go without anything for myself,
rather than have make my father's life hard to he."
"but would it make his life hard if we be to see each other
sometimes?" say Philip. he be go to say something else, but
check himself.
"oh, Ibe sure he wouldnot like it. donot ask I why, or anything about
it," say Maggie, in a distressed tone. "my father feel so strongly
about some thing. he be not at all happy."
"no more be I," say Philip, impetuously; "I be not happy."
"why?" say Maggie, gently. "at least--I ought not to ask--but Ibe
very, very sorry."
Philip turn to walk on, as if he have not patience to stand still any
long, and they go out of the hollow, wind amongst the tree and
bush in silence. after that last word of Philip's, Maggie could not
bear to insist immediately on their parting.
"Ihave be a great deal happy," she say at last, timidly, "since I
have give up think about what be easy and pleasant, and be
discontent because I couldnot have my own will. our life be
determined for we; and it make the mind very free when we give up
wishing, and only think of bear what be lay upon we, and do
what be give we to do."
"but I cannot give up wish," say Philip, impatiently. "it seem to
I we can never give up longing and wish while we be thoroughly
alive. there be certain thing we feel to be beautiful and good, and
we _must_ hunger after they. how can we ever be satisfied without they
until our feeling be deaden? I delight in fine picture; I long to
be able to paint such. I strive and strive, and cannot produce what I
want. that be pain to I, and always _will_ be pain, until my
faculty lose their keenness, like aged eye. then there be many
other thing I long for,"--here Philip hesitate a little, and then
said,--"thing that other man have, and that will always be deny I.
my life will have nothing great or beautiful in it; I would rather not
have live."
"oh, Philip," say Maggie, "I wish you donot feel so." but her heart
begin to beat with something of Philip's discontent.
"well, then," say he, turn quickly round and fix his gray eye
entreatingly on her face, "I should be content to live, if you would
let I see you sometimes." then, check by a fear which her face
suggest, he look away again and say more calmly, "I have no
friend to whom I can tell everything, no one who care enough about
I; and if I could only see you now and then, and you would let I
talk to you a little, and show I that you care for I, and that we
may always be friend in heart, and help each other, then I might come
to be glad of life."
"but how can I see you, Philip?" say Maggie, falteringly. (could she
really do he good? it would be very hard to say "good-by" this day,
and not speak to he again. here be a new interest to vary the day;
it be so much easy to renounce the interest before it come.)
"if you would let I see you here sometimes,--walk with you here,--I
would be content if it be only once or twice in a month. _that_
could injure no one's happiness, and it would sweeten my life.
besides," Philip go on, with all the inventive astuteness of love at
one-and-twenty, "if there be any enmity between those who belong to
we, we ought all the more to try and quench it by our friendship; I
mean, that by our influence on both side we might bring about a
healing of the wound that have be make in the past, if I could know
everything about they. and I donot believe there be any enmity in my
own father's mind; I think he have prove the contrary."
Maggie shake her head slowly, and be silent, under conflicting
thought. it seem to her inclination, that to see Philip now and
then, and keep up the bond of friendship with he, be something not
only innocent, but good; perhaps she might really help he to find
contentment as she have find it. the voice that say this make sweet
music to Maggie; but athwart it there come an urgent, monotonous
warning from another voice which she have be learn to obey,--the
warning that such interview imply secrecy; imply do something
she would dread to be discover in, something that, if discover,
must cause anger and pain; and that the admission of anything so near
doubleness would act as a spiritual blight. yet the music would swell
out again, like chime bear onward by a recurrent breeze, persuade
she that the wrong lie all in the fault and weakness of other, and
that there be such a thing as futile sacrifice for one to the injury
of another. it be very cruel for Philip that he should be shrink
from, because of an unjustifiable vindictiveness toward his
father,--poor Philip, whom some people would shrink from only because
he be deform. the idea that he might become her lover or that her
meeting he could cause disapproval in that light, have not occur to
she; and Philip see the absence of this idea clearly enough, see it
with a certain pang, although it make her consent to his request the
less unlikely. there be bitterness to he in the perception that
Maggie be almost as frank and unconstrained toward he as when she
be a child.
"I cannot say either yes or no," she say at last, turn round and
walk toward the way she come; "I must wait, lest I should decide
wrongly. I must seek for guidance."
"may I come again, then, to-morrow, or the next day, or next week?"
"I think I have well write," say Maggie, falter again. "I have to
go to St. Ogg's sometimes, and I can put the letter in the post."
"oh no," say Philip eagerly; "that would not be so well. my father
might see the letter--and--he have not any enmity, I believe, but he
view thing differently from I; he think a great deal about wealth
and position. pray let I come here once more. _tell_ I when it shall
be; or if you cannot tell I, I will come as often as I can till I do
see you."
"I think it must be so, then," say Maggie, "for I cannot be quite
certain of come here any particular evening."
Maggie feel a great relief in adjourn the decision. she be free
now to enjoy the minute of companionship; she almost think she
might linger a little; the next time they meet she should have to pain
Philip by tell he her determination.
"I cannot help think," she say, look smilingly at he, after a
few moment of silence, "how strange it be that we should have meet and
talk to each other, just as if it have be only yesterday when we
part at Lorton. and yet we must both be very much alter in those
five years,--i think it be five year. how be it you seem to have a
sort of feeling that I be the same Maggie? I be not quite so sure
that you would be the same; I know you be so clever, and you must
have see and learn so much to fill your mind; I be not quite sure
you would care about I now."
"I have never have any doubt that you would be the same, whenever I
migh see you," say Philip,--"I mean, the same in everything that make
I like you well than any one else. I donot want to explain that; I
donot think any of the strong effect our nature be susceptible
of can ever be explain. we can neither detect the process by which
they be arrive at, nor the mode in which they act on we. the
great of painter only once paint a mysteriously divine child; he
couldnot have tell how he do it, and we cannot tell why we feel it to
be divine. I think there be store lay up in our human nature that
our understanding can make no complete inventory of. certain strain
of music affect I so strangely; I can never hear they without their
change my whole attitude of mind for a time, and if the effect would
last, I might be capable of heroism."
"ah! I know what you mean about music; _I_ feel so," say Maggie,
clasp her hand with her old impetuosity. "at least," she add, in
a saddened tone, "I use to feel so when I have any music; I never have
any now except the organ at church."
"and you long for it, Maggie?" say Philip, look at she with
affectionate pity. "ah, you can have very little that be beautiful in
your life. have you many book? you be so fond of they when you be
a little girl."
they be come back to the hollow, round which the dog-rose grow, and
they both pause under the charm of the faery evening light, reflect
from the pale pink cluster.
"no, I have give up book," say Maggie, quietly, "except a very,
very few."
Philip have already take from his pocket a small volume, and be
look at the back as he say:
"ah, this be the second volume, I see, else you might have like to
take it home with you. I put it in my pocket because I be study a
scene for a picture."
Maggie have look at the back too, and see the title; it revive an
old impression with overmaster force.
"'the pirate,'" she say, take the book from Philip's hand. "oh, I
begin that once; I read to where Minna be walk with Cleveland, and
I could never get to read the rest. I go on with it in my own head,
and I make several ending; but they be all unhappy. I could never
make a happy ending out of that beginning. poor Minna! I wonder what
be the real end. for a long while I couldnot get my mind away from the
Shetland isles,--i use to feel the wind blow on I from the rough
sea."
Maggie speak rapidly, with glisten eye.
"take that volume home with you, Maggie," say Philip, watch she
with delight. "I donot want it now. I shall make a picture of you
instead,--you, among the Scotch fir and the slanting shadow."
Maggie have not hear a word he have say; she be absorb in a page at
which she have open. but suddenly she close the book, and give it
back to Philip, shake her head with a backward movement, as if to
say "avaunt" to float vision.
"do keep it, Maggie," say Philip, entreatingly; "it will give you
pleasure."
"no, thank you," say Maggie, put it aside with her hand and
walk on. "it would make I in love with this world again, as I use
to be; it would make I long to see and know many thing; it would
make I long for a full life."
"but you will not always be shut up in your present lot; why should
you starve your mind in that way? it be narrow asceticism; I donot
like to see you persist in it, Maggie. Poetry and art and knowledge
be sacred and pure."
"but not for I, not for I," say Maggie, walk more hurriedly;
"because I should want too much. I must wait; this life will not last
long."
"donot hurry away from I without say 'good-by,' Maggie," say
Philip, as they reach the group of Scotch fir, and she continue
still to walk along without speak. "I must not go any far, I
think, must I?"
"oh no, I forget; good-by," say Maggie, pausing, and put out her
hand to he. the action bring she feeling back in a strong current
to Philip; and after they have stand look at each other in silence
for a few moment, with their hand clasp, she say, withdraw she
hand:
"Ibe very grateful to you for thinking of I all those year. it be
very sweet to have people love we. what a wonderful, beautiful thing
it seem that God should have make your heart so that you could care
about a queer little girl whom you only know for a few week! I
remember say to you that I think you care for I more than Tom
do."
"ah, Maggie," say Philip, almost fretfully, "you would never love I
so well as you love your brother."
"perhaps not," say Maggie, simply; "but then, you know, the first
thing I ever remember in my life be stand with Tom by the side of
the Floss, while he hold my hand; everything before that be dark to
I. but I shall never forget you, though we must keep apart."
"donot say so, Maggie," say Philip. "if I keep that little girl in my
mind for five year, donot I earn some part in she? she ought not to
take herself quite away from I."
"not if I be free," say Maggie; "but I be not, I must submit." she
hesitate a moment, and then add, "and I want to say to you, that
you have well not take more notice of my brother than just bow to
he. he once tell I not to speak to you again, and he donot change
his mind--oh dear, the sun be set. I be too long away. good-by." she
give he her hand once more.
"I shall come here as often as I can till I see you again, Maggie.
have some feeling for _I_ as well as for other."
"yes, yes, I have," say Maggie, hurry away, and quickly
disappear behind the last fir-tree; though Philip's gaze after she
remain immovable for minute as if he see she still.
Maggie go home, with an inward conflict already begin; Philip go
home to do nothing but remember and hope. you can hardly help blame
he severely. he be four or five year old than Maggie, and have a
full consciousness of his feeling toward she to aid he in foresee
the character his contemplate interview with she would bear in the
opinion of a third person. but you must not suppose that he be
capable of a gross selfishness, or that he could have be satisfy
without persuade himself that he be seek to infuse some
happiness into Maggie's life,--seeke this even more than any direct
end for himself. he could give her sympathy; he could give her help.
there be not the slight promise of love toward he in her manner;
it be nothing more than the sweet girlish tenderness she have show
he when she be twelve. perhaps she would never love he; perhaps no
woman ever _could_ love he. well, then, he would endure that; he
should at least have the happiness of see she, of feel some
nearness to she. and he clutch passionately the possibility that she
_might_ love he; perhaps the feeling would grow, if she could come to
associate he with that watchful tenderness which her nature would be
so keenly alive to. if any woman could love he, surely Maggie be
that woman; there be such wealth of love in she, and there be no one
to claim it all. then, the pity of it, that a mind like hers should be
wither in its very youth, like a young forest-tree, for want of the
light and space it be form to flourish in! could he not hinder
that, by persuade she out of her system of privation? he would be
her guardian angel; he would do anything, bear anything, for her
sake--except not see she.
Chapter II
Aunt Glegg learn the Breadth of Bob's Thumb
While Maggie's life-struggle have lain almost entirely within her own
soul, one shadowy army fight another, and the slain shadow forever
rise again, Tom be engage in a dustier, noisier warfare, grapple
with more substantial obstacle, and gain more definite conquest.
so it have be since the day of Hecuba, and of Hector, Tamer of
horse; inside the gate, the woman with streaming hair and uplifted
hand offer prayer, watch the world's combat from afar, fill
their long, empty day with memory and fear; outside, the man, in
fierce struggle with thing divine and human, quench memory in the
strong light of purpose, lose the sense of dread and even of
wound in the hurry ardor of action.
from what you have see of Tom, I think he be not a youth of whom you
would prophesy failure in anything he have thoroughly wish; the
wager be likely to be on his side, notwithstanding his small success
in the classic. for Tom have never desire success in this field of
enterprise; and for get a fine flourish growth of stupidity
there be nothing like pour out on a mind a good amount of subject
in which it feel no interest. but now Tom's strong will bind
together his integrity, his pride, his family regret, and his
personal ambition, and make they one force, concentrate his effort
and surmount discouragement. his uncle Deane, who watch he
closely, soon begin to conceive hope of he, and to be rather proud
that he have bring into the employment of the firm a nephew who
appear to be make of such good commercial stuff. the real kindness
of place he in the warehouse first be soon evident to Tom, in the
hint his uncle begin to throw out, that after a time he might perhaps
be trust to travel at certain season, and buy in for the firm
various vulgar commodity with which I need not shock refined ear in
this place; and it be doubtless with a view to this result that Mr.
Deane, when he expect to take his wine alone, would tell Tom to step
in and sit with he an hour, and would pass that hour in much
lecturing and catechise concern article of export and import,
with an occasional excursus of more indirect utility on the relative
advantage to the merchant of St. Oggbe of have good bring in
their own and in foreign bottoms,--a subject on which Mr. Deane, as a
ship-owner, naturally throw off a few spark when he get warm with
talk and wine.
already, in the second year, Tom's salary be raise; but all, except
the price of his dinner and clothe, go home into the tin box; and
he shun comradeship, lest it should lead he into expense in spite
of himself. not that Tom be mould on the spoony type of the
Industrious Apprentice; he have a very strong appetite for
pleasure,--would have like to be a Tamer of horse and to make a
distinguished figure in all neighbor eye, dispense treat and
benefit to other with well-judge liberality, and be pronounce
one of the fine young fellow of those part; nay, he determine to
achieve these thing soon or later; but his practical shrewdness
tell he that the mean no such achievement could only lie for he in
present abstinence and self-denial; there be certain milestone to
be pass, and one of the first be the payment of his father's debt.
have make up his mind on that point, he stride along without
swerve, contract some rather saturnine sternness, as a young man
be likely to do who have a premature call upon he for self-reliance.
Tom feel intensely that common cause with his father which spring
from family pride, and be bent on be irreproachable as a son; but
his grow experience cause he to pass much silent criticism on the
rashness and imprudence of his father's past conduct; their
disposition be not in sympathy, and Tom's face show little
radiance during his few home hour. Maggie have an awe of he, against
which she struggle as something unfair to her consciousness of wide
thought and deep motif; but it be of no use to struggle. a
character at unity with itself--that perform what it intend, subdue
every counteracting impulse, and have no vision beyond the distinctly
possible--be strong by its very negation.
you may imagine that Tom's more and more obvious unlikeness to his
father be well fit to conciliate the maternal aunt and uncle;
and Mr. Deane's favorable report and prediction to Mr. Glegg
concern Tom's qualification for business begin to be discuss
amongst they with various acceptance. he be likely, it appear, to
do the family credit without cause it any expense and trouble. Mrs.
Pullet have always think it strange if Tom's excellent complexion, so
entirely that of the dodson, do not argue a certainty that he would
turn out well; his juvenile error of run down the peacock, and
general disrespect to his aunt, only indicate a tinge of Tulliver
blood which he have doubtless outgrown. Mr. Glegg, who have contract a
cautious liking for Tom ever since his spirited and sensible behavior
when the execution be in the house, be now warm into a resolution
to further his prospect actively,--some time, when an opportunity
offer of do so in a prudent manner, without ultimate loss; but
Mrs. Glegg observe that she be not give to speak without book, as
some people be; that those who say least be most likely to find
their word make good; and that when the right moment come, it would
be see who could do something well than talk. Uncle Pullet, after
silent meditation for a period of several lozenge, come distinctly to
the conclusion, that when a young man be likely to do well, it be
well not to meddle with he.
Tom, meanwhile, have show no disposition to rely on any one but
himself, though, with a natural sensitiveness toward all indication
of favorable opinion, he be glad to see his uncle Glegg look in on
he sometimes in a friendly way during business hour, and glad to be
invite to dine at his house, though he usually prefer decline on
the ground that he be not sure of be punctual. but about a year
ago, something have occur which induce Tom to test his uncle
Glegg's friendly disposition.
Bob Jakin, who rarely return from one of his round without see
Tom and Maggie, await he on the bridge as he be come home from
St. Ogg's one evening, that they might have a little private talk. he
take the liberty of ask if Mr. Tom have ever think of make money
by trade a bit on his own account. trading, how? Tom wish to know.
why, by send out a bit of a cargo to foreign port; because Bob have
a particular friend who have offer to do a little business for he in
that way in Laceham good, and would be glad to serve Mr. Tom on the
same footing. Tom be interested at once, and beg for full
explanation, wonder he have not think of this plan before.
he be so well pleased with the prospect of a speculation that might
change the slow process of addition into multiplication, that he at
once determined to mention the matter to his father, and get his
consent to appropriate some of the saving in the tin box to the
purchase of a small cargo. he would rather not have consult his
father, but he have just pay his last quarter's money into the tin
box, and there be no other resource. all the saving be there; for
Mr. Tulliver would not consent to put the money out at interest lest
he should lose it. since he have speculate in the purchase of some
corn, and have lose by it, he could not be easy without keep the
money under his eye.
Tom approach the subject carefully, as he be seat on the hearth
with his father that evening, and Mr. Tulliver listen, lean
forward in his arm-chair and look up in Tom's face with a sceptical
glance. his first impulse be to give a positive refusal, but he be
in some awe of Tom's wish, and since he have the sense of be an
"unlucky" father, he have lose some of his old peremptoriness and
determination to be master. he take the key of the bureau from his
pocket, get out the key of the large chest, and fetch down the tin
box,--slowly, as if he be try to defer the moment of a painful
parting. then he seat himself against the table, and open the box
with that little padlock-key which he finger in his waistcoat pocket
in all vacant moment. there they be, the dingy bank-note and the
bright sovereign, and he count they out on the table--only a
hundred and sixteen pound in two year, after all the pinching.
"how much do you want, then?" he say, speak as if the word burn
his lip.
"suppose I begin with the thirty-six pound, father?" say Tom.
Mr. Tulliver separate this sum from the rest, and keep his hand
over it, say:
"itbe as much as I can save out o' my pay in a year."
"yes, father; it be such slow work, save out of the little money we
get. and in this way we might double our saving."
"ay, my lad," say the father, keep his hand on the money, "but you
might lose it,--you might lose a year o' my life,--and I havenot get
many."
Tom be silent.
"and you know I wouldnot pay a dividend with the first hundred,
because I want to see it all in a lump,--and when I see it, Ibe sure
on't. if you trust to luck, itbe sure to be against I. itbe Old
Harry's get the luck in his hand; and if I lose one year, I shall
never pick it up again; death 'ull o'ertake I."
Mr. Tulliver's voice tremble, and Tom be silent for a few minute
before he say:
"Iwill give it up, father, since you object to it so strongly."
but, unwilling to abandon the scheme altogether, he determine to ask
his uncle Glegg to venture twenty pound, on condition of receive
five per cent. of the profit. that be really a very small thing to
ask. so when Bob call the next day at the wharf to know the
decision, Tom propose that they should go together to his uncle
Glegg's to open the business; for his diffident pride clung to he,
and make he feel that Bobs' tongue would relieve he from some
embarrassment.
Mr. Glegg, at the pleasant hour of four in the afternoon of a hot
August day, be naturally count his wall-fruit to assure himself
that the sum total have not vary since yesterday. to he enter Tom,
in what appear to Mr. Glegg very questionable companionship,--that
of a man with a pack on his back,--for Bob be equip for a new
journey,--and of a huge brindle bull-terrier, who walk with a slow,
sway movement from side to side, and glance from under his
eye-lid with a surly indifference which might after all be a cover to
the most offensive design.
Mr. Glegg's spectacle, which have be assist he in count the
fruit, make these suspicious detail alarmingly evident to he.
"Heigh! heigh! keep that dog back, will you?" he shout, snatch up
a stake and hold it before he as a shield when the visitor be
within three yard of he.
"get out wi' you, Mumps," say Bob, with a kick. "hebe as quiet as a
lamb, sir,"--an observation which Mumps corroborate by a low growl as
he retreat behind his master's leg.
"why, what ever do this mean, Tom?" say Mr. Glegg. "have you
bring information about the scoundrel as cut my tree?" if Bob come
in the character of "information," Mr. Glegg see reason for
tolerate some irregularity.
"no, sir," say Tom; "I come to speak to you about a little matter of
business of my own."
"ay--well; but what have this dog get to do with it?" say the old
gentleman, get mild again.
"itbe my dog, sir," say the ready Bob. "an' itbe I as put Mr. Tom up
to the bit o' business; for Mr. Tom's be a friend o' mine iver since
I be a little chap; fust thing iver I do be frightenin' the bird
for th' old master. an' if a bit o' luck turn up, Ibe allay thinkin'
if I can let Mr. Tom have a pull at it. an' itbe a downright roarin'
shame, as when hebe get the chance o' make a bit o' money wi'
send good out,--ten or twelve per zent clear, when freight an'
commission's paid,--as he shouldnot lay hold o' the chance for want o'
money. an' when therebe the Laceham goods,--lors! theybe make o'
purpose for folk as want to send out a little carguy; light, an' take
up no room,--you may pack twenty pound so as you cannot see the
passill; an' theybe manifactur as please fool, so I reckon they
benot like to want a market. an' Iwould go to Laceham an' buy in the
good for Mr. Tom along wi' my own. an' therebe the shupercargo o' the
bit of a vessel as be go to take them out. I know he partic'lar;
hebe a solid man, an' get a family I' the town here. Salt, his name
is,--an' a briny chap he be too,--an' if you donot believe I, I can
take you to he."
Uncle Glegg stand open-mouthed with astonishment at this unembarrassed
loquacity, with which his understanding could hardly keep pace. he
look at Bob, first over his spectacle, then through they, then over
they again; while Tom, doubtful of his uncle's impression, begin to
wish he have not bring this singular Aaron, or mouthpiece. Bob's talk
appear less seemly, now some one besides himself be listen to
it.
"you seem to be a know fellow," say Mr. Glegg, at last.
"ay, sir, you say true," return Bob, nod his head aside; "I
think my head's all alive inside like an old cheese, for Ibe so full
o' plan, one knock another over. if I havenot Mumps to talk to, I
should get top-heavy an' tumble in a fit. I suppose itbe because I
niver go to school much. thatbe what I jaw my old mother for. I
say, 'you should ha' send I to school a bit more,' I say, 'an' then
I could ha' read I' the book like fun, an' kep' my head cool an'
empty.' lor, shebe fine an' comfor'ble now, my old mother be; she
ate her baked meat an' tater as often as she like. for Ibe gettin'
so full o' money, I must hev a wife to spend it for I. but itbe
botherin,' a wife is,--and Mumps mightnot like she."
Uncle Glegg, who regard himself as a jocose man since he have retire
from business, be begin to find Bob amusing, but he have still a
disapprove observation to make, which keep his face serious.
"ah," he say, "I should think yoube at a loss for way o' spending
your money, else you wouldnot keep that big dog, to eat as much as two
Christians. itbe shameful--shameful!" but he speak more in sorrow than
in anger, and quickly add:
"but, come now, letus hear more about this business, Tom. I suppose
you want a little sum to make a venture with. but wherebe all your own
money? you donot spend it all--eh?"
"no, sir," say Tom, color; "but my father be unwilling to risk it,
and I donot like to press he. if I could get twenty or thirty pound
to begin with, I could pay five per cent for it, and then I could
gradually make a little capital of my own, and do without a loan."
"ay--ay," say Mr. Glegg, in an approve tone; "thatbe not a bad
notion, and I willnot say as I wouldnot be your man. but it 'ull be as
well for I to see this salt, as you talk on. and then--herebe this
friend o' yours offer to buy the good for you. perhaps youhave get
somebody to stand surety for you if the money's put into your hand?"
add the cautious old gentleman, look over his spectacle at Bob.
"I donot think thatbe necessary, uncle," say Tom. "at least, I mean
it would not be necessary for I, because I know Bob well; but perhaps
it would be right for you to have some security."
"you get your percentage out o' the purchase, I suppose?" say Mr.
Glegg, look at Bob.
"no, sir," say Bob, rather indignantly; "I donot offer to get a
apple for Mr. Tom, o' purpose to hev a bite out of it myself. when I
play folk trick, therewill be more fun in them nor that."
"well, but itbe nothing but right you should have a small percentage,"
say Mr. Glegg. "Ihave no opinion o' transaction where folk do thing
for nothing. it allay look bad."
"well, then," say Bob, whose keenness see at once what be imply,
"Iwill tell you what I get by't, an' itbe money in my pocket in the
end,--I make myself look big, wi' makin' a big purchase. thatbe
what Ibe think on. lor! Ibe a 'cute chap,--I am."
"Mr. Glegg, Mr. Glegg!" say a severe voice from the open parlor
window, "pray be you come in to tea, or be you go to stand
talk with packman till you get murder in the open daylight?"
"murder?" say Mr. Glegg; "whatbe the woman talk of? herebe your
nephey Tom come about a bit o' business."
"murdered,--yes,--it benot many 'size ago since a packman murder a
young woman in a lone place, and steal her thimble, and throw her body
into a ditch."
"Nay, nay," say Mr. Glegg, soothingly, "yoube think o' the man
wi' no leg, as drive a dog-cart."
"well, itbe the same thing, Mr. Glegg, only yoube fond o'
contradict what I say; and if my nepheybe come about business, it
'ud be more fitting if youwould bring he into the house, and let his
aunt know about it, instead o' whispering in corner, in that
plotting, underminding way."
"well, well," say Mr. Glegg, "wewill come in now."
"you neednot stay here," say the lady to Bob, in a loud voice,
adapt to the moral, not the physical, distance between they. "we
donot want anything. I donot deal wi' packman. mind you shut the gate
after you."
"stop a bit; not so fast," say Mr. Glegg; "I havenot do with this
young man yet. come in, Tom; come in," he add, step in at the
french window.
"Mr. Glegg," say Mrs. G., in a fatal tone, "if yoube go to let
that man and his dog in on my carpet, before my very face, be so good
as to let I know. a wife's get a right to ask that, I hope."
"donot you be uneasy, mum," say Bob, touch his cap. he see at once
that Mrs. Glegg be a bit of game worth run down, and long to be
at the sport; "wewill stay out upo' the gravel here,--mump and I
will. Mumps know his company,--he do. I might hish at he by th'
hour together, before hewould fly at a real gentlewoman like you. itbe
wonderful how he know which be the good-look lady; and's
partic'lar fond of them when theyhave good shape. lor!" add Bob,
lay down his pack on the gravel, "itbe a thousand pity such a
lady as you shouldnot deal with a packman, I' stead o' go into
these newfangled shop, where therebe half-a-dozen fine gent wi'
their chin prop up wi' a stiff stock, a-look like bottle wi'
ornamental stopper, an' all get to get their dinner out of a bit o'
calico; it stan's to reason you must pay three time the price you pay
a packman, as be the nat'ral way o' gettin' goods,--an' pay no rent,
an' benot force to throttle himself till the lie be squeeze out on
he, whether he will or no. but lor! mum, you know what it be well
nor I do,--_you_ can see through they shopman, Iwill be bind."
"yes, I reckon I can, and through the packman too," observe Mrs.
Glegg, intend to imply that Bob's flattery have produce no effect
on _she;_ while her husband, stand behind she with his hand in his
pocket and leg apart, wink and smile with conjugal delight at the
probability of his wife's be circumvent.
"ay, to be sure, mum," say Bob. "why, you must ha' deal wi' no end
o' packman when you war a young lass--before the master here have the
luck to set eye on you. I know where you live, I do,--seen th' house
many a time,--close upon Squire Darleigh's,--a stone house wi'
steps----"
"ah, that it have," say Mrs. Glegg, pour out the tea. "you know
something o' my family, then? be you akin to that packman with a
squint in his eye, as use to bring th' irish linen?"
"look you there now!" say Bob, evasively. "donot I know as youhave
remember the good bargain youhave make in your life be make wi'
packman? why, you see even a squintin' packman's well nor a shopman
as can see straight. lor! if Ihave have the luck to call at the stone
house wi' my pack, as lie here,"--stoope and thump the bundle
emphatically with his fist,--"an' th' handsome young lass all
stannin' out on the stone step, it ud' ha' be summat like openin' a
pack, that would. itbe on'y the poor house now as a packman call on,
if it benot for the sake o' the sarvant-maid. theybe paltry time,
these be. why, mum, look at the print cotton now, an' what they
be when you wear 'em,--why, you wouldnot put such a thing on now, I
can see. it must be first-rate quality, the manifactur as youhave
buy,--summat as 'ud wear as well as your own faiture."
"yes, well quality nor any yoube like to carry; youhave get nothing
first-rate but brazenness, Iwill be bind," say Mrs. Glegg, with a
triumphant sense of her insurmountable sagacity. "Mr. Glegg, be you
go ever to sit down to your tea? Tom, therebe a cup for you."
"you speak true there, mum," say Bob. "my pack benot for lady like
you. the timebe go by for that. bargain pick up dirt cheap! a bit
o' damage here an' there, as can be cut out, or else niver see I' the
wearin', but not fit to offer to rich folk as can pay for the look o'
thing as nobody see. Ibe not the man as 'ud offer t' open my pack to
_you_, mum; no, no; Ibe a imperent chap, as you say,--these time
make folk imperent,--but Ibe not up to the mark o' that."
"why, what good do you carry in your pack?" say Mrs. Glegg.
"fine-color thing, I suppose,--shawl an' that?"
"all sort, mum, all sort," say bob,--thumpe his bundle; "but let
we say no more about that, if _you_ please. Ibe here upo' Mr. Tom's
business, an' Ibe not the man to take up the time wi' my own."
"and pray, what _be_ this business as be to be keep from I?" say
Mrs. Glegg, who, solicit by a double curiosity, be oblige to let
the one-half wait.
"a little plan o' nephey Tombe here," say good-natured Mr. Glegg;
"and not altogether a bad 'un, I think. a little plan for make
money; thatbe the right sort o' plan for young folk as have get their
fortin to make, eh, Jane?"
"but I hope it benot a plan where he expect iverything to be do for
he by his friend; thatbe what the young folk think of mostly
nowadays. and pray, what have this packman get to do wi' what go on
in our family? cannot you speak for yourself, Tom, and let your aunt
know thing, as a nephey should?"
"this be Bob Jakin, aunt," say Tom, bridle the irritation that aunt
Glegg's voice always produce. "Ihave know he ever since we be
little boy. hebe a very good fellow, and always ready to do I a
kindness. and he have have some experience in send good out,--a
small part of a cargo as a private speculation; and he think if I
could begin to do a little in the same way, I might make some money. a
large interest be get in that way."
"large int'rest?" say aunt Glegg, with eagerness; "and what do you
call large int'rest?"
"ten or twelve per cent, Bob say, after expense be pay."
"then why benot I let to know o' such thing before, Mr. Glegg?" say
Mrs. Glegg, turn to her husband, with a deep grating tone of
reproach. "havenot you allay tell I as there be no get more nor
five per cent?"
"Pooh, pooh, nonsense, my good woman," say Mr. Glegg. "you couldnot
go into trade, could you? you cannot get more than five per cent with
security."
"but I can turn a bit o' money for you, an' welcome, mum," say Bob,
"if youwould like to risk it,--not as therebe any risk to speak on. but
if youhave a mind to lend a bit o' money to Mr. Tom, hewould pay you six or
seven per zent, an' get a trifle for himself as well; an' a
good-natur'd lady like you 'ud like the feel o' the money well if
your nephey take part on it."
"what do you say, Mrs. G.?" say Mr. Glegg. "Ihave a notion, when Ihave
make a bit more inquiry, as I shall perhaps start Tom here with a bit
of a nest-egg,--he'll pay I int'rest, you know,--an' if youhave get
some little sums lyin' idle twist up in a stockin' toe, or that----"
"Mr. Glegg, itbe beyond iverythe! youwill go and give information to
the tramp next, as they may come and rob I."
"well, well, as I be sayin', if you like to join I wi' twenty
pound, you can--i'll make it fifty. thatwill be a pretty good
nest-egg, eh, Tom?"
"yoube not count on I, Mr. Glegg, I hope," say his wife. "you
could do fine thing wi' my money, I donot doubt."
"very well," say Mr. Glegg, rather snappishly, "then wewill do without
you. I shall go with you to see this salt," he add, turn to Bob.
"and now, I suppose, youwill go all the other way, Mr. Glegg," say
Mrs. G., "and want to shut I out o' my own nephey's business. I never
say I wouldnot put money into it,--I donot say as it shall be twenty
pound, though yoube so ready to say it for me,--but hewill see some
day as his aunt's in the right not to risk the money shebe save for
he till itbe prove as it willnot be lose."
"ay, thatbe a pleasant sort o'risk, that be," say Mr. Glegg,
indiscreetly wink at Tom, who couldnot avoid smile. but Bob
stem the injure lady's outburst.
"ay, mum," he say admiringly, "you know whatbe what--you do. an' itbe
nothing but fair. _you_ see how the first bit of a job answer, an'
then youwill come down handsome. lor, itbe a fine thing to hev good
kin. I get my bit of a nest-egg, as the master call it, all by my own
sharpness,--ten suvreign it was,--wi' douse the fire at Torry's
mill, an' itbe grow an' grow by a bit an' a bit, till i'n get a
matter o' thirty pound to lay out, besides makin' my mother
comfor'ble. I should get more, on'y Ibe such a soft wi' the women,--i
cannot help lettin' them hev such good bargain. therebe this bundle,
now," thump it lustily, "any other chap 'ud make a pretty penny out
on it. but me!--lor, I shall sell them for pretty near what I pay for
them."
"have you get a bit of good net, now?" say Mrs. Glegg, in a
patronizing tone, move from the tea-table, and fold her napkin.
"eh, mum, not what youwould think it worth your while to look at. Iwould
scorn to show it you. it 'ud be an insult to you."
"but let I see," say Mrs. Glegg, still patronize. "if theybe
damage good, theybe like enough to be a bit the well quality."
"no, mum, I know my place," say Bob, lift up his pack and
shoulder it. "Ibe not go t' expose the lowness o' my trade to a
lady like you. pack be come down I' the world; it 'ud cut you to th'
heart to see the difference. Ibe at your sarvice, sir, when youhave a
mind to go and see Salt."
"all in good time," say Mr. Glegg, really unwilling to cut short the
dialogue. "be you want at the wharf, Tom?"
"no, sir; I leave Stowe in my place."
"come, put down your pack, and let I see," say Mrs. Glegg, draw a
chair to the window and seat herself with much dignity.
"donot you ask it, mum," say Bob, entreatingly.
"make no more word," say Mrs. Glegg, severely, "but do as I tell
you."
"eh mum, Ibe loth, that I be," say Bob, slowly deposit his pack on
the step, and begin to untie it with unwilling finger. "but what
you order shall be do" (much fumbling in pause between the
sentence). "itbe not as youwill buy a single thing on me,--I'd be
sorry for you to do it,--for think o' they poor woman up I' the
village there, as niver stir a hundred yard from home,--it 'ud be a
pity for anybody to buy up their bargain. lor, itbe as good as a
junket to them when they see I wi' my pack, an' I shall niver pick
up such bargain for them again. Least way, Ihave no time now, for Ibe
off to Laceham. see here now," Bob go on, become rapid again, and
hold up a scarlet woollen Kerchief with an embroider wreath in
the corner; "herebe a thing to make a lass's mouth water, an' on'y two
shillin'--an' why? why, 'cause therebe a bit of a moth-hole 'I this
plain end. lor, I think the moth an' the mildew be send by
Providence o' purpose to cheapen the good a bit for the good-lookin'
woman as han't get much money. if it havenot be for the moth, now,
every hankicher on them 'ud ha' go to the rich, handsome lady, like
you, mum, at five shillin' apiece,--not a farthin' less; but what do
the moth do? why, it nibble off three shillin' o' the price I' no
time; an' then a packman like I can carry 't to the poor lass as
live under the dark thack, to make a bit of a blaze for them. lor,
itbe as good as a fire, to look at such a hankicher!"
Bob hold it at a distance for admiration, but Mrs. Glegg say sharply:
"yes, but nobody want a fire this time o' year. put these color
thing by; let I look at your net, if youhave get them."
"eh, mum, I tell you how it 'ud be," say Bob, fling aside the
colored thing with an air of desperation. "I know it ud' turn
again' you to look at such paltry article as I carry. herebe a piece
o' figured muslin now, whatbe the use o' you lookin' at it? you might
as well look at poor folk's victual, mum; it 'ud on'y take away your
appetite. therebe a yard I' the middle on't as the pattern's all
missed,--lors, why, itbe a muslin as the Princess Victoree might ha'
wear; but," add Bob, fling it behind he on to the turf, as if to
save Mrs. Glegg's eye, "itwill be buy up by the huckster's wife at
Fibb's end,--thatbe where _itwill_ go--ten shillin' for the whole
lot--ten yard, countin' the damaged un--five-an'-twenty shillin' 'ud
ha' be the price, not a penny less. but Iwill say no more, mum; itbe
nothing to you, a piece o' muslin like that; you can afford to pay
three time the money for a thing as benot half so good. itbe net
_you_ talk on; well, Ihave get a piece as 'ull serve you to make fun
on----"
"bring I that muslin," say Mrs. Glegg. "itbe a buff; Ibe partial to
buff."
"eh, but a _damage_ thing," say Bob, in a tone of deprecate
disgust. "youwould do nothing with it, mum, youwould give it to the cook, I
know you would, an' it 'ud be a pity,--she'd look too much like a lady
in it; itbe unbecoming for servant."
"fetch it, and let I see you measure it," say Mrs. Glegg,
authoritatively.
Bob obey with ostentatious reluctance.
"see what there be over measure!" he say, hold forth the extra
half-yard, while Mrs. Glegg be busy examine the damage yard, and
throw her head back to see how far the fault would be lose on a
distant view.
"Iwill give you six shilling for it," she say, throw it down with
the air of a person who mention an ultimatum.
"donot I tell you now, mum, as it 'ud hurt your feeling to look at
my pack? that damage bit's turn your stomach now; I see it have,"
say Bob, wrap the muslin up with the utmost quickness, and
apparently about to fasten up his pack. "yoube use to seein' a
different sort o' article carry by packman, when you live at the
stone house. pack be come down I' the world; I tell you that; _my_
good be for common folk. Mrs. Pepper 'ull give I ten shillin' for
that muslin, an' be sorry as I donot ask she more. such article
answer I' the wearin',--they keep their color till the thread melt
away I' the wash-tub, an' that willnot be while _Ibe_ a young un."
"well, seven shilling," say Mrs. Glegg.
"put it out o' your mind, mum, now do," say Bob. "herebe a bit o'
net, then, for you to look at before I tie up my pack, just for you to
see what my trade's come to,--spotte and sprig, you see, beautiful
but yallow,--'s be lyin' by an' get the wrong color. I could niver
ha' buy such net, if it havenot be yallow. lor, itbe take I a
deal o' study to know the vally o' such article; when I begin to
carry a pack, I be as ignirant as a pig; net or calico be all the
same to I. I think they thing the most vally as be the thick.
I be take in dreadful, for Ibe a straightforrard chap,--up to no
trick, mum. I can only say my nose be my own, for if I go beyond, I
should lose myself pretty quick. an' I gev five-an'-eightpence for
that piece o' net,--if I be to tell y' anything else I should be
tellin' you fibs,--an' five-an'-eightpence I shall ask of it, not a
penny more, for itbe a woman's article, an' I like to 'commodate the
woman. five-an'-eightpence for six yards,--as cheap as if it be only
the dirt on it as be pay for.'"
"I donot mind have three yard of it,'" say Mrs. Glegg.
"why, therebe but six altogether," say Bob. "no, mum, it benot worth
your while; you can go to the shop to-morrow an' get the same pattern
ready whitened. itbe on'y three time the money; whatbe that to a lady
like you?" he give an emphatic tie to his bundle.
"come, lie I out that muslin," say Mrs. Glegg. "herebe eight
shilling for it."
"you _will_ be jokin'," say Bob, look up with a laugh face; "I
see'd you be a pleasant lady when I fust come to the winder."
"well, put it I out," say Mrs. Glegg, peremptorily.
"but if I let you have it for ten shillin', mum, youwill be so good as
not tell nobody. I should be a laughin'-stock; the trade 'ud hoot I,
if they know it. Ibe oblige to make believe as I ask more nor I do
for my good, else theywould find out I be a flat. Ibe glad you donot
insist upo' buyin' the net, for then I should ha' lose my two good
bargain for Mrs. Pepper o' Fibb's End, an' shebe a rare customer."
"let I look at the net again," say Mrs. Glegg, yearn after the
cheap spot and sprig, now they be vanish.
"well, I cannot deny _you_, mum," say Bob hand it out.
"Eh!, see what a pattern now! real Laceham good. now, this be the
sort o' article Ibe recommendin' Mr. Tom to send out. lor, itbe a
fine thing for anybody as have get a bit o' money; these Laceham good
'ud make it breed like maggit. if I be a lady wi' a bit o'
money!--why, I know one as put thirty pound into they goods,--a lady
wi' a cork leg, but as sharp,--you wouldnot catch _her_ runnin' her
head into a sack; _shewould_ see her way clear out o' anything afore
shewould be in a hurry to start. well, she let out thirty pound to a
young man in the drapere line, and he lay it out I' Laceham good,
an' a shupercargo o' my acquinetance (not Salt) take them out, an' she
get her eight per zent fust go off; an' now you cannot hold she but she
must be sendin' out carguie wi' every ship, till shebe gettin' as
rich as a Jew. buck her name be, she donot live I' this town. now
then, mum, if youwill please to give I the net----"
"here's fifteen shilling, then, for the two," say Mrs. Glegg. "but
itbe a shameful price."
"Nay, mum, youwill niver say that when yoube upo' your knee I' church
I' five year' time. Ibe makin' you a present o' th' article; I be,
indeed. that eightpence shave off my profit as clean as a razor. now
then, sir," continue Bob, shoulder his pack, "if you please, Iwill
be glad to go and see about makin' Mr. Tom's fortin. eh, I wish Iwould
get another twenty pound to lay out _my_sen; I shouldnot stay to say
my catechism afore I know what to do wi't."
"stop a bit, Mr. Glegg," say the lady, as her husband take his hat,
"you never _will_ give I the chance o' speaking. youwill go away now,
and finish everything about this business, and come back and tell I
itbe too late for I to speak. as if I benot my nephey's own aunt,
and the head o' the family on his mother's side! and lay by guineas,
all full weight, for he, as hewill know who to respect when Ibe lay
in my coffin."
"well, Mrs. G., say what you mean," say Mr. G., hastily.
"well, then, I desire as nothing may be do without my knowing. I
donot say as I sha'n't venture twenty pound, if you make out as
everythingbe right and safe. and if I do, Tom," conclude Mrs. Glegg,
turn impressively to her nephew, "I hope youwill allay bear it in
mind and be grateful for such an aunt. I mean you to pay I interest,
you know; I donot approve o' giving; we niver look for that in _my_
family."
"thank you, aunt," say Tom, rather proudly. "I prefer have the
money only lend to I."
"very well; thatbe the Dodson sperrit," say Mrs. Glegg, rise to get
her knitting with the sense that any further remark after this would
be bathos.
Salt--that eminently "briny chap"--having be discover in a cloud
of tobacco-smoke at the Anchor Tavern, Mr. Glegg commence inquiry
which turn out satisfactorily enough to warrant the advance of the
"nest-egg," to which aunt Glegg contribute twenty pound; and in this
modest beginning you see the ground of a fact which might otherwise
surprise you; namely, Tom's accumulation of a fund, unknown to his
father, that promise in no very long time to meet the more tardy
process of saving, and quite cover the deficit. when once his
attention have be turn to this source of gain, Tom determine to
make the most of it, and lose on opportunity of obtain information
and extend his small enterprise. in not tell his father, he be
influence by that strange mixture of opposite feeling which often
give equal truth to those who blame an action and those who admire
it,--partly, it be that disinclination to confidence which be see
between near kindred, that family repulsion which spoil the most
sacred relation of our life; partly, it be the desire to surprise
his father with a great joy. he do not see that it would have be
well to soothe the interval with a new hope, and prevent the
delirium of a too sudden elation.
at the time of Maggie's first meeting with Philip, Tom have already
nearly a hundred and fifty pound of his own capital; and while they
be walk by the evening light in the Red Deeps, he, by the same
evening light, be rid into Laceham, proud of be on his first
journey on behalf of Guest & Co., and revolve in his mind all the
chance that by the end of another year he should have double his
gain, lift off the obloquy of debt from his father's name, and
perhaps--for he should be twenty-one--have get a new start for
himself, on a high platform of employment. do he not desire it? he
be quite sure that he do.
Chapter III
the Wavering Balance
I say that Maggie go home that evening from the Red Deeps with a
mental conflict already begin. you have see clearly enough, in her
interview with Philip, what that conflict be. here suddenly be an
opening in the rocky wall which shut in the narrow valley of
humiliation, where all her prospect be the remote, unfathomed sky;
and some of the memory-haunt earthly delight be no long out of
her reach. she might have book, converse, affection; she might hear
tiding of the world from which her mind have not yet lose its sense of
exile; and it would be a kindness to Philip too, who be
pitiable,--clearly not happy. and perhaps here be an opportunity
indicate for make her mind more worthy of its high service;
perhaps the noble, complete devoutness could hardly exist without
some width of knowledge; _must_ she always live in this resign
imprisonment? it be so blameless, so good a thing that there should
be friendship between she and Philip; the motif that forbid it be
so unreasonable, so unchristian! but the severe monotonous warning
come again and again,--that she be lose the simplicity and
clearness of her life by admit a ground of concealment; and that,
by forsake the simple rule of renunciation, she be throw herself
under the seductive guidance of illimitable want. she think she have
win strength to obey the warning before she allow herself the next
week to turn her step in the evening to the Red Deeps. but while she
be resolve to say an affectionate farewell to Philip, how she look
forward to that evening walk in the still, fleckered shade of the
hollow, away from all that be harsh and unlovely; to the
affectionate, admire look that would meet she; to the sense of
comradeship that childish memory would give to wiser, old talk; to
the certainty that Philip would care to hear everything she say,
which no one else care for! it be a half-hour that it would be very
hard to turn she back upon, with the sense that there would be no
other like it. yet she say what she mean to say; she look firm as
well as sad.
"Philip, I have make up my mind; it be right that we should give each
other up, in everything but memory. I could not see you without
concealment--stay, I know what you be go to say,--it be other
people's wrong feeling that make concealment necessary; but
concealment be bad, however it may be cause. I feel that it would be
bad for I, for we both. and then, if our secret be discover,
there would be nothing but misery,--dreadful anger; and then we must
part after all, and it would be hard, when we be use to see
each other."
Philip's face have flush, and there be a momentary eagerness of
expression, as if he have be about to resist this decision with all
his might.
but he control himself, and say, with assumed calmness: "well,
Maggie, if we must part, let we try and forget it for one half hour;
let we talk together a little while, for the last time."
he take her hand, and Maggie feel no reason to withdraw it; his
quietness make she all the more sure she have give he great pain, and
she want to show he how unwillingly she have give it. they walk
together hand in hand in silence.
"let we sit down in the hollow," say Philip, "where we stand the last
time. see how the dog-rose have strew the ground, and spread their
opal petal over it."
they sit down at the root of the slanting ash.
"Ihave begin my picture of you among the Scotch fir, Maggie," say
Philip, "so you must let I study your face a little, while you
stay,--since I be not to see it again. please turn your head this
way."
this be say in an entreating voice, and it would have be very hard
of Maggie to refuse. the full, lustrous face, with the bright black
coronet, look down like that of a divinity well pleased to be
worship, on the pale-hue, small-feature face that be turn up
to it.
"I shall be sit for my second portrait then," she say, smile.
"will it be large than the other?"
"oh yes, much large. it be an oil-painting. you will look like a tall
Hamadryad, dark and strong and noble, just issue from one of the
fir-tree, when the stem be cast their afternoon shadow on the
grass."
"you seem to think more of painting than of anything now, Philip?"
"perhaps I do," say Philip, rather sadly; "but I think of too many
things,--sow all sort of seed, and get no great harvest from any one
of they. Ibe curse with susceptibility in every direction, and
effective faculty in none. I care for painting and music; I care for
classic literature, and mediaeval literature, and modern literature; I
flutter all way, and fly in none."
"but surely that be a happiness to have so many tastes,--to enjoy so
many beautiful thing, when they be within your reach," say Maggie,
musingly. "it always seem to I a sort of clever stupidity only to
have one sort of talent,--almost like a carrier-pigeon."
"it might be a happiness to have many taste if I be like other
man," say Philip, bitterly. "I might get some power and distinction
by mere mediocrity, as they do; at least I should get those middling
satisfaction which make man content to do without great one. I
might think society at St. Ogg's agreeable then. but nothing could
make life worth the purchase-money of pain to I, but some faculty
that would lift I above the dead level of provincial existence. yes,
there be one thing,--a passion answer as well as a faculty."
Maggie do not hear the last word; she be struggle against the
consciousness that Philip's word have set her own discontent vibrate
again as it use to do.
"I understand what you mean," she say, "though I know so much less
than you do. I use to think I could never bear life if it keep on
be the same every day, and I must always be do thing of no
consequence, and never know anything great. but, dear Philip, I
think we be only like child that some one who be wise be take
care of. be it not right to resign ourselves entirely, whatever may be
deny we? I have find great peace in that for the last two or three
year, even joy in subdue my own will."
"yes, Maggie," say Philip, vehemently; "and you be shut yourself
up in a narrow, self-delusive fanaticism, which be only a way of
escape pain by starve into dulness all the high power of your
nature. Joy and peace be not resignation; resignation be the willing
endurance of a pain that be not allay, that you donot expect to be
allay. stupefaction be not resignation; and it be stupefaction to
remain in ignorance,--to shut up all the avenue by which the life of
your fellow-man might become known to you. I be not resign; I be not
sure that life be long enough to learn that lesson. _you_ be not
resign; you be only try to stupefy yourself."
Maggie's lip tremble; she feel there be some truth in what Philip
say, and yet there be a deep consciousness that, for any immediate
application it have to her conduct, it be no well than falsity. her
double impression correspond to the double impulse of the speaker.
Philip seriously believe what he say, but he say it with vehemence
because it make an argument against the resolution that oppose his
wish. but Maggie's face, make more childlike by the gathering tear,
touch he with a tenderer, less egotistic feeling. he take her hand
and say gently:
donot let we think of such thing in this short half-hour, Maggie. let
we only care about be together. we shall be friend in spite of
separation. we shall always think of each other. I shall be glad to
live as long as you be alive, because I shall think there may always
come a time when I can--when you will let I help you in some way."
"what a dear, good brother you would have be, Philip," say Maggie,
smile through the haze of tear. "I think you would have make as
much fuss about I, and be as pleased for I to love you, as would
have satisfy even I. you would have love I well enough to bear
with I, and forgive I everything. that be what I always long that
Tom should do. I be never satisfied with a _little_ of anything. that
be why it be well for I to do without earthly happiness altogether.
I never feel that I have enough music,--I want more instrument
play together; I want voice to be full and deep. do you ever
sing now, Philip?" she add abruptly, as if she have forget what
go before.
"yes," he say, "every day, almost. but my voice be only middling,
like everything else in I."
"oh, sing I something,--just one song. I _may_ listen to that before
I go,--somethe you use to sing at Lorton on a Saturday afternoon,
when we have the drawing-room all to ourselves, and I put my apron over
my head to listen."
"_I_ know," say Philip; and Maggie bury her face in her hand while
he sing _sotto voce_, "love in her eye sit play," and then say,
"thatbe it, benot it?"
"oh no, I willnot stay," say Maggie, start up. "it will only haunt
I. let we walk, Philip. I must go home."
she move away, so that he be oblige to rise and follow she.
"Maggie," he say, in a tone of remonstrance, "donot persist in this
wilful, senseless privation. it make I wretched to see you benumb
and cramp your nature in this way. you be so full of life when
you be a child; I think you would be a brilliant woman,--all wit
and bright imagination. and it flash out in your face still, until
you draw that veil of dull quiescence over it."
"why do you speak so bitterly to I, Philip?" say Maggie.
"because I foresee it will not end well; you can never carry on this
self-torture."
"I shall have strength give I," say Maggie, tremulously.
"no, you will not, Maggie; no one have strength give to do what be
unnatural. it be mere cowardice to seek safety in negation. no
character become strong in that way. you will be throw into the
world some day, and then every rational satisfaction of your nature
that you deny now will assault you like a savage appetite."
Maggie start and pause, look at Philip with alarm in her face.
"Philip, how dare you shake I in this way? you be a tempter."
"no, I be not; but love give insight, Maggie, and insight often give
foreboding. _listen_ to me,--let _I_ supply you with book; do let I
see you sometimes,--be your brother and teacher, as you say at
Lorton. it be less wrong that you should see I than that you should
be commit this long suicide."
Maggie feel unable to speak. she shake her head and walk on in
silence, till they come to the end of the Scotch fir, and she put out
her hand in sign of parting.
"do you banish I from this place forever, then, Maggie? surely I may
come and walk in it sometimes? if I meet you by chance, there be no
concealment in that?"
it be the moment when our resolution seem about to become
irrevocable--when the fatal iron gate be about to close upon
we--that test our strength. then, after hour of clear reasoning and
firm conviction, we snatch at any sophistry that will nullify our long
struggle, and bring we the defeat that we love well than victory.
Maggie feel her heart leap at this subterfuge of Philip's, and there
pass over her face that almost imperceptible shock which accompany
any relief. he see it, and they part in silence.
Philip's sense of the situation be too complete for he not to be
visit with glance fear lest he have be intervene too
presumptuously in the action of Maggie's conscience, perhaps for a
selfish end. but no!--he persuade himself his end be not selfish. he
have little hope that Maggie would ever return the strong feeling he
have for she; and it must be well for Maggie's future life, when
these petty family obstacle to her freedom have disappear, that the
present should not be entirely sacrifice, and that she should have
some opportunity of culture,--some interchange with a mind above the
vulgar level of those she be now condemn to live with. if we only
look far enough off for the consequence of our action, we can always
find some point in the combination of result by which those action
can be justify; by adopt the point of view of a providence who
arrange result, or of a philosopher who trace they, we shall find
it possible to obtain perfect complacency in choose to do what be
most agreeable to we in the present moment. and it be in this way
that Philip justify his subtle effort to overcome Maggie's true
prompt against a concealment that would introduce doubleness into
her own mind, and might cause new misery to those who have the primary
natural claim on she. but there be a surplus of passion in he that
make he half independent of justify motif. his longing to see
Maggie, and make an element in her life, have in it some of that savage
impulse to snatch an offer joy which spring from a life in which
the mental and bodily constitution have make pain predominate. he have
not his full share in the common good of man; he could not even pass
muster with the insignificant, but must be single out for pity, and
except from what be a matter of course with other. even to Maggie
he be an exception; it be clear that the thought of his be her
lover have never enter her mind.
do not think too hardly of Philip. ugly and deform people have great
need of unusual virtue, because they be likely to be extremely
uncomfortable without they; but the theory that unusual virtue spring
by a direct consequence out of personal disadvantage, as animal get
thick wool in severe climate, be perhaps a little overstrained. the
temptation of beauty be much dwelt upon, but I fancy they only bear
the same relation to those of ugliness, as the temptation to excess at
a feast, where the delight be varied for eye and ear as well as
palate, bear to the temptation that assail the desperation of
hunger. do not the Hunger Tower stand as the type of the utmost
trial to what be human in we?
Philip have never be soothe by that mother's love which flow out to
we in the great abundance because our need be great, which cling
to we the more tenderly because we be the less likely to be winner
in the game of life; and the sense of his father's affection and
indulgence toward he be mar by the keener perception of his
father's fault. keep aloof from all practical life as Philip have
be, and by nature half feminine in sensitiveness, he have some of the
woman's intolerant repulsion toward worldliness and the deliberate
pursuit of sensual enjoyment; and this one strong natural tie in his
life,--his relation as a son,--was like an aching limb to he. perhaps
there be inevitably something morbid in a human being who be in any
way unfavorably except from ordinary condition, until the good
force have have time to triumph; and it have rarely have time for that at
two-and-twenty. that force be present in Philip in much strength, but
the sun himself look feeble through the morning mist.
Chapter IV
another Love-scene
early in the following April, nearly a year after that dubious parting
you have just witness, you may, if you like, again see Maggie
enter the Red Deeps through the group of Scotch fir. but it be
early afternoon and not evening, and the edge of sharpness in the
spring air make she draw her large shawl close about she and trip
along rather quickly; though she look round, as usual, that she may
take in the sight of her beloved tree. there be a more eager,
inquire look in her eye than there be last June, and a smile be
hover about her lip, as if some playful speech be await the
right hearer. the hearer be not long in appear.
"take back your _Corinne_," say Maggie, draw a book from under her
shawl. "you be right in tell I she would do I no good; but you
be wrong in think I should wish to be like she."
"wouldnot you really like to be a tenth muse, then, Maggie?" say
Philip look up in her face as we look at a first parting in the
cloud that promise we a bright heaven once more.
"not at all," say Maggie, laugh. "the Muses be uncomfortable
goddess, I think,--oblige always to carry roll and musical
instrument about with they. if I carry a harp in this climate, you
know, I must have a green baize cover for it; and I should be sure to
leave it behind I by mistake."
"you agree with I in not like Corinne, then?"
"I donot finish the book," say Maggie. "as soon as I come to the
blond-haired young lady reading in the park, I shut it up, and
determine to read no far. I foresaw that that light-complexion
girl would win away all the love from Corinne and make her miserable.
Ibe determined to read no more book where the blond-haired woman
carry away all the happiness. I should begin to have a prejudice
against they. if you could give I some story, now, where the dark
woman triumph, it would restore the balance. I want to avenge Rebecca
and Flora MacIvor and Minna, and all the rest of the dark unhappy
one. since you be my tutor, you ought to preserve my mind from
prejudice; you be always argue against prejudice."
"well, perhaps you will avenge the dark woman in your own person, and
carry away all the love from your cousin Lucy. she be sure to have
some handsome young man of St. Ogg's at her foot now; and you have
only to shine upon he--your fair little cousin will be quite quench
in your beam."
"Philip, that be not pretty of you, to apply my nonsense to anything
real," say Maggie, look hurt. "as if I, with my old gown and want
of all accomplishment, could be a rival of dear little lucy,--who
know and do all sort of charming thing, and be ten time pretty
than I am,--even if I be odious and base enough to wish to be her
rival. besides, I never go to aunt Deane's when any one be there; it
be only because dear Lucy be good, and love I, that she come to see
I, and will have I go to see she sometimes."
"Maggie," say Philip, with surprise, "it be not like you to take
playfulness literally. you must have be in St. Oggbe this morning,
and bring away a slight infection of dulness."
"well," say Maggie, smile, "if you mean that for a joke, it be a
poor one; but I think it be a very good reproof. I think you
want to remind I that I be vain, and wish every one to admire I
most. but it benot for that that Ibe jealous for the dark women,--not
because Ibe dark myself; itbe because I always care the most about the
unhappy people. if the blond girl be forsake, I should like _her_
well. I always take the side of the reject lover in the story."
"then you would never have the heart to reject one yourself, should
you, Maggie?" say Philip, flush a little.
"I donot know," say Maggie, hesitatingly. then with a bright smile,
"I think perhaps I could if he be very conceited; and yet, if he get
extremely humiliate afterward, I should relent."
"Ihave often wonder, Maggie," Philip say, with some effort, "whether
you wouldnot really be more likely to love a man that other woman be
not likely to love."
"that would depend on what they donot like he for," say Maggie,
laugh. "he might be very disagreeable. he might look at I through
an eye-glass stick in his eye, make a hideous face, as young Torry
do. I should think other woman be not fond of that; but I never
feel any pity for young Torry. Ihave never any pity for conceited
people, because I think they carry their comfort about with they."
"but suppose, maggie,--suppose it be a man who be not conceited, who
feel he have nothing to be conceited about; who have be mark from
childhood for a peculiar kind of suffering, and to whom you be the
day-star of his life; who love you, worship you, so entirely that
he feel it happiness enough for he if you would let he see you at
rare moments----"
Philip pause with a pang of dread lest his confession should cut
short this very happiness,--a pang of the same dread that have keep his
love mute through long month. a rush of self-consciousness tell he
that he be besotte to have say all this. Maggie's manner this
morning have be as unconstrained and indifferent as ever.
but she be not look indifferent now. strike with the unusual
emotion in Philip's tone, she have turn quickly to look at he; and
as he go on speak, a great change come over her face,--a flush
and slight spasm of the feature, such as we see in people who hear
some news that will require they to readjust their conception of the
past. she be quite silent, and walk on toward the trunk of a
fall tree, she sit down, as if she have no strength to spare for her
muscle. she be tremble.
"Maggie," say Philip, get more and more alarmed in every fresh
moment of silence, "I be a fool to say it; forget that Ihave say it.
I shall be content if thing can be as they be."
the distress with which he speak urge Maggie to say something. "I be
so surprised, Philip; I have not think of it." and the effort to say
this bring the tear down too.
"have it make you hate I, Maggie?" say Philip, impetuously. "do you
think Ibe a presumptuous fool?"
"oh, Philip!" say Maggie, "how can you think I have such feeling? as
if I be not grateful for _any_ love. but--but I have never think of
your be my lover. it seem so far off--like a dream--only like one
of the story one imago--that I should ever have a lover."
"then can you bear to think of I as your lover, Maggie?" say Philip,
seat himself by she, and take her hand, in the elation of a
sudden hope. "_do_ you love I?"
Maggie turn rather pale; this direct question seem not easy to
answer. but her eye meet Philip's, which be in this moment liquid
and beautiful with beseech love. she speak with hesitation, yet
with sweet, simple, girlish tenderness.
"I think I could hardly love any one well; there be nothing but what
I love you for." she pause a little while, and then add: "but it
will be well for we not to say any more about it, willnot it, dear
Philip? you know we couldnot even be friend, if our friendship be
discover. I have never feel that I be right in give way about
see you, though it have be so precious to I in some way; and now
the fear come upon I strongly again, that it will lead to evil."
"but no evil have come, Maggie; and if you have be guide by that fear
before, you would only have live through another dreary, benumb
year, instead of revive into your real self."
Maggie shake her head. "it have be very sweet, I know,--all the
talk together, and the book, and the feeling that I have the walk
to look forward to, when I could tell you the thought that have come
into my head while I be away from you. but it have make I restless;
it have make I think a great deal about the world; and I have
impatient thought again,--i get weary of my home; and then it cut I
to the heart afterward, that I should ever have feel weary of my
father and mother. I think what you call be benumb be
well--well for I--for then my selfish desire be benumb."
Philip have rise again, and be walk backward and forward
impatiently.
"no, Maggie, you have wrong idea of self-conquest, as Ihave often tell
you. what you call self-conquest--bind and deafen yourself to
all but one train of impression--be only the culture of monomania in
a nature like your."
he have speak with some irritation, but now he sit down by she again
and take her hand.
"donot think of the past now, Maggie; think only of our love. if you
can really cling to I with all your heart, every obstacle will be
overcome in time; we need only wait. I can live on hope. look at I,
Maggie; tell I again it be possible for you to love I. donot look
away from I to that cloven tree; it be a bad oman."
she turn she large dark glance upon he with a sad smile.
"Come, Maggie, say one kind word, or else you be well to I at
Lorton. you ask I if I should like you to kiss me,--don't you
remember?--and you promise to kiss I when you meet I again. you
never keep the promise."
the recollection of that childish time come as a sweet relief to
Maggie. it make the present moment less strange to she. she kiss he
almost as simply and quietly as she have do when she be twelve year
old. Philip's eye flash with delight, but his next word be word
of discontent.
"you donot seem happy enough, Maggie; you be force yourself to say
you love I, out of pity."
"no, Philip," say Maggie, shake her head, in her old childish way;
"Ibe tell you the truth. it be all new and strange to I; but I
donot think I could love any one well than I love you. I should like
always to live with you--to make you happy. I have always be happy
when I have be with you. there be only one thing I will not do for
your sake; I will never do anything to wound my father. you must never
ask that from I."
"no, Maggie, I will ask nothing; I will bear everything; Iwill wait
another year only for a kiss, if you will only give I the first place
in your heart."
"no," say Maggie, smile, "I willnot make you wait so long as that."
but then, look serious again, she add, as she rise from her
seat,--
"but what would your own father say, Philip? oh, it be quite
impossible we can ever be more than friends,--brother and sister in
secret, as we have be. let we give up thinking of everything else."
"no, Maggie, I cannot give you up,--unless you be deceive I; unless
you really only care for I as if I be your brother. tell I the
truth."
"indeed I do, Philip. what happiness have I ever have so great as be
with you,--since I be a little girl,--the day Tom be good to I?
and your mind be a sort of world to I; you can tell I all I want to
know. I think I should never be tired of be with you."
they be walk hand in hand, look at each other; Maggie, indeed,
be hurry along, for she feel it time to be go. but the sense
that their parting be near make she more anxious lest she should have
unintentionally leave some painful impression on Philip's mind. it be
one of those dangerous moment when speech be at once sincere and
deceptive; when feel, rise high above its average depth, leave
floodmark which be never reach again.
they stop to part among the Scotch fir.
"then my life will be fill with hope, Maggie, and I shall be happy
than other man, in spite of all? we _do_ belong to each other--for
always--whether we be apart or together?"
"yes, Philip; I should like never to part; I should like to make your
life very happy."
"I be wait for something else. I wonder whether it will come."
Maggie smile, with glisten tear, and then stoop her tall head
to kiss the pale face that be full of plead, timid love,--like a
woman's.
she have a moment of real happiness then,--a moment of belief that, if
there be sacrifice in this love, it be all the rich and more
satisfying.
she turn away and hurry home, feel that in the hour since she
have tread this road before, a new era have begin for she. the tissue
of vague dream must now get narrow and narrower, and all the
thread of thought and emotion be gradually absorb in the woof of
her actual daily life.
chapter V
the Cloven Tree
secret be rarely betray or discover accord to any programme
our fear have sketch out. fear be almost always haunt by terrible
dramatic scene, which recur in spite of the well-argue probability
against they; and during a year that Maggie have have the burthen of
concealment on her mind, the possibility of discovery have continually
present itself under the form of a sudden meeting with her father or
Tom when she be walk with Philip in the Red Deeps. she be aware
that this be not one of the most likely event; but it be the scene
that most completely symbolize her inward dread. those slight
indirect suggestion which be dependent on apparently trivial
coincidence and incalculable state of mind, be the favorite
machinery of Fact, but be not the stuff in which Imagination be apt
to work.
certainly one of the person about whom Maggie's fear be furth
from trouble themselves be her aunt Pullet, on whom, see that
she do not live in St. Ogg's, and be neither sharp-eyed nor
sharp-temper, it would surely have be quite whimsical of they to
fix rather than on aunt Glegg. and yet the channel of fatality--the
pathway of the lightning--be no other than aunt Pullet. she do not
live at St. Ogg's, but the road from Garum Firs lie by the Red Deeps,
at the end opposite that by which Maggie enter.
the day after Maggie's last meeting with Philip, be a Sunday on
which Mr. Pullet be bind to appear in funeral hatband and scarf at
St. Ogg's church, Mrs. Pullet make this the occasion of dining with
sister Glegg, and take tea with poor sister Tulliver. Sunday be the
one day in the week on which Tom be at home in the afternoon; and
today the bright spirit he have be in of late have flow over in
unusually cheerful open chat with his father, and in the invitation,
"come, Magsie, you come too!" when he stroll out with his mother in
the garden to see the advance cherry-blossom. he have be well
pleased with Maggie since she have be less odd and ascetic; he be
even get rather proud of she; several person have remark in his
hearing that his sister be a very fine girl. to-day there be a
peculiar brightness in her face, due in reality to an undercurrent of
excitement, which have as much doubt and pain as pleasure in it; but it
might pass for a sign of happiness.
"you look very well, my dear," say aunt Pullet, shake her head
sadly, as they sit round the tea-table. "I niver think your girl 'ud
be so good-look, Bessy. but you must wear pink, my dear; that blue
thing as your aunt Glegg give you turn you into a crowflower. jane
never _be_ tasty. why donot you wear that gown o' mine?"
"it be so pretty and so smart, aunt. I think itbe too showy for
me,--at least for my other clothe, that I must wear with it.
"to be sure, it 'ud be unbecoming if it benot well known youhave get
they belong to you as can afford to give you such thing when
theyhave do with them themselves. it stand to reason I must give my
own niece clothe now and then,--such thing as _i_ buy every year,
and never wear anything out. and as for Lucy, therebe no giving to
she, for shebe get everything o' the choice; sister Deane may well
hold her head up,--though she look dreadful yallow, poor thing--I
doubt this liver complaint 'ull carry she off. thatbe what this new
vicar, this Dr. Kenn, say in the funeral sermon to-day."
"ah, hebe a wonderful preacher, by all account,--isn't he, Sophy?"
say Mrs. Tulliver.
"why, Lucy have get a collar on this blessed day," continue Mrs.
Pullet, with her eye fix in a ruminating manner, "as I donot say I
havenot get as good, but I must look out my good to match it."
"Miss Lucy's call the bell o' St. Ogg's, they say; thatbe a cur'ous
word," observe Mr. Pullet, on whom the mystery of etymology
sometimes fall with an oppressive weight.
"Pooh!" say Mr. Tulliver, jealous for Maggie, "shebe a small thing,
not much of a figure. but fine feather make fine bird. I see nothing
to admire so much in those diminutive woman; they look silly by the
side o' the men,--out o' proportion. when I choose my wife, I choose she
the right size,--neither too little nor too big."
the poor wife, with her withered beauty, smile complacently.
"but the man benot _all_ big," say uncle Pullet, not without some
self-reference; "a young fellow may be good-look and yet not be a
six-foot, like Master Tom here.
"ah, itbe poor talk about littleness and bigness,--anybody may
think itbe a mercy theybe straight," say aunt Pullet. "therebe that
mismade son o' Lawyer Wakem's, I see he at church to-day. dear, dear!
to think o' the property hebe like to have; and they say hebe very
queer and lonely, donot like much company. I shouldnot wonder if he
go out of his mind; for we never come along the road but hebe
a-scramble out o' the tree and bramble at the Red Deeps."
this wide statement, by which Mrs. Pullet represent the fact that
she have twice see Philip at the spot indicate, produce an effect on
Maggie which be all the strong because Tom sate opposite she, and
she be intensely anxious to look indifferent. at Philip's name she
have blush, and the blush deepen every instant from consciousness,
until the mention of the Red Deeps make she feel as if the whole
secret be betray, and she dare not even hold her tea-spoon lest
she should show how she tremble. she sit with her hand clasp under
the table, not dare to look round. happily, her father be seat on
the same side with herself, beyond her uncle Pullet, and could not see
her face without stoop forward. her mother's voice bring the
first relief, turn the conversation; for Mrs. Tulliver be always
alarm when the name of Wakem be mention in her husband's
presence. Gradually Maggie recover composure enough to look up; her
eye meet Tom's, but he turn away his head immediately; and she go
to bed that night wonder if he have gather any suspicion from her
confusion. perhaps not; perhaps he would think it be only her alarm
at her aunt's mention of Wakem before her father; that be the
interpretation her mother have put in it. to her father, Wakem be like
a disfiguring disease, of which he be oblige to endure the
consciousness, but be exasperate to have the existence recognize by
other; and no amount of sensitiveness in she about her father could
be surprising, Maggie think.
but Tom be too keen-sighted to rest satisfied with such an
interpretation; he have see clearly enough that there be something
distinct from anxiety about her father in Maggie's excessive
confusion. in try to recall all the detail that could give shape
to his suspicion, he remember only lately hear his mother scold
Maggie for walk in the Red Deeps when the ground be wet, and
bring home shoe clog with red soil; still Tom, retain all
his old repulsion for Philip's deformity, shrank from attribute to
his sister the probability of feel more than a friendly interest in
such an unfortunate exception to the common run of man. Tom's be a
nature which have a sort of superstitious repugnance to everything
exceptional. a love for a deformed man would be odious in any woman,
in a sister intolerable. but if she have be carry on any kind of
intercourse whatever with Philip, a stop must be put to it at once;
she be disobey her father's strong feeling and her brother's
express command, besides compromise herself by secret meeting. he
leave home the next morning in that watchful state of mind which turn
the most ordinary course of thing into pregnant coincidence.
that afternoon, about half-past three o'clock, Tom be stand on the
wharf, talk with Bob Jakin about the probability of the good ship
Adelaide come in, in a day or two, with result highly important to
both of they.
"eh," say Bob, parenthetically, as he look over the field on the
other side of the river, "there go that crooked young Wakem. I know
he or his shadder as far off as I can see them; Ibe allay light on
he o' that side the river."
a sudden thought seem to have dart through Tom's mind. "I must go,
Bob," he say; "Ihave something to attend to," hurry off to the
warehouse, where he leave notice for some one to take his place; he be
call away home on peremptory business.
the swift pace and the short road take he to the gate, and he
be pause to open it deliberately, that he might walk into the house
with an appearance of perfect composure, when Maggie come out at the
front door in bonnet and shawl. his conjecture be fulfil, and he
wait for she at the gate. she start violently when she see he.
"Tom, how be it you be come home? be there anything the matter?"
Maggie speak in a low, tremulous voice.
"Ibe come to walk with you to the Red Deeps, and meet Philip Wakem,"
say Tom, the central fold in his brow, which have become habitual with
he, deepen as he speak.
Maggie stand helpless, pale and cold. by some mean, then, Tom know
everything. at last she say, "Ibe, not go," and turn round.
"yes, you be; but I want to speak to you first. where be my father?"
"out on horseback."
"and my mother?"
"in the yard, I think, with the poultry."
"I can go in, then, without she see I?"
they walk in together, and Tom, enter the parlor, say to Maggie,
"come in here."
she obey, and he close the door behind she.
"now, Maggie, tell I this instant everything that have pass between
you and Philip Wakem."
"do my father know anything?" say Maggie, still tremble.
"no," say Tom indignantly. "but he _shall_ know, if you attempt to
use deceit toward I any far."
"I donot wish to use deceit," say Maggie, flush into resentment at
hear this word apply to her conduct.
"tell I the whole truth, then."
"perhaps you know it."
"never mind whether I know it or not. tell I exactly what have
happen, or my father shall know everything."
"I tell it for my father's sake, then."
"yes, it become you to profess affection for your father, when you
have despise his strong feeling."
"you never do wrong, Tom," say Maggie, tauntingly.
"not if I know it," answer Tom, with proud sincerity.
"but I have nothing to say to you beyond this: tell I what have pass
between you and Philip Wakem. when do you first meet he in the Red
Deeps?"
"a year ago," say Maggie, quietly. Tom's severity give she a certain
fund of defiance, and keep her sense of error in abeyance. "you need
ask I no more question. we have be friendly a year. we have meet
and walk together often. he have lend I book."
"be that all?" say Tom, look straight at she with his frown.
Maggie pause a moment; then, determine to make an end of Tom's right
to accuse she of deceit, she say haughtily:
"no, not quite all. on Saturday he tell I that he love I. I donot
think of it before then; I have only thought of he as an old friend."
"and you _encourage_ he?" say Tom, with an expression of disgust.
"I tell he that I love he too."
Tom be silent a few moment, look on the ground and frown, with
his hand in his pocket. at last he look up and say coldly,--
"now, then, Maggie, there be but two course for you to take,--either
you vow solemnly to I, with your hand on my father's Bible, that you
will never have another meeting or speak another word in private with
Philip Wakem, or you refuse, and I tell my father everything; and this
month, when by my exertion he might be make happy once more, you will
cause he the blow of know that you be a disobedient, deceitful
daughter, who throw away her own respectability by clandestine
meeting with the son of a man that have help to ruin her father.
choose!" Tom end with cold decision, go up to the large Bible,
draw it forward, and open it at the fly-leaf, where the writing
be.
it be a crush alternative to Maggie.
"Tom," she say, urge out of pride into pleading, "donot ask I that.
I will promise you to give up all intercourse with Philip, if you will
let I see he once, or even only write to he and explain
everything,--to give it up as long as it would ever cause any pain to
my father. I feel something for Philip too. _he_ be not happy."
"I donot wish to hear anything of your feeling; I have say exactly
what I mean. choose, and quickly, lest my mother should come in."
"if I give you my word, that will be as strong a bond to I as if I
lay my hand on the Bible. I donot require that to bind I."
"do what _I_ require," say Tom. "I cannot trust you, Maggie. there be
no consistency in you. put your hand on this Bible, and say, 'I
renounce all private speech and intercourse with Philip Wakem from
this time forth.' else you will bring shame on we all, and grief on my
father; and what be the use of my exert myself and give up
everything else for the sake of pay my father's debt, if you be
to bring madness and vexation on he, just when he might be easy and
hold up his head once more?"
"oh, Tom, _will_ the debt be pay soon?" say Maggie, clasp her
hand, with a sudden flash of joy across her wretchedness.
"if thing turn out as I expect," say Tom. "but," he add, his voice
tremble with indignation, "while I have be contrive and work
that my father may have some peace of mind before he dies,--worke
for the respectability of our family,--you have do all you can to
destroy both."
Maggie feel a deep movement of compunction; for the moment, her mind
cease to contend against what she feel to be cruel and unreasonable,
and in her self-blame she justify her brother.
"Tom," she say in a low voice, "it be wrong of I; but I be so
lonely, and I be sorry for Philip. and I think enmity and hatred be
wicked."
"nonsense!" say Tom. "your duty be clear enough. say no more; but
promise, in the word I tell you."
"I _must_ speak to Philip once more."
"you will go with I now and speak to he."
"I give you my word not to meet he or write to he again without your
knowledge. that be the only thing I will say. I will put my hand on
the Bible if you like."
"say it, then."
Maggie lay her hand on the page of manuscript and repeat the
promise. Tom close the book, and say, "now let we go."
not a word be speak as they walk along. Maggie be suffer in
anticipation of what Philip be about to suffer, and dread the
galling word that would fall on he from Tom's lip; but she feel it
be in vain to attempt anything but submission. Tom have his terrible
clutch on her conscience and her deep dread; she writhe under the
demonstrable truth of the character he have give to her conduct, and
yet her whole soul rebel against it as unfair from its
incompleteness. he, meanwhile, feel the impetus of his indignation
divert toward Philip. he do not know how much of an old boyish
repulsion and of mere personal pride and animosity be concern in
the bitter severity of the word by which he mean to do the duty of a
son and a brother. Tom be not give to inquire subtly into his own
motif any more than into other matter of an intangible kind; he be
quite sure that his own motif as well as action be good, else he
would have have nothing to do with they.
Maggie's only hope be that something might, for the first time, have
prevent Philip from come. then there would be delay,--then she
might get Tom's permission to write to he. her heart beat with double
violence when they get under the Scotch fir. it be the last moment
of suspense, she think; Philip always meet she soon after she get
beyond they. but they pass across the more open green space, and
enter the narrow bushy path by the mound. another turning, and they
come so close upon he that both Tom and Philip stop suddenly
within a yard of each other. there be a moment's silence, in which
Philip dart a look of inquiry at Maggie's face. he see an answer
there, in the pale, part lip, and the terrified tension of the
large eye. her imagination, always rush extravagantly beyond an
immediate impression, see she tall, strong brother grasp the feeble
Philip bodily, crush he and trample on he.
"do you call this act the part of a man and a gentleman, sir?" Tom
say, in a voice of harsh scorn, as soon as Philip's eye be turn
on he again.
"what do you mean?" answer Philip, haughtily.
"mean? stand far from I, lest I should lay hand on you, and Iwill
tell you what I mean. I mean, take advantage of a young girl's
foolishness and ignorance to get she to have secret meeting with you.
I mean, dare to trifle with the respectability of a family that have
a good and honest name to support."
"I deny that," interrupt Philip, impetuously. "I could never trifle
with anything that affect your sister's happiness. she be dearer to
I than she be to you; I honor she more than you can ever honor she; I
would give up my life to she."
"donot talk high-flown nonsense to I, sir! do you mean to pretend
that you donot know it would be injurious to she to meet you here
week after week? do you pretend you have any right to make profession
of love to she, even if you have be a fit husband for she, when
neither her father nor your father would ever consent to a marriage
between you? and _you_,--_you_ to try and worm yourself into the
affection of a handsome girl who be not eighteen, and have be shut
out from the world by her father's misfortune! thatbe your crooked
notion of honor, be it? I call it base treachery; I call it take
advantage of circumstance to win whatbe too good for you,--what youwould
never get by fair mean."
"it be manly of you to talk in this way to _I_," say Philip,
bitterly, his whole frame shake by violent emotion. "giant have an
immemorial right to stupidity and insolent abuse. you be incapable
even of understand what I feel for your sister. I feel so much for
she that I could even desire to be at friendship with _you_."
"I should be very sorry to understand your feeling," say Tom, with
scorch contempt. "what I wish be that you should understand
_me_,--that I shall take care of _my_ sister, and that if you dare to
make the least attempt to come near she, or to write to she, or to
keep the slight hold on her mind, your puny, miserable body, that
ought to have put some modesty into your mind, shall not protect you.
Iwill thrash you; Iwill hold you up to public scorn. who wouldnot laugh
at the idea of _your_ turn lover to a fine girl?"
Tom and Maggie walk on in silence for some yard. he burst out, in a
convulse voice.
"Stay, Maggie!" say Philip, make a strong effort to speak. then
look at Tom, "you have drag your sister here, I suppose, that
she may stand by while you threaten and insult I. these naturally
seem to you the right mean to influence I. but you be mistaken.
let your sister speak. if she say she be bind to give I up, I shall
abide by her wish to the slight word."
"it be for my father's sake, Philip," say Maggie, imploringly. "Tom
threaten to tell my father, and he couldnot bear it; I have promise,
I have vow solemnly, that we will not have any intercourse without
my brother's knowledge."
"it be enough, Maggie. _I_ shall not change; but I wish you to hold
yourself entirely free. but trust I; remember that I can never seek
for anything but good to what belong to you."
"yes," say Tom, exasperate by this attitude of Philip's, "you can
talk of seek good for she and what belong to she now; do you seek
her good before?"
"I did,--at some risk, perhaps. but I wish she to have a friend for
life,--who would cherish she, who would do she more justice than a
coarse and narrow-minded brother, that she have always lavish she
affection on."
"yes, my way of befriend she be different from your; and Iwill tell
you what be my way. Iwill save she from disobey and disgrace she
father; Iwill save she from throw herself away on you,--from make
herself a laughing-stock,--from be flout by a man like _your_
father, because shebe not good enough for his son. you know well
enough what sort of justice and cherish you be prepare for she.
Ibe not to be impose upon by fine word; I can see what action mean.
come away, Maggie."
he seize Maggie's right wrist as he speak, and she put out her left
hand. Philip clasp it an instant, with one eager look, and then
hurry away.
Tom and Maggie walk on in silence for some yard. he be still
hold her wrist tightly, as if he be compelling a culprit from the
scene of action. at last Maggie, with a violent snatch, draw her hand
away, and her pent-up, long-gather irritation burst into utterance.
"donot suppose that I think you be right, Tom, or that I bow to your
will. I despise the feeling you have show in speak to Philip; I
det your insulting, unmanly allusion to his deformity. you have
be reproach other people all your life; you have be always sure
you yourself be right. it be because you have not a mind large enough
to see that there be anything well than your own conduct and your
own petty aim."
"certainly," say Tom, coolly. "I donot see that your conduct be
well, or your aim either. if your conduct, and Philip Wakem's
conduct, have be right, why be you ashamed of its be know?
answer I that. I know what I have aim at in my conduct, and Ihave
succeed; pray, what good have your conduct bring to you or any one
else?"
"I donot want to defend myself," say Maggie, still with vehemence: "I
know Ihave be wrong,--often, continually. but yet, sometimes when I
have do wrong, it have be because I have feeling that you would be
the well for, if you have they. if _you_ be in fault ever, if you
have do anything very wrong, I should be sorry for the pain it
bring you; I should not want punishment to be heap on you. but you
have always enjoy punish I; you have always be hard and cruel
to I; even when I be a little girl, and always love you well than
any one else in the world, you would let I go cry to bed without
forgive I. you have no pity; you have no sense of your own
imperfection and your own sin. it be a sin to be hard; it be not
fitting for a mortal, for a Christian. you be nothing but a Pharisee.
you thank God for nothing but your own virtue; you think they be
great enough to win you everything else. you have not even a vision of
feeling by the side of which your shin virtue be mere darkness!"
"well," say Tom, with cold scorn, "if your feeling be so much
well than mine, let I see you show they in some other way than by
conduct thatbe likely to disgrace we all,--than by ridiculous flight
first into one extreme and then into another. pray, how have you show
your love, that you talk of, either to I or my father? by disobey
and deceive we. I have a different way of show my affection."
"because you be a man, Tom, and have power, and can do something in
the world."
"then, if you can do nothing, submit to those that can."
"so I _will_ submit to what I acknowledge and feel to be right. I will
submit even to what be unreasonable from my father, but I will not
submit to it from you. you boast of your virtue as if they purchase
you a right to be cruel and unmanly, as youhave be to-day. donot
suppose I would give up Philip Wakem in obedience to you. the
deformity you insult would make I cle to he and care for he the
more."
"very well; that be your view of thing." say Tom, more coldly than
ever; "you need say no more to show I what a wide distance there be
between we. let we remember that in future, and be silent."
Tom go back to St. Ogg's, to fulfill an appointment with his uncle
Deane, and receive direction about a journey on which he be to set
out the next morning.
Maggie go up to her own room to pour out all that indignant
remonstrance, against which Tom's mind be close bar, in bitter
tear. then, when the first burst of unsatisfie anger be go by,
come the recollection of that quiet time before the pleasure which have
end in to-day's misery have perturb the clearness and simplicity of
her life. she use to think in that time that she have make great
conquest, and win a lasting stand on serene height above worldly
temptation and conflict. and here she be down again in the thick of
a hot strife with her own and other' passion. life be not so short,
then, and perfect rest be not so near as she have dream when she be
two year young. there be more struggle for she, and perhaps more
fall. if she have feel that she be entirely wrong, and that Tom have
be entirely right, she could soon have recover more inward
harmony; but now her penitence and submission be constantly
obstruct by resentment that would present itself to she no otherwise
than as a just indignation. her heart bleed for Philip; she go on
recall the insult that have be fling at he with so vivid a
conception of what he have feel under they, that it be almost like a
sharp bodily pain to she, make she beat the floor with her foot and
tighten her finger on her palm.
and yet, how be it that she be now and then conscious of a certain
dim background of relief in the force separation from Philip? surely
it be only because the sense of a deliverance from concealment be
welcome at any cost.
Chapter VI
the Hard-Won Triumph
three week later, when Dorlcote Mill be at its prettiest moment in
all the year,--the great chestnut in blossom, and the grass all deep
and daisied,--tom Tulliver come home to it early than usual in the
evening, and as he pass over the bridge, he look with the old
deep-rooted affection at the respectable red brick house, which always
seem cheerful and invite outside, let the room be as bare and the
heart as sad as they might inside. there be a very pleasant light in
Tom's blue-gray eye as he glance at the house-windows; that fold in
his brow never disappear, but it be not unbecoming; it seem to imply
a strength of will that may possibly be without harshness, when the
eye and mouth have their gentle expression. his firm step become
quick, and the corner of his mouth rebel against the compression
which be mean to forbid a smile.
the eye in the parlor be not turn toward the bridge just then,
and the group there be sit in unexpectant silence,--mr. Tulliver
in his arm-chair, tired with a long ride, and ruminate with a worn
look, fix chiefly on Maggie, who be bend over her sewing while
her mother be make the tea.
they all look up with surprise when they hear the well-know foot.
"why, whatbe up now, Tom?" say his father. "yoube a bit early than
usual."
"oh, there be nothing more for I to do, so I come away. well,
mother!"
Tom go up to his mother and kiss she, a sign of unusual good-humor
with he. hardly a word or look have pass between he and Maggie in
all the three week; but his usual incommunicativeness at home
prevent this from be noticeable to their parent.
"Father," say Tom, when they have finish tea, "do you know exactly
how much money there be in the tin box?"
"only a hundred and ninety-three pound," say Mr. Tulliver. "youhave
bring less o' late; but young fellow like to have their own way
with their money. though I donot do as I like before _i_ be of
age." he speak with rather timid discontent.
"be you quite sure thatbe the sum, father?" say Tom. "I wish you
would take the trouble to fetch the tin box down. I think you have
perhaps make a mistake."
"how should I make a mistake?" say his father, sharply. "Ihave count
it often enough; but I can fetch it, if you willnot believe I."
it be always an incident Mr. Tulliver like, in his gloomy life, to
fetch the tin box and count the money.
"donot go out of the room, mother," say Tom, as he see she move
when his father be go upstairs.
"and benot Maggie to go?" say Mrs. Tulliver; "because somebody must
take away the thing."
"just as she like," say Tom indifferently.
that be a cut word to Maggie. her heart have leap with the
sudden conviction that Tom be go to tell their father the debt
could be pay; and Tom would have let she be absent when that news be
tell! but she carry away the tray and come back immediately. the
feeling of injury on her own behalf could not predominate at that
moment.
Tom draw to the corner of the table near his father when the tin box
be set down and open, and the red evening light fall on they
make conspicuous the worn, sour gloom of the dark-eyed father and the
suppress joy in the face of the fair-complexion son. the mother
and Maggie sit at the other end of the table, the one in blank
patience, the other in palpitating expectation.
Mr. Tulliver count out the money, set it in order on the table,
and then say, glance sharply at Tom:
"there now! you see I be right enough."
he pause, look at the money with bitter despondency.
"therebe more nor three hundred want; itwill be a fine while before
_i_ can save that. lose that forty-two pound wi' the corn be a sore
job. this worldbe be too many for I. itbe take four year to lay
_this_ by; itbe much if Ibe above ground for another four year. I must
trusten to you to pay them," he go on, with a trembling voice, "if
you keep I' the same mind now yoube come o' age. but yoube like
enough to bury I first."
he look up in Tom's face with a querulous desire for some assurance.
"no, father," say Tom, speak with energetic decision, though there
be tremor discernible in his voice too, "you will live to see the
debt all pay. you shall pay they with your own hand."
his tone imply something more than mere hopefulness or resolution. a
slight electric shock seem to pass through Mr. Tulliver, and he keep
his eye fix on Tom with a look of eager inquiry, while Maggie,
unable to restrain herself, rush to her father's side and kneel down
by he. Tom be silent a little while before he go on.
"a good while ago, my uncle Glegg lend I a little money to trade
with, and that have answer. I have three hundred and twenty pound in
the bank."
his mother's arm be round his neck as soon as the last word be
utter, and she say, half cry:
"oh, my boy, I know youwould make iverything right again, when you get a
man."
but his father be silent; the flood of emotion hem in all power of
speech. both Tom and Maggie be strike with fear lest the shock of
joy might even be fatal. but the blessed relief of tear come. the
broad chest heave, the muscle of the face give way, and the
gray-haired man burst into loud sob. the fit of weeping gradually
subside, and he sit quiet, recover the regularity of his
breathing. at last he look up at his wife and say, in a gentle
tone:
"Bessy, you must come and kiss I now--the lad have make you amend.
youwill see a bit o' comfort again, belike."
when she have kiss he, and he have hold her hand a minute, his
thought go back to the money.
"I wish youwould bring I the money to look at, Tom," he say,
finger the sovereign on the table; "I should ha' feel surer."
"you shall see it to-morrow, father," say Tom. "my uncle Deane have
appoint the creditor to meet to-morrow at the Golden Lion, and he
have order a dinner for they at two o'clock. my uncle Glegg and he
will both be there. it be advertise in the 'Messenger' on Saturday."
"then Wakem know on't!" say Mr. Tulliver, his eye kindling with
triumphant fire. "ah!" he go on, with a long-draw guttural
enunciation, take out his snuff-box, the only luxury he have leave
himself, and tap it with something of his old air of defiance.
"Iwill get from under _his_ thumb now, though I _must_ leave the old
mill. I think I could ha' hold out to die here--but I can't----we've
get a glass o' nothing in the house, have we, Bessy?"
"yes," say Mrs. Tulliver, draw out her much-reduce bunch of key,
"therebe some brandy sister Deane bring I when I be ill."
"get it I, then; get it I. I feel a bit weak."
"Tom, my lad," he say, in a strong voice, when he have take some
brandy-and-water, "you shall make a speech to them. Iwill tell them itbe
you as get the good part o' the money. theywill see Ibe honest at last,
and ha' get an honest son. ah! Wakem 'ud be fine and glad to have a
son like mine,--a fine straight fellow,--i'stead o' that poor crooked
creatur! youwill prosper I' the world, my lad; youwill maybe see the day
when Wakem and his son 'ull be a round or two below you. youwill like
enough be ta'en into partnership, as your uncle Deane be before
you,--you're in the right way for't; and then therebe nothing to
hinder your get rich. and if ever yoube rich enough--mind
this--try and get th' old mill again."
Mr. Tulliver throw himself back in his chair; his mind, which have so
long be the home of nothing but bitter discontent and foreboding,
suddenly fill, by the magic of joy, with vision of good fortune.
but some subtle influence prevent he from foresee the good
fortune as happen to himself.
"shake hand wi' I, my lad," he say, suddenly put out his hand.
"itbe a great thing when a man can be proud as hebe get a good son.
Ihave have _that_ luck."
Tom never live to taste another moment so delicious as that; and
Maggie couldnot help forget her own grievance. Tom _be_ good;
and in the sweet humility that spring in we all in moment of true
admiration and gratitude, she feel that the fault he have to pardon in
she have never be redeem, as his fault be. she feel no jealousy
this evening that, for the first time, she seem to be throw into
the background in her father's mind.
there be much more talk before bedtime. Mr. Tulliver naturally want
to hear all the particular of Tom's trading adventure, and he
listen with grow excitement and delight. he be curious to know
what have be say on every occasion; if possible, what have be
think; and Bob Jakin's part in the business throw he into peculiar
outburst of sympathy with the triumphant knowingness of that
remarkable packman. Bob's juvenile history, so far as it have come
under Mr. Tulliver's knowledge, be recall with that sense of
astonishing promise it display, which be observable in all
reminiscence of the childhood of great man.
it be well that there be this interest of narrative to keep under
the vague but fierce sense of triumph over Wakem, which would
otherwise have be the channel his joy would have rush into with
dangerous force. even as it be, that feel from time to time give
threat of its ultimate mastery, in sudden burst of irrelevant
exclamation.
it be long before Mr. Tulliver get to sleep that night; and the
sleep, when it come, be fill with vivid dream. at half-past five
o'clock in the morning, when Mrs. Tulliver be already rise, he
alarm she by start up with a sort of smothered shout, and look
round in a bewildered way at the wall of the bedroom.
"whatbe the matter, Mr. Tulliver?" say his wife. he look at she,
still with a puzzled expression, and say at last:
"Ah!--I be dream--do I make a noise?--i think Iwould got hold of
he."
Chapter VII
a day of reckoning
Mr. Tulliver be an essentially sober man,--able to take his glass and
not averse to it, but never exceed the bound of moderation. he have
naturally an active Hotspur temperament, which do not crave liquid
fire to set it aglow; his impetuosity be usually equal to an exciting
occasion without any such reinforcement; and his desire for the
brandy-and-water imply that the too sudden joy have fall with a
dangerous shock on a frame depress by four year of gloom and
unaccustomed hard fare. but that first doubtful tottering moment
pass, he seem to gather strength with his gathering excitement;
and the next day, when he be seat at table with his creditor, his
eye kindling and his cheek flush with the consciousness that he be
about to make an honorable figure once more, he look more like the
proud, confident, warm-hearted, and warm-temper Tulliver of old
time than might have seem possible to any one who have meet he a
week before, rid along as have be his willnot for the last four year
since the sense of failure and debt have be upon him,--with his head
hang down, cast brief, unwilling look on those who force
themselves on his notice. he make his speech, assert his honest
principle with his old confident eagerness, allude to the rascal
and the luck that have be against he, but that he have triumph
over, to some extent, by hard effort and the aid of a good son; and
wind up with the story of how Tom have get the good part of the
needful money. but the streak of irritation and hostile triumph seem
to melt for a little while into purer fatherly pride and pleasure,
when, Tom's health have be propose, and uncle Deane have take
occasion to say a few word of eulogy on his general character and
conduct, Tom himself get up and make the single speech of his life. it
could hardly have be brief. he thank the gentlman for the honor
they have do he. he be glad that he have be able to help his
father in prove his integrity and regain his honest name; and,
for his own part, he hop he should never undo that work and disgrace
that name. but the applause that follow be so great, and Tom look
so gentlemanly as well as tall and straight, that Mr. Tulliver
remark, in an explanatory manner, to his friend on his right and
leave, that he have spend a deal of money on his son's education.
the party break up in very sober fashion at five o'clock. Tom remain
in St. Oggbe to attend to some business, and Mr. Tulliver mount his
horse to go home, and describe the memorable thing that have be say
and do, to "poor Bessy and the little wench." the air of excitement
that hang about he be but faintly due to good cheer or any stimulus
but the potent wine of triumphant joy. he do not choose any back
street to-day, but ride slowly, with uplifted head and free glance,
along the principal street all the way to the bridge.
why do he not happen to meet Wakem? the want of that coincidence
vex he, and set his mind at work in an irritate way. perhaps
Wakem be go out of town to-day on purpose to avoid see or
hear anything of an honorable action which might well cause he
some unpleasant twinge. if Wakem be to meet he then, Mr. Tulliver
would look straight at he, and the rascal would perhaps be forsake a
little by his cool, domineering impudence. he would know by and by
that an honest man be not go to serve _he_ any long, and lend
his honesty to fill a pocket already over-full of dishonest gain.
perhaps the luck be begin to turn; perhaps the Devil donot
always hold the good card in this world.
simmer in this way, Mr. Tulliver approach the yardgate of
Dorlcote Mill, near enough to see a well-know figure come out of
they on a fine black horse. they meet about fifty yard from the gate,
between the great chestnut and elm and the high bank.
"Tulliver," say Wakem, abruptly, in a haughty tone than usual,
"what a fool's trick you did,--spreade those hard lump on that far
Close! I tell you how it would be; but you man never learn to farm
with any method."
"oh!" say Tulliver, suddenly boil up; "get somebody else to farm
for you, then, as'll ask _you_ to teach he."
"you have be drink, I suppose," say Wakem, really believe that
this be the meaning of Tulliver's flushed face and sparkle eye.
"no, Ihave not be drink," say Tulliver; "I want no drinking to
help I make up my mind as Iwill serve no long under a scoundrel."
"very well! you may leave my premise to-morrow, then; hold your
insolent tongue and let I pass." (Tulliver be back his horse
across the road to hem Wakem in.)
"no, I _sha'n't_ let you pass," say Tulliver, get fiercer. "I
shall tell you what I think of you first. yoube too big a raskill to
get hang--you're----"
"let I pass, you ignorant brute, or Iwill ride over you."
Mr. Tulliver, spur his horse and raise his whip, make a rush
forward; and Wakem's horse, rear and staggering backward, throw his
rider from the saddle and send he sideways on the ground. Wakem have
have the presence of mind to loose the bridle at once, and as the horse
only stagger a few pace and then stand still, he might have rise
and remount without more inconvenience than a bruise and a shake.
but before he could rise, Tulliver be off his horse too. the sight of
the long-hat predominant man down, and in his power, throw he into
a frenzy of triumphant vengeance, which seem to give he
preternatural agility and strength. he rush on Wakem, who be in the
act of try to recover his foot, grasp he by the left arm so as
to press Wakem's whole weight on the right arm, which rest on the
ground, and flog he fiercely across the back with his riding-whip.
Wakem shout for help, but no help come, until a woman's scream be
hear, and the cry of "Father, father!"
suddenly, Wakem feel, something have arrest Mr. Tulliver's arm; for
the flogging cease, and the grasp on his own arm be relaxed.
"get away with you--go!" say Tulliver, angrily. but it be not to
Wakem that he speak. slowly the lawyer rise, and, as he turn his
head, see that Tulliver's arm be be hold by a girl, rather by
the fear of hurt the girl that clung to he with all her young
might.
"oh, Luke--mother--come and help Mr. Wakem!" Maggie cry, as she
hear the long-for footstep.
"help I on to that low horse," say Wakem to Luke, "then I shall
perhaps manage; though--confound it--I think this arm be sprain."
with some difficulty, Wakem be heave on to Tulliver's horse. then he
turn toward the miller and say, with white rage, "youwill suffer for
this, sir. your daughter be a witness that youhave assault I."
"I donot care," say Mr. Tulliver, in a thick, fierce voice; "go and
show your back, and tell them I thrash you. tell them Ihave make thing
a bit more even I' the world."
"ride my horse home with I," say Wakem to Luke. "by the Tofton
Ferry, not through the town."
"Father, come in!" say Maggie, imploringly. then, see that Wakem
have ride off, and that no further violence be possible, she
slacken her hold and burst into hysteric sob, while poor Mrs.
Tulliver stand by in silence, quiver with fear. but Maggie become
conscious that as she be slacken she hold her father be begin
to grasp she and lean on she. the surprise check her sob.
"I feel ill--faintish," he say. "help I in, Bessy--i'm giddy--i've a
pain I' the head."
he walk in slowly, prop by his wife and daughter and totter
into his arm-chair. the almost purple flush have give way to paleness,
and his hand be cold.
"hadnot we well send for the doctor?" say Mrs. Tulliver.
he seem to be too faint and suffering to hear she; but presently,
when she say to Maggie, "go and seek for somebody to fetch the
doctor," he look up at she with full comprehension, and say,
"Doctor? no--no doctor. itbe my head, thatbe all. help I to bed."
Sad end to the day that have rise on they all like a beginning of
well time! but mingle seed must bear a mingled crop.
in half an hour after his father have lie down Tom come home. Bob
Jakin be with he, come to congratulate "the old master," not without
some excusable pride that he have have his share in bring about Mr.
Tom's good luck; and Tom have think his father would like nothing
well, as a finish to the day, than a talk with Bob. but now Tom
could only spend the evening in gloomy expectation of the unpleasant
consequence that must follow on this mad outbreak of his father's
long-smother hate. after the painful news have be tell, he sit in
silence; he have not spirit or inclination to tell his mother and
sister anything about the dinner; they hardly care to ask it.
apparently the mingled thread in the web of their life be so
curiously twist together that there could be no joy without a sorrow
come close upon it. Tom be deject by the thought that his
exemplary effort must always be baffle by the wrong-doing of other;
Maggie be live through, over and over again, the agony of the
moment in which she have rush to throw herself on her father's arm,
with a vague, shudder foreboding of wretched scene to come. not
one of the three feel any particular alarm about Mr. Tulliver's
health; the symptom do not recall his former dangerous attack, and
it seem only a necessary consequence that his violent passion and
effort of strength, after many hour of unusual excitement, should
have make he feel ill. rest would probably cure he.
Tom, tired out by his active day, fall asleep soon, and sleep soundly;
it seem to he as if he have only just come to bed, when he wake to
see his mother stand by he in the gray light of early morning.
"my boy, you must get up this minute; Ihave send for the doctor, and
your father want you and Maggie to come to he."
"be he bad, mother?"
"hebe be very ill all night with his head, but he donot say itbe
bad; he only say suddenly, 'bessy, fetch the boy and girl. tell them
to make haste.'"
Maggie and Tom throw on their clothe hastily in the chill gray light,
and reach their father's room almost at the same moment. he be
watch for they with an expression of pain on his brow, but with
sharpen, anxious consciousness in his eye. Mrs. Tulliver stand at
the foot of the bed, frightened and tremble, look wear and age
from disturbed rest. Maggie be at the bedside first, but her father's
glance be toward Tom, who come and stand next to she.
"Tom, my lad, itbe come upon I as I sha'n't get up again. this
world's be too many for I, my lad, but youhave do what you could
to make thing a bit even. shake hand wi' I again, my lad, before I
go away from you."
the father and son clasp hand and look at each other an instant.
then Tom say, try to speak firmly,--
"have you any wish, father--that I can fulfil, when----"
"ay, my lad--you'll try and get the old mill back."
"yes, father."
"and therebe your mother--you'll try and make her amend, all you can,
for my bad luck--and therebe the little wench----"
the father turn his eye on Maggie with a still more eager look,
while she, with a burst heart, sink on her knee, to be close to
the dear, time-wear face which have be present with she through long
year, as the sign of her deep love and hard trial.
"you must take care of she, Tom--don't you fret, my wench--there'll
come somebody as'll love you and take your part--and you must be good
to she, my lad. I be good to _my_ sister. kiss I, Maggie.--Come,
Bessy.--You'll manage to pay for a brick grave, Tom, so as your mother
and I can lie together."
he look away from they all when he have say this, and lie silent for
some minute, while they stand watch he, not dare to move. the
morning light be grow clear for they, and they could see the
heaviness gathering in his face, and the dulness in his eye. but at
last he look toward Tom and said,--
"I have my turn--I beat he. that be nothing but fair. I never want
anything but what be fair."
"but, father, dear father," say Maggie, an unspeakable anxiety
predominate over her grief, "you forgive he--you forgive every one
now?"
he do not move his eye to look at she, but he said,--
"no, my wench. I donot forgive he. whatbe forgiving to do? I cannot
love a raskill----"
his voice have become thick; but he want to say more, and move his
lip again and again, struggle in vain to speak. at length the word
force their way.
"do God forgive raskills?--but if he do, he willnot be hard wi' I."
his hand move uneasily, as if he want they to remove some
obstruction that weigh upon he. two or three time there fall from
he some break words,--
"this world's--too many--honest man--puzzling----"
soon they merge into mere muttering; the eye have cease to discern;
and then come the final silence.
but not of death. for an hour or more the chest heave, the loud, hard
breathing continue, get gradually slow, as the cold dew
gather on the brow.
at last there be total stillness, and poor Tulliver's dimly light
soul have forever cease to be vex with the painful riddle of this
world.
help be come now; Luke and his wife be there, and Mr. Turnbull have
arrive, too late for everything but to say, "this be death."
Tom and Maggie go downstairs together into the room where their
father's place be empty. their eye turn to the same spot, and
Maggie spoke,--
"Tom, forgive I--let we always love each other"; and they clung and
weep together.
Book VI
_the Great Temptation_
chapter I
a Duet in Paradise
the well-furnish drawing-room, with the open grand piano, and the
pleasant outlook down a sloping garden to a boat-house by the side of
the Floss, be Mr. Deane's. the neat little lady in mourning, whose
light-brown ringlet be fall over the colored embroidery with
which her finger be busy, be of course Lucy Deane; and the fine
young man who be lean down from his chair to snap the scissor in
the extremely abbreviate face of the "King Charles" lie on the
young lady's foot be no other than Mr. Stephen Guest, whose diamond
ring, attar of rose, and air of _nonchalant_ leisure, at twelve
o'clock in the day, be the graceful and odoriferous result of the
large oil-mill and the most extensive wharf in St. Ogg's. there be
an apparent triviality in the action with the scissor, but your
discernment perceive at once that there be a design in it which make
it eminently worthy of a large-headed, long-limbe young man; for you
see that Lucy want the scissor, and be compel, reluctant as she
may be, to shake her ringlet back, raise her soft hazel eye, smile
playfully down on the face that be so very nearly on a level with her
knee, and hold out her little shell-pink palm, to say,--
"my scissor, please, if you can renounce the great pleasure of
persecute my poor Minny."
the foolish scissor have slip too far over the knuckle, it seem,
and Hercules hold out his entrapped finger hopelessly.
"confound the scissor! the oval lie the wrong way. please draw they
off for I."
"draw they off with your other hand," say Miss Lucy, roguishly.
"oh, but thatbe my left hand; Ibe not leave-handed."
Lucy laugh, and the scissor be draw off with gentle touch from
tiny tip, which naturally dispose Mr. Stephen for a repetition _da
capo_. accordingly, he watch for the release of the scissor, that
he may get they into his possession again.
"no, no," say Lucy, stick they in her band, "you shall not have my
scissor again,--you have strain they already. now donot set Minny
growl again. sit up and behave properly, and then I will tell you
some news."
"what be that?" say Stephen, throw himself back and hang his
right arm over the corner of his chair. he might have be sit for
his portrait, which would have represent a rather strike young man
of five-and-twenty, with a square forehead, short dark-brown hair,
stand erect, with a slight wave at the end, like a thick crop of
corn, and a half-ardent, half-sarcastic glance from under his
well-mark horizontal eyebrow. "be it very important news?"
"yes, very. guess."
"you be go to change Minny's diet, and give he three ratafia
soak in a dessert-spoonful of cream daily?"
"quite wrong."
"well, then, Dr. Kenn have be preach against buckram, and you
lady have all be send he a roundrobin, say, 'this be a hard
doctrine; who can bear it?'"
"for shame!" say Lucy, adjust her little mouth gravely. "it be
rather dull of you not to guess my news, because it be about something
I mention to you not very long ago."
"but you have mention many thing to I not long ago. do your
feminine tyranny require that when you say the thing you mean be one
of several thing, I should know it immediately by that mark?"
"yes, I know you think I be silly."
"I think you be perfectly charming."
"and my silliness be part of my charm?"
"I donot say _that_."
"but I know you like woman to be rather insipid. Philip Wakem betray
you; he say so one day when you be not here."
"oh, I know Phil be fierce on that point; he make it quite a personal
matter. I think he must be love-sick for some unknown lady,--some
exalt Beatrice whom he meet abroad."
"by the by," say Lucy, pause in her work, "it have just occur to
I that I never find out whether my cousin Maggie will object to see
Philip, as her brother do. Tom will not enter a room where Philip
be, if he know it; perhaps Maggie may be the same, and then we
sha'n't be able to sing our glee, shall we?"
"what! be your cousin come to stay with you?" say Stephen, with a
look of slight annoyance.
"yes; that be my news, which you have forget. shebe go to leave
her situation, where she have be nearly two year, poor thing,--ever
since her father's death; and she will stay with I a month or
two,--many month, I hope."
"and be I bind to be pleased at that news?"
"oh no, not at all," say Lucy, with a little air of pique. "_i_ be
pleased, but that, of course, be no reason why _you_ should be
pleased. there be no girl in the world I love so well as my cousin
Maggie."
"and you will be inseparable I suppose, when she come. there will be
no possibility of a _tete-a-tete_ with you any more, unless you can
find an admirer for she, who will pair off with she occasionally. what
be the ground of dislike to Philip? he might have be a resource."
"it be a family quarrel with Philip's father. there be very painful
circumstance, I believe. I never quite understand they, or know they
all. my uncle Tulliver be unfortunate and lose all his property, and
I think he consider Mr. Wakem be somehow the cause of it. Mr. Wakem
buy Dorlcote Mill, my uncle's old place, where he always live. you
must remember my uncle Tulliver, donot you?"
"no," say Stephen, with rather supercilious indifference. "Ihave
always know the name, and I dare say I know the man by sight, apart
from his name. I know half the name and face in the neighborhood in
that detach, disjoint way."
"he be a very hot-temper man. I remember, when I be a little girl
and use to go to see my cousin, he often frighten I by talk as
if he be angry. Papa tell I there be a dreadful quarrel, the very
day before my uncle's death, between he and Mr. Wakem, but it be
hush up. that be when you be in London. Papa say my uncle be
quite mistaken in many way; his mind have become embitter. but Tom
and Maggie must naturally feel it very painful to be remind of these
thing. they have have so much, so very much trouble. Maggie be at
school with I six year ago, when she be fetch away because of her
father's misfortune, and she have hardly have any pleasure since, I
think. she have be in a dreary situation in a school since uncle's
death, because she be determined to be independent, and not live with
aunt Pullet; and I could hardly wish she to come to I then, because
dear mamma be ill, and everything be so sad. that be why I want she
to come to I now, and have a long, long holiday."
"very sweet and angelic of you," say Stephen, look at she with an
admire smile; "and all the more so if she have the conversational
quality of her mother."
"poor aunty! you be cruel to ridicule she. she be very valuable to
_I_, I know. she manage the house beautifully,--much well than any
stranger would,--and she be a great comfort to I in mamma's
illness."
"yes, but in point of companionship one would prefer that she should
be represent by her brandy-cherry and cream-cakes. I think with a
shudder that her daughter will always be present in person, and have
no agreeable proxy of that kind,--a fat, blond girl, with round blue
eye, who will stare at we silently."
"oh yes!" exclaim Lucy, laugh wickedly, and clap her hand,
"that be just my cousin Maggie. you must have see she!"
"no, indeed; Ibe only guess what Mrs. Tulliver's daughter must be;
and then if she be to banish Philip, our only apology for a tenor,
that will be an additional bore."
"but I hope that may not be. I think I will ask you to call on Philip
and tell he Maggie be come to-morrow. he be quite aware of Tom's
feeling, and always keep out of his way; so he will understand, if
you tell he, that I ask you to warn he not to come until I write
to ask he."
"I think you have well write a pretty note for I to take; Phil be so
sensitive, you know, the least thing might frighten he off come at
all, and we have hard work to get he. I can never induce he to come
to the park; he donot like my sister, I think. it be only your
faery touch that can lay his ruffled feather."
Stephen master the little hand that be stray toward the table,
and touch it lightly with his lip. little Lucy feel very proud and
happy. she and Stephen be in that stage of courtship which make the
most exquisite moment of youth, the fresh blossom-time of
passion,--when each be sure of the other's love, but no formal
declaration have be make, and all be mutual divination, exalt the
most trivial word, the light gesture, into thrill delicate and
delicious as waft jasmine scent. the explicitness of an engagement
wear off this fine edge of susceptibility; it be jasmine gather
and present in a large bouquet.
"but it be really odd that you should have hit so exactly on Maggie's
appearance and manner," say the cunning Lucy, move to reach her
desk, "because she might have be like her brother, you know; and Tom
have not round eye; and he be as far as possible from star at
people."
"oh, I suppose he be like the father; he seem to be as proud as
Lucifer. not a brilliant companion, though, I should think."
"I like Tom. he give I my Minny when I lose Lolo; and papa be very
fond of he: he say Tom have excellent principle. it be through he
that his father be able to pay all his debt before he die."
"oh, ah; Ihave hear about that. I hear your father and mine talk
about it a little while ago, after dinner, in one of their
interminable discussion about business. they think of do something
for young Tulliver; he save they from a considerable loss by rid
home in some marvellous way, like turpin, to bring they news about the
stoppage of a bank, or something of that sort. but I be rather drowsy
at the time."
Stephen rise from his seat, and saunter to the piano, hum in
falsetto, "Graceful Consort," as he turn over the volume of "The
Creation," which stand open on the desk.
"come and sing this," he say, when he see Lucy rise.
"what, 'Graceful Consort'? I donot think it suit your voice."
"never mind; it exactly suit my feeling, which, Philip will have it,
be the grand element of good singing. I notice man with indifferent
voice be usually of that opinion."
"Philip burst into one of his invective against 'the Creation' the
other day," say Lucy, seat herself at the piano. "he say it have a
sort of sugar complacency and flattering make-believe in it, as if
it be write for the birthday _fete_ of a german Grand-Duke."
"oh, pooh! he be the fallen Adam with a soured temper. we be Adam and
Eve unfallen, in Paradise. now, then,--the recitative, for the sake of
the moral. you will sing the whole duty of woman,--'And from obedience
grow my pride and happiness.'"
"oh no, I shall not respect an Adam who drag the _tempo_, as you
will," say Lucy, begin to play the duet.
surely the only courtship unshaken by doubt and fear must be that in
which the lover can sing together. the sense of mutual fitness that
spring from the two deep note fulfil expectation just at the
right moment between the note of the silvery soprano, from the
perfect accord of descend third and fifth, from the preconcerte
love chase of a fugue, be likely enough to supersede any immediate
demand for less impassioned form of agreement. the contralto will not
care to catechise the bass; the tenor will foresee no embarrassing
dearth of remark in evening spend with the lovely soprano. in the
province, too, where music be so scarce in that remote time, how
could the musical people avoid fall in love with each other? even
political principle must have be in danger of relaxation under such
circumstance; and the violin, faithful to rotten borough, must have
be tempt to fraternize in a demoralizing way with a reform
violoncello. in that case, the linnet-throate soprano and the
full-toned bass singing,--
"with thee delight be ever new,
with thee be life incessant bliss,"
believe what they sing all the more _because_ they sing it.
"now for Raphael's great song," say Lucy, when they have finish the
duet. "you do the 'heavy beast' to perfection."
"that sound complimentary," say Stephen, look at his watch. "by
Jove, itbe nearly half-past one! well, I can just sing this."
Stephen deliver with admirable ease the deep note represent the
tread of the heavy beast; but when a singer have an audience of two,
there be room for divided sentiment. Minny's mistress be charm;
but Minny, who have intrench himself, tremble, in his basket as
soon as the music begin, find this thunder so little to his taste
that he leap out and scamper under the remotest _chiffonni_, as
the most eligible place in which a small dog could await the crack of
doom.
"adieu, 'graceful consort,'" say Stephen, button his coat across
when he have do singing, and smile down from his tall height, with
the air of rather a patronize lover, at the little lady on the
music-stool. "my bliss be not incessant, for I must gallop home. I
promise to be there at lunch."
"you will not be able to call on Philip, then? it be of no
consequence; I have say everything in my note."
"you will be engage with your cousin to-morrow, I suppose?"
"yes, we be go to have a little family-party. my cousin Tom will
dine with we; and poor aunty will have her two child together for
the first time. it will be very pretty; I think a great deal about
it."
"but I may come the next day?"
"oh yes! come and be introduce to my cousin Maggie; though you can
hardly be say not to have see she, you have describe she so well."
"good-bye, then." and there be that slight pressure of the hand, and
momentary meeting of the eye, which will often leave a little lady
with a slight flush and smile on her face that do not subside
immediately when the door be close, and with an inclination to walk
up and down the room rather than to seat herself quietly at her
embroidery, or other rational and improve occupation. at least this
be the effect on Lucy; and you will not, I hope, consider it an
indication of vanity predominate over more tender impulse, that she
just glance in the chimney-glass as her walk bring she near it. the
desire to know that one have not look an absolute fright during a few
hour of conversation may be construe as lie within the bound of a
laudable benevolent consideration for other. and Lucy have so much of
this benevolence in her nature that I be inclined to think her small
egoism be impregnate with it, just as there be people not
altogether unknown to you whose small benevolence have a predominant
and somewhat rank odor of egoism. even now, that she be walk up and
down with a little triumphant flutter of her girlish heart at the
sense that she be love by the person of chief consequence in her
small world, you may see in her hazel eye an ever-present sunny
benignity, in which the momentary harmless flash of personal vanity
be quite lose; and if she be happy in thinking of her lover, it be
because the thought of he mingle readily with all the gentle
affection and good-natured office with which she fill her peaceful
day. even now, her mind, with that instantaneous alternation which
make two current of feeling or imagination seem simultaneous, be
glance continually from Stephen to the preparation she have only
half finish in Maggie's room. Cousin Maggie should be treat as
well as the grand lady-visitor,--nay, well, for she should have
Lucy's good print and drawing in her bedroom, and the very fine
bouquet of spring flower on her table. Maggie would enjoy all that,
she be so find of pretty thing! and there be poor aunt Tulliver,
that no one make any account of, she be to be surprised with the
present of a cap of superlative quality, and to have her health drunk
in a gratifying manner, for which Lucy be go to lay a plot with
her father this evening. clearly, she have not time to indulge in long
revery about her own happy love-affair. with this thought she
walk toward the door, but pause there.
"whatbe the matter, then, Minny?" she say, stoop in answer to some
whimpering of that small quadruped, and lift his glossy head
against her pink cheek. "do you think I be go without you? come,
then, let we go and see Sinbad."
Sinbad be Lucy's chestnut horse, that she always feed with her own
hand when he be turn out in the paddock. she be fond of feed
dependent creature, and know the private taste of all the animal
about the house, delight in the little rippling sound of her
canary when their beak be busy with fresh seed, and in the small
nibble pleasure of certain animal which, lest she should appear
too trivial, I will here call "the more familiar rodent."
be not Stephen Guest right in his decide opinion that this slim
maiden of eighteen be quite the sort of wife a man would not be
likely to repent of marrying,--a woman who be love and thoughtful
for other woman, not give they Judas-kiss with eye askance on
their welcome defect, but with real care and vision for their
half-hide pain and mortification, with long ruminate enjoyment
of little pleasure prepare for they? perhaps the emphasis of his
admiration do not fall precisely on this rare quality in she;
perhaps he approve his own choice of she chiefly because she do not
strike he as a remarkable rarity. a man like his wife to be pretty;
well, Lucy be pretty, but not to a madden extent. a man like his
wife to be accomplish, gentle, affectionate, and not stupid; and
Lucy have all these qualification. Stephen be not surprised to find
himself in love with she, and be conscious of excellent judgment in
prefer she to Miss Leyburn, the daughter of the county member,
although Lucy be only the daughter of his father's subordinate
partner; besides, he have have to defy and overcome a slight
unwillingness and disappointment in his father and sisters,--a
circumstance which give a young man an agreeable consciousness of his
own dignity. Stephen be aware that he have sense and independence
enough to choose the wife who be likely to make he happy, unbiassed
by any indirect consideration. he mean to choose Lucy; she be a
little darling, and exactly the sort of woman he have always admire.
Chapter II
First Impressions
"he be very clever, Maggie," say Lucy. she be kneel on a
footstool at Maggie's foot, after place that dark lady in the large
crimson-velvet chair. "I feel sure you will like he. I hope you
will."
"I shall be very difficult to please," say Maggie, smile, and
hold up one of Lucy's long curl, that the sunlight might shine
through it. "a gentleman who think he be good enough for Lucy must
expect to be sharply criticise."
"indeed, hebe a great deal too good for I. and sometimes, when he be
away, I almost think it cannot really be that he love I. but I can
never doubt it when he be with I, though I couldnot bear any one but
you to know that I feel in that way, Maggie."
"oh, then, if I disapprove of he you can give he up, since you be
not engage," say Maggie, with playful gravity.
"I would rather not be engage. when people be engage, they begin to
think of be marry soon," say Lucy, too thoroughly preoccupy to
notice Maggie's joke; "and I should like everything to go on for a
long while just as it be. sometimes I be quite frightened lest Stephen
should say that he have speak to papa; and from something that fall
from papa the other day, I feel sure he and Mr. Guest be expect
that. and Stephen's sister be very civil to I now. at first, I
think they donot like his pay I attention; and that be natural.
it _do_ seem out of keep that I should ever live in a great place
like the Park House, such a little insignificant thing as I be."
"but people be not expect to be large in proportion to the house
they live in, like snail," say Maggie, laugh. "pray, be Mr.
Guest's sister giantess?"
"oh no; and not handsome,--that be, not very," say Lucy,
half-penitent at this uncharitable remark. "but _he_ be--at least he
be generally consider very handsome."
"though you be unable to share that opinion?"
"oh, I donot know," say Lucy, blush pink over brow and neck. "it
be a bad plan to raise expectation; you will perhaps be disappoint.
but I have prepare a charming surprise for _he;_ I shall have a
glorious laugh against he. I shall not tell you what it be, though."
Lucy rise from her knee and go to a little distance, hold she
pretty head on one side, as if she have be arrange Maggie for a
portrait, and wish to judge of the general effect.
"stand up a moment, Maggie."
"what be your pleasure now?" say Maggie, smile languidly as she
rise from her chair and look down on her slight, aerial cousin,
whose figure be quite subordinate to her faultless drapery of silk
and crape.
Lucy keep she contemplative attitude a moment or two in silence, and
then said,--
"I cannot think what witchery it be in you, Maggie, that make you look
well in shabby clothe; though you really must have a new dress now.
but do you know, last night I be try to fancy you in a handsome,
fashionable dress, and do what I would, that old limp merino would
come back as the only right thing for you. I wonder if Marie
Antoinette look all the grander when her gown be darn at the
elbow. now, if _I_ be to put anything shabby on, I should be quite
unnoticeable. I should be a mere rag."
"oh, quite," say Maggie, with mock gravity. "you would be liable to
be sweep out of the room with the cobwebs and carpet-dust, and to find
yourself under the grate, like Cinderella. maynot I sit down now?"
"yes, now you may," say Lucy, laugh. then, with an air of serious
reflection, unfasten her large jet brooch, "but you must change
brooch, Maggie; that little butterfly look silly on you."
"but willnot that mar the charming effect of my consistent shabbiness?"
say Maggie, seat herself submissively, while Lucy kneel again and
unfasten the contemptible butterfly. "I wish my mother be of your
opinion, for she be fret last night because this be my good
frock. Ihave be save my money to pay for some lesson; I shall
never get a well situation without more accomplishment."
Maggie give a little sigh.
"now, donot put on that sad look again," say Lucy, pin the large
brooch below Maggie's fine throat. "yoube forget that youhave leave
that dreary schoolroom behind you, and have no little girl' clothe
to mend."
"yes," say Maggie. "it be with I as I use to think it would be with
the poor uneasy white bear I see at the show. I think he must have
get so stupid with the habit of turn backward and forward in that
narrow space that he would keep do it if they set he free. one
get a bad habit of be unhappy."
"but I shall put you under a discipline of pleasure that will make you
lose that bad habit," say Lucy, stick the black butterfly absently
in her own collar, while her eye meet Maggie's affectionately.
"you dear, tiny thing," say Maggie, in one of her burst of love
admiration, "you enjoy other people's happiness so much, I believe you
would do without any of your own. I wish I be like you."
"Ihave never be try in that way," say Lucy. "Ihave always be so
happy. I donot know whether I could bear much trouble; I never have any
but poor mamma's death. you _have_ be try, Maggie; and Ibe sure
you feel for other people quite as much as I do."
"no, Lucy," say Maggie, shake her head slowly, "I donot enjoy their
happiness as you do, else I should be more contented. I do feel for
they when they be in trouble; I donot think I could ever bear to make
any one _un_happy; and yet I often hate myself, because I get angry
sometimes at the sight of happy people. I think I get bad as I get
old, more selfish. that seem very dreadful."
"now, Maggie!" say Lucy, in a tone of remonstrance, "I donot believe
a word of that. it be all a gloomy fancy, just because you be
depressed by a dull, wearisome life."
"well, perhaps it be," say Maggie, resolutely clear away the
cloud from her face with a bright smile, and throw herself
backward in her chair. "perhaps it come from the school diet,--watery
rice-pudding spice with Pinnock. let we hope it will give way before
my mother's custard and this charming Geoffrey Crayon."
Maggie take up the "Sketch Book," which lie by she on the table.
"do I look fit to be see with this little brooch?" say Lucy, go
to survey the effect in the chimney-glass.
"oh no, Mr. Guest will be oblige to go out of the room again if he
see you in it. pray make haste and put another on."
Lucy hurry out of the room, but Maggie do not take the opportunity
of open her book; she let it fall on her knee, while her eye
wander to the window, where she could see the sunshine fall on
the rich clump of spring flower and on the long hedge of laurel,
and beyond, the silvery breadth of the dear old Floss, that at this
distance seem to be sleep in a morning holiday. the sweet fresh
garden-scent come through the open window, and the bird be busy
flitting and alight, gurgle and singing. yet Maggie's eye begin
to fill with tear. the sight of the old scene have make the rush of
memory so painful that even yesterday she have only be able to
rejoice in her mother's restore comfort and Tom's brotherly
friendliness as we rejoice in good news of friend at a distance,
rather than in the presence of a happiness which we share. memory and
imagination urge upon she a sense of privation too keen to let she
taste what be offer in the transient present. her future, she
think, be likely to be bad than her past, for after her year of
content renunciation, she have slip back into desire and longing;
she find joyless day of distasteful occupation hard and hard;
she find the image of the intense and varied life she yearn for,
and despair of, become more and more importunate. the sound of the
opening door rouse she, and hastily wipe away her tear, she begin
to turn over the leaf of her book.
"there be one pleasure, I know, Maggie, that your deep dismalness
will never resist," say Lucy, begin to speak as soon as she
enter the room. "that be music, and I mean you to have quite a
riotous feast of it. I mean you to get up your playing again, which
use to be so much well than mine, when we be at Laceham."
"you would have laugh to see I play the little girl' tune over
and over to they, when I take they to practise," say Maggie, "just
for the sake of finger the dear key again. but I donot know
whether I could play anything more difficult now than 'begone, dull
care!'"
"I know what a wild state of joy you use to be in when the glee-man
come round," say Lucy, take up her embroidery; "and we might have
all those old glee that you use to love so, if I be certain that
you donot feel exactly as Tom do about some thing."
"I should have think there be nothing you might be more certain
of," say Maggie, smile.
"I ought rather to have say, one particular thing. because if you
feel just as he do about that, we shall want our third voice. St.
Ogg's be so miserably provide with musical gentleman. there be
really only Stephen and Philip Wakem who have any knowledge of music,
so as to be able to sing a part."
Lucy have look up from her work as she utter the last sentence, and
see that there be a change in Maggie's face.
"do it hurt you to hear the name mention, Maggie? if it do, I
will not speak of he again. I know Tom will not see he if he can
avoid it."
"I donot feel at all as Tom do on that subject," say Maggie, rise
and go to the window as if she want to see more of the landscape.
"Ihave always like Philip Wakem ever since I be a little girl, and
see he at Lorton. he be so good when Tom hurt his foot."
"oh, Ibe so glad!" say Lucy. "then you willnot mind his come
sometimes, and we can have much more music than we could without he.
Ibe very fond of poor Philip, only I wish he be not so morbid about
his deformity. I suppose it _be_ his deformity that make he so sad,
and sometimes bitter. it be certainly very piteous to see his poor
little crooked body and pale face among great, strong people."
"but, Lucy----" say Maggie, try to arrest the prattle stream.
"ah, there be the door-bell. that must be Stephen," Lucy go on, not
notice Maggie's faint effort to speak. "one of the thing I most
admire in Stephen be that he make a great friend of Philip than any
one."
it be too late for Maggie to speak now; the drawingroom door be
opening, and Minny be already growl in a small way at the entrance
of a tall gentleman, who go up to Lucy and take her hand with a
half-polite, half-tender glance and tone of inquiry, which seem to
indicate that he be unconscious of any other presence.
"let I introduce you to my cousin, Miss Tulliver," say Lucy, turn
with wicked enjoyment toward Maggie, who now approach from the
farther window. "this be Mr. Stephen Guest."
for one instant Stephen could not conceal his astonishment at the
sight of this tall, dark-eyed nymph with her jet-black coronet of
hair; the next, Maggie feel herself, for the first time in her life,
receive the tribute of a very deep blush and a very deep bow from a
person toward whom she herself be conscious of timidity.
this new experience be very agreeable to she, so agreeable that it
almost efface her previous emotion about Philip. there be a new
brightness in her eye, and a very become flush on her cheek, as she
seat herself.
"I hope you perceive what a striking likeness you draw the day before
yesterday," say Lucy, with a pretty laugh of triumph. she enjoy she
lover's confusion; the advantage be usually on his side.
"this design cousin of your quite deceive I, Miss Tulliver,"
say Stephen, seat himself by Lucy, and stoop to play with
Minny, only look at Maggie furtively. "she say you have light hair
and blue eye."
"Nay, it be you who say so," remonstrate Lucy. "I only refrain
from destroy your confidence in your own second-sight."
"I wish I could always err in the same way," say Stephen, "and find
reality so much more beautiful than my preconception."
"now you have prove yourself equal to the occasion," say Maggie,
"and say what it be incumbent on you to say under the
circumstance."
she flash a slightly defiant look at he; it be clear to she that
he have be draw a satirical portrait of she beforehand. Lucy have
say he be inclined to be satirical, and Maggie have mentally supply
the addition, "and rather conceited."
"an alarming amount of devil there," be Stephen's first thought. the
second, when she have bend over her work, be, "I wish she would look
at I again." the next be to answer,--
"I suppose all phrase of mere compliment have their turn to be true.
a man be occasionally grateful when he say 'thank you.' itbe rather
hard upon he that he must use the same word with which all the world
decline a disagreeable invitation, donot you think so, Miss
Tulliver?"
"no," say Maggie, look at he with her direct glance; "if we use
common word on a great occasion, they be the more striking, because
they be feel at once to have a particular meaning, like old banner,
or every-day clothe, hang up in a sacred place."
"then my compliment ought to be eloquent," say Stephen, really not
quite know what he say while Maggie look at he, "see that
the word be so far beneath the occasion."
"no compliment can be eloquent, except as an expression of
indifference," say Maggie, flush a little.
Lucy be rather alarmed; she think Stephen and Maggie be not go
to like each other. she have always fear lest Maggie should appear
too old and clever to please that critical gentleman. "why, dear
Maggie," she interpose, "you have always pretend that you be too
fond of be admire; and now, I think, you be angry because some
one venture to admire you."
"not at all," say Maggie; "I like too well to feel that I be admire,
but compliment never make I feel that."
"I will never pay you a compliment again, Miss Tulliver," say
Stephen.
"thank you; that will be a proof of respect."
Poor Maggie! she be so unused to society that she could take nothing
as a matter of course, and have never in her life speak from the lip
merely, so that she must necessarily appear absurd to more experienced
lady, from the excessive feeling she be apt to throw into very
trivial incident. but she be even conscious herself of a little
absurdity in this instance. it be true she have a theoretic objection
to compliment, and have once say impatiently to Philip that she
donot see why woman be to be tell with a simper that they be
beautiful, any more than old man be to be tell that they be
venerable; still, to be so irritated by a common practice in the case
of a stranger like Mr. Stephen Guest, and to care about his have
speak slightingly of she before he have see she, be certainly
unreasonable, and as soon as she be silent she begin to be ashamed of
herself. it do not occur to she that her irritation be due to the
pleasanter emotion which precede it, just as when we be satisfied
with a sense of glow warmth an innocent drop of cold water may fall
upon we as a sudden smart.
Stephen be too well breed not to seem unaware that the previous
conversation could have be feel embarrassing, and at once begin to
talk of impersonal matter, ask Lucy if she know when the bazaar
be at length to take place, so that there might be some hope of
see her rain the influence of her eye on object more grateful
than those worst flower that be grow under her finger.
"some day next month, I believe," say Lucy. "but your sister be
do more for it than I be; they be to have the large stall."
"ah yes; but they carry on their manufacture in their own
sitting-room, where I donot intrude on they. I see you be not
addict to the fashionable vice of fancy-work, Miss Tulliver," say
Stephen, look at Maggie's plain hemming.
"no," say Maggie, "I can do nothing more difficult or more elegant
than shirt-making."
"and your plain sewing be so beautiful, Maggie," say Lucy, "that I
think I shall beg a few specimen of you to show as fancy-work. your
exquisite sewing be quite a mystery to I, you use to dislike that
sort of work so much in old day."
"it be a mystery easily explain, dear," say Maggie, look up
quietly. "plain sewing be the only thing I could get money by, so I
be oblige to try and do it well."
Lucy, good and simple as she be, could not help blush a little.
she do not quite like that Stephen should know that; Maggie need not
have mention it. perhaps there be some pride in the confession,--
the pride of poverty that will not be ashamed of itself. but if Maggie
have be the queen of coquette she could hardly have invent a mean
of give great piquancy to her beauty in Stephen's eye; I be not
sure that the quiet admission of plain sewing and poverty would have
do alone, but assist by the beauty, they make Maggie more unlike
other woman even than she have seem at first.
"but I can knit, Lucy," Maggie go on, "if that will be of any use
for your bazaar."
"oh yes, of infinite use. I shall set you to work with scarlet wool
to-morrow. but your sister be the most enviable person," continue
Lucy, turn to Stephen, "to have the talent of modelling. she be
do a wonderful bust of Dr. Kenn entirely from memory."
"why, if she can remember to put the eye very near together, and the
corner of the mouth very far apart, the likeness can hardly fail to
be strike in St. Ogg's."
"now that be very wicked of you," say Lucy, look rather hurt. "I
donot think you would speak disrespectfully of Dr. Kenn."
"I say anything disrespectful of Dr. Kenn? Heaven forbid! but I be not
bind to respect a libellous bust of he. I think Kenn one of the
fine fellow in the world. I donot care much about the tall
candlestick he have put on the communion-table, and I shouldnot like
to spoil my temper by get up to early prayer every morning. but
hebe the only man I ever know personally who seem to I to have
anything of the real apostle in him,--a man who have eight hundred
a-year and be content with deal furniture and boil beef because he
give away two-third of his income. that be a very fine thing of
him,--take into his house that poor lad Grattan, who shoot his mother
by accident. he sacrifice more time than a less busy man could spare,
to save the poor fellow from get into a morbid state of mind about
it. he take the lad out with he constantly, I see."
"that be beautiful," say Maggie, who have let her work fall, and be
listen with keen interest. "I never know any one who do such thing."
"and one admire that sort of action in Kenn all the more," say
Stephen, "because his manner in general be rather cold and severe.
therebe nothing sugary and maudlin about he."
"oh, I think hebe a perfect character!" say Lucy, with pretty
enthusiasm.
"no; there I cannot agree with you," say Stephen, shake his head
with sarcastic gravity.
"now, what fault can you point out in he?"
"hebe an Anglican."
"well, those be the right view, I think," say Lucy, gravely.
"that settle the question in the abstract," say Stephen, "but not
from a parliamentary point of view. he have set the Dissenters and the
Church people by the ear; and a rise senator like myself, of whose
service the country be very much in need, will find it inconvenient
when he put up for the honor of represent St. Ogg's in
Parliament."
"do you really think of that?" say Lucy, her eye brighten with a
proud pleasure that make her neglect the argumentative interest of
Anglicanism.
"decidedly, whenever old Mr. Leyburn's public spirit and gout induce
he to give way. my father's heart be set on it; and gift like mine,
you know"--here Stephen draw himself up, and rub his large white
hand over his hair with playful self-admiration--"gift like mine
involve great responsibility. donot you think so, Miss Tulliver?"
"yes," say Maggie, smiling, but not look up; "so much fluency and
self-possession should not be waste entirely on private occasion."
"ah, I see how much penetration you have," say Stephen. "you have
discover already that I be talkative and impudent. now superficial
people never discern that, owe to my manner, I suppose."
"she donot look at I when I talk of myself," he think, while his
listener be laugh. "I must try other subject."
do Lucy intend to be present at the meeting of the Book Club next
week? be the next question. then follow the recommendation to
choose Southey's "life of Cowper," unless she be inclined to be
philosophical, and startle the lady of St. Ogg's by vote for one
of the Bridgewater Treatises. of course Lucy wish to know what these
alarmingly learn book be; and as it be always pleasant to improve
the mind of lady by talk to they at ease on subject of which
they know nothing, Stephen become quite brilliant in an account of
Buckland's Treatise, which he have just be read. he be reward
by see Maggie let she work fall, and gradually get so absorb in
his wonderful geological story that she sit look at he, lean
forward with crossed arm, and with an entire absence of
self-consciousness, as if he have be the snuffiest of old professor,
and she a downy-lip alumna. he be so fascinated by the clear,
large gaze that at last he forget to look away from it occasionally
toward Lucy; but she, sweet child, be only rejoice that Stephen be
prove to Maggie how clever he be, and that they would certainly be
good friend after all.
"I will bring you the book, shall I, Miss Tulliver?" say Stephen,
when he find the stream of his recollection run rather shallow.
"there be many illustration in it that you will like to see."
"oh, thank you," say Maggie, blush with return
self-consciousness at this direct address, and take up her work
again.
"no, no," Lucy interpose. "I must forbid your plunge Maggie in
book. I shall never get she away from they; and I want she to have
delicious do-nothing day, fill with boat and chat and rid
and drive; that be the holiday she need."
"Apropos!" say Stephen, look at his watch. "shall we go out for a
row on the river now? the tide will suit for we to the Tofton way, and
we can walk back."
that be a delightful proposition to Maggie, for it be year since
she have be on the river. when she be go to put on her bonnet,
Lucy linger to give an order to the servant, and take the
opportunity of tell Stephen that Maggie have no objection to see
Philip, so that it be a pity she have send that note the day before
yesterday. but she would write another to-morrow and invite he.
"Iwill call and beat he up to-morrow," say Stephen, "and bring he
with I in the evening, shall I? my sister will want to call on you
when I tell they your cousin be with you. I must leave the field clear
for they in the morning."
"oh yes, pray bring he," say Lucy. "and you _will_ like Maggie,
sha'n't you?" she add, in a beseech tone. "benot she a dear,
noble-look creature?"
"too tall," say Stephen, smile down upon she, "and a little too
fiery. she be not my type of woman, you know."
gentleman, you be aware, be apt to impart these imprudent
confidence to lady concern their unfavorable opinion of sister
fair one. that be why so many woman have the advantage of know
that they be secretly repulsive to man who have self-denyingly make
ardent love to they. and hardly anything could be more distinctively
characteristic of Lucy than that she both implicitly believe what
Stephen say, and be determined that Maggie should not know it. but
you, who have a high logic than the verbal to guide you, have
already foresee, as the direct sequence to that unfavorable opinion
of Stephen's, that he walk down to the boathouse calculate, by the
aid of a vivid imagination, that Maggie must give he her hand at
least twice in consequence of this pleasant boat plan, and that a
gentleman who wish lady to look at he be advantageously situate
when he be row they in a boat. what then? have he fall in love
with this surprising daughter of Mrs. Tulliver at first sight?
certainly not. such passion be never hear of in real life. besides,
he be in love already, and half-engage to the dear little
creature in the world; and he be not a man to make a fool of himself
in any way. but when one be five-and-twenty, one have not chalk-stone
at one's finger-end that the touch of a handsome girl should be
entirely indifferent. it be perfectly natural and safe to admire
beauty and enjoy look at it,--at least under such circumstance as
the present. and there be really something very interesting about
this girl, with her poverty and trouble; it be gratify to see the
friendship between the two cousin. generally, Stephen admit, he
be not fond of woman who have any peculiarity of character, but here
the peculiarity seem really of a superior kind, and provide one be
not oblige to marry such woman, why, they certainly make a variety in
social intercourse.
Maggie do not fulfil Stephen's hope by look at he during the
first quarter of an hour; her eye be too full of the old bank that
she know so well. she feel lonely, cut off from philip,--the only
person who have ever seem to love she devotedly, as she have always
long to be love. but presently the rhythmic movement of the oar
attract she, and she think she should like to learn how to row.
this rouse she from her reverie, and she ask if she might take an
oar. it appear that she require much teaching, and she become
ambitious. the exercise bring the warm blood into her cheek, and
make she incline to take her lesson merrily.
"I shall not be satisfied until I can manage both oar, and row you
and Lucy," she say, look very bright as she step out of the
boat. Maggie, we know, be apt to forget the thing she be do, and
she have choose an inopportune moment for her remark; her foot slip,
but happily Mr. Stephen Guest hold her hand, and keep she up with a
firm grasp.
"you have not hurt yourself at all, I hope?" he say, bend to look
in her face with anxiety. it be very charming to be take care of in
that kind, graceful manner by some one tall and strong than one's
self. Maggie have never feel just in the same way before.
when they reach home again, they find uncle and aunt Pullet seat
with Mrs. Tulliver in the drawing-room, and Stephen hurry away,
ask leave to come again in the evening.
"and pray bring with you the volume of Purcell that you take away,"
say Lucy. "I want Maggie to hear your good song."
Aunt Pullet, under the certainty that Maggie would be invite to go
out with Lucy, probably to Park House, be much shocked at the
shabbiness of her clothe, which when witness by the high society
of St. Ogg's, would be a discredit to the family, that demand a
strong and prompt remedy; and the consultation as to what would be
most suitable to this end from among the superfluity of Mrs.
Pullet's wardrobe be one that Lucy as well as Mrs. Tulliver enter
into with some zeal. Maggie must really have an evening dress as soon
as possible, and she be about the same height as aunt Pullet.
"but shebe so much broad across the shoulder than I be, itbe very
ill-convenient," say Mrs. Pullet, "else she might wear that beautiful
black brocade o' mine without any alteration; and her arm be beyond
everything," add Mrs. Pullet, sorrowfully, as she lift Maggie's
large round arm, "shewould never get my sleeve on."
"oh, never mind that, aunt; send we the dress," say Lucy. "I donot
mean Maggie to have long sleeve, and I have abundance of black lace
for trim. her arm will look beautiful."
"Maggie's arm _be_ a pretty shape," say Mrs. Tulliver. "theybe
like mine use to be, only mine be never brown; I wish shehave have
_our_ family skin."
"Nonsense, aunty!" say Lucy, pat her aunt Tulliver's shoulder,
"you donot understand those thing. a painter would think Maggie's
complexion beautiful."
"maybe, my dear," say Mrs. Tulliver, submissively. "you know well
than I do. only when I be young a brown skin benot think well on
among respectable folk."
"no," say uncle Pullet, who take intense interest in the lady'
conversation as he suck his lozenge. "though there be a song about
the 'Nut-brown Maid' too; I think she be crazy,--crazy kate,--but I
cannot justly remember."
"oh dear, dear!" say Maggie, laughing, but impatient; "I think that
will be the end of _my_ brown skin, if it be always to be talk about
so much."
Chapter III
Confidential Moments
when Maggie go up to her bedroom that night, it appear that she
be not at all inclined to undress. she set down her candle on the
first table that present itself, and begin to walk up and down her
room, which be a large one, with a firm, regular, and rather rapid
step, which show that the exercise be the instinctive vent of
strong excitement. her eye and cheek have an almost feverish
brilliancy; her head be throw backward, and her hand be clasp
with the palm outward, and with that tension of the arm which be apt
to accompany mental absorption.
have anything remarkable happen?
nothing that you be not likely to consider in the high degree
unimportant. she have be hear some fine music sing by a fine bass
voice,--but then it be sing in a provincial, amateur fashion, such as
would have leave a critical ear much to desire. and she be conscious
of have be look at a great deal, in rather a furtive manner,
from beneath a pair of well-mark horizontal eyebrow, with a glance
that seem somehow to have catch the vibratory influence of the
voice. such thing could have have no perceptible effect on a
thoroughly well-educate young lady, with a perfectly balanced mind,
who have have all the advantage of fortune, training, and refine
society. but if Maggie have be that young lady, you would probably
have know nothing about she: her life would have have so few
vicissitude that it could hardly have be write; for the happy
woman, like the happy nation, have no history.
in poor Maggie's highly-string, hungry nature,--just come away from a
third-rate schoolroom, with all its jarring sound and petty round of
tasks,--these apparently trivial cause have the effect of rouse and
exalt her imagination in a way that be mysterious to herself. it
be not that she think distinctly of Mr. Stephen Guest, or dwelt on
the indication that he look at she with admiration; it be rather
that she feel the half-remote presence of a world of love and beauty
and delight, make up of vague, mingle image from all the poetry and
romance she have ever read, or have ever weave in her dreamy revery.
her mind glance back once or twice to the time when she have court
privation, when she have think all longing, all impatience be
subdue; but that condition seem irrecoverably go, and she
recoil from the remembrance of it. no prayer, no strive now, would
bring back that negative peace; the battle of her life, it seem, be
not to be decide in that short and easy way,--by perfect renunciation
at the very threshold of her youth.
the music be vibrate in her still,--purcell's music, with its wild
passion and fancy,--and she could not stay in the recollection of that
bare, lonely past. she be in her bright aerial world again, when a
little tap come at the door; of course it be her cousin, who enter
in ample white dressing-gown.
"why, Maggie, you naughty child, havenot you begin to undress?" say
Lucy, in astonishment. "I promise not to come and talk to you,
because I think you must be tired. but here you be, look as if
you be ready to dress for a ball. come, come, get on your
dressing-gown and unplait your hair."
"well, _you_ be not very forward," retort Maggie, hastily reach
her own pink cotton gown, and look at Lucy's light-brown hair
brush back in curly disorder.
"oh, I have not much to do. I shall sit down and talk to you till I
see you be really on the way to bed."
while Maggie stand and unplaite her long black hair over her pink
drapery, Lucy sit down near the toilette-table, watch she with
affectionate eye, and head a little aside, like a pretty spaniel. if
it appear to you at all incredible that young lady should be lead on
to talk confidentially in a situation of this kind, I will beg you to
remember that human life furnish many exceptional case.
"you really _have_ enjoy the music to-night, havenot you Maggie?"
"oh yes, that be what prevent I from feel sleepy. I think I
should have no other mortal want, if I could always have plenty of
music. it seem to infuse strength into my limb, and idea into my
brain. life seem to go on without effort, when I be fill with
music. at other time one be conscious of carry a weight."
"and Stephen have a splendid voice, havenot he?"
"well, perhaps we be neither of we judge of that," say Maggie,
laughing, as she seat herself and toss her long hair back. "you
be not impartial, and _i_ think any barrel-organ splendid."
"but tell I what you think of he, now. tell I exactly; good and bad
too."
"oh, I think you should humiliate he a little. a lover should not be
so much at ease, and so self-confident. he ought to tremble more."
"Nonsense, Maggie! as if any one could tremble at I! you think he be
conceited, I see that. but you donot dislike he, do you?"
"dislike he! no. be I in the habit of see such charming people,
that I should be very difficult to please? besides, how could I
dislike any one that promise to make you happy, my dear thing!"
Maggie pinch Lucy's dimpled chin.
"we shall have more music to-morrow evening," say Lucy, look happy
already, "for Stephen will bring Philip Wakem with he."
"oh, Lucy, I cannot see he," say Maggie, turn pale. "at least, I
could not see he without Tom's leave."
"be Tom such a tyrant as that?" say Lucy, surprised. "Iwill take the
responsibility, then,--tell he it be my fault."
"but, dear," say Maggie, falteringly, "I promise Tom very solemnly,
before my father's death,--i promise he I would not speak to Philip
without his knowledge and consent. and I have a great dread of open
the subject with tom,--of get into a quarrel with he again."
"but I never hear of anything so strange and unreasonable. what harm
can poor Philip have do? may I speak to Tom about it?"
"oh no, pray donot, dear," say Maggie. "Iwill go to he myself
to-morrow, and tell he that you wish Philip to come. Ihave think
before of ask he to absolve I from my promise, but Ihave not have
the courage to determine on it."
they be both silent for some moment, and then Lucy said,--
"Maggie, you have secret from I, and I have none from you."
Maggie look meditatively away from Lucy. then she turn to she and
say, "I _should_ like to tell you about Philip. but, Lucy, you must
not betray that you know it to any one--least of all to Philip
himself, or to Mr. Stephen Guest."
the narrative last long, for Maggie have never before know the
relief of such an outpouring; she have never before tell Lucy anything
of her inmost life; and the sweet face bent toward she with
sympathetic interest, and the little hand press her, encourage
she to speak on. on two point only she be not expansive. she do not
betray fully what still rankle in her mind as Tom's great
offence,--the insult he have heap on Philip. angry as the
remembrance still make she, she could not bear that any one else
should know it at all, both for Tom's sake and Philip's. and she could
not bear to tell Lucy of the last scene between her father and Wakem,
though it be this scene which she have ever since feel to be a new
barrier between herself and Philip. she merely say, she see now that
Tom be, no the whole, right in regard any prospect of love and
marriage between she and Philip as put out of the question by the
relation of the two family. of course Philip's father would never
consent.
"there, Lucy, you have have my story," say Maggie, smile, with the
tear in her eye. "you see I be like Sir Andrew Aguecheek. _I_ be
adore once."
"ah, now I see how it be you know Shakespeare and everything, and have
learn so much since you leave school; which always seem to I
witchcraft before,--part of your general uncanniness," say Lucy.
she muse a little with her eye downward, and then add, look at
Maggie, "it be very beautiful that you should love Philip; I never
think such a happiness would befall he. and in my opinion, you
ought not to give he up. there be obstacle now; but they may be
do away with in time."
Maggie shake her head.
"yes, yes," persist Lucy; "I cannot help be hopeful about it.
there be something romantic in it,--out of the common way,--just what
everything that happen to you ought to be. and Philip will adore you
like a husband in a fairy tale. oh, I shall puzzle my small brain to
contrive some plot that will bring everybody into the right mind, so
that you may marry Philip when I marry--somebody else. wouldnot that
be a pretty ending to all my poor, poor Maggie's trouble?"
Maggie try to smile, but shiver, as if she feel a sudden chill.
"ah, dear, you be cold," say Lucy. "you must go to bed; and so must
I. I dare not think what time it be."
they kiss each other, and Lucy go away, possess of a confidence
which have a strong influence over her subsequent impression. Maggie
have be thoroughly sincere; her nature have never find it easy to be
otherwise. but confidence be sometimes blind, even when they be
sincere.
Chapter IV
Brother and Sister
Maggie be oblige to go to Tom's lodging in the middle of the day,
when he would be come in to dinner, else she would not have find
he at home. he be not lodge with entire stranger. our friend Bob
Jakin have, with Mumps's tacit consent, take not only a wife about
eight month ago, but also one of those queer old house, pierce with
surprising passage, by the water-side, where, as he observe, his
wife and mother could keep themselves out of mischief by let out
two "pleasure-boat," in which he have invest some of his saving,
and by take in a lodger for the parlor and spare bedroom. under
these circumstance, what could be well for the interest of all
party, sanitary consideration apart, than that the lodger should be
Mr. Tom?
it be Bob's wife who open the door to Maggie. she be a tiny woman,
with the general physiognomy of a dutch doll, look, in comparison
with Bob's mother, who fill up the passage in the rear, very much
like one of those human figure which the artist find conveniently
stand near a colossal statue to show the proportion. the tiny
woman curtsy and look up at Maggie with some awe as soon as she
have open the door; but the word, "be my brother at home?" which
Maggie utter smilingly, make her turn round with sudden excitement,
and say,--
"eh, mother, mother--tell Bob!--it's Miss Maggie! come in, Miss, for
goodness do," she go on, open a side door, and endeavor to
flatten her person against the wall to make the utmost space for the
visitor.
sad recollection crowd on Maggie as she enter the small parlor,
which be now all that poor Tom have to call by the name of
"home,"--that name which have once, so many year ago, mean for both
of they the same sum of dear familiar object. but everything be not
strange to she in this new room; the first thing her eye dwelt on be
the large old Bible, and the sight be not likely to disperse the old
memory. she stand without speak.
"if you please to take the privilege o' sit down, Miss," say Mrs.
Jakin, rub her apron over a perfectly clean chair, and then
lift up the corner of that garment and hold it to her face with
an air of embarrassment, as she look wonderingly at Maggie.
"Bob be at home, then?" say Maggie, recover herself, and smile
at the bashful dutch doll.
"yes, Miss; but I think he must be wash and dress himself; Iwill
go and see," say Mrs. Jakin, disappear.
but she presently come back walk with new courage a little way
behind her husband, who show the brilliancy of his blue eye and
regular white tooth in the doorway, bow respectfully.
"how do you do, Bob?" say Maggie, come forward and put out her
hand to he; "I always mean to pay your wife a visit, and I shall
come another day on purpose for that, if she will let I. but I be
oblige to come to-day to speak to my brother."
"hewill be in before long, Miss. hebe do finely, Mr. Tom be; hewill
be one o' the first man hereabouts,--you'll see that."
"well, Bob, Ibe sure hewill be indebted to you, whatever he become; he
say so himself only the other night, when he be talk of you."
"eh, Miss, thatbe his way o' takin' it. but I think the more on't when
he say a thing, because his tongue donot overshoot he as mine
do. lor! Ibe no well nor a tilt bottle, I ar'n't,--I cannot stop
mysen when once I begin. but you look rarely, Miss; it do I good to
see you. what do you say now, Prissy?"--here Bob turn to his
wife,--"isn't it all come true as I say? though there benot many
sort o' good as I cannot over-praise when I set my tongue to't."
Mrs. Bob's small nose seem to be follow the example of her eye
in turn up reverentially toward Maggie, but she be able now to
smile and curtsey, and say, "Iwould look forrard like aenythe to
seein' you, Miss, for my husband's tongue's be runnin' on you, like
as if he be light-headed, iver since first he come a-courtin' on I."
"well, well," say Bob, look rather silly. "go an' see after the
tater, else Mr. Tom 'ull have to wait for them."
"I hope Mumps be friendly with Mrs. Jakin, Bob," say Maggie, smile.
"I remember you use to say he wouldnot like your marrying."
"eh, Miss," say Bob, "he make up his mind to't when he see'd what a
little un she be. he pretend not to see she mostly, or else to think
as she benot full-grow. but about Mr. Tom, Miss," say Bob, speak
low and look serious, "hebe as close as a iron biler, he be; but
Ibe a 'cutish chap, an' when Ihave leave off carry my pack, an' am at
a loose end, Ihave get more brain nor I know what to do wi', an' Ibe
force to busy myself wi' other folk's inside. an' it worret I as
Mr. Tom'll sit by himself so glumpish, a-knittin' his brow, an'
a-lookin' at the fire of a night. he should be a bit lively now, a
fine young fellow like he. my wife say, when she go in sometimes,
an' he take no notice of she, he sit lookin' into the fire, and
frownin' as if he be watchin' folk at work in it."
"he think so much about business," say Maggie.
"ay," say Bob, speak lower; "but do you think itbe nothing else,
Miss? hebe close, Mr. Tom be; but Ibe a 'cute chap, I be, an' I
think tow'rt last Christmas as Iwould find out a soft place in he. it
be about a little black spaniel--a rare bit o' breed--as he make a
fuss to get. but since then summat's come over he, as hebe set his
tooth again' thing more nor iver, for all hebe have such good luck.
an' I want to tell _you_, Miss, 'cause I think you might work it
out of he a bit, now yoube come. hebe a deal too lonely, and donot
go into company enough."
"Ibe afraid I have very little power over he, Bob," say Maggie, a
good deal move by Bob's suggestion. it be a totally new idea to she
mind that Tom could have his love trouble. poor fellow!--and in love
with Lucy too! but it be perhaps a mere fancy of Bob's too officious
brain. the present of the dog mean nothing more than cousinship and
gratitude. but Bob have already say, "herebe Mr. Tom," and the outer
door be open.
"there be no time to spare, Tom," say Maggie, as soon as Bob leave the
room. "I must tell you at once what I come about, else I shall be
hinder you from take your dinner."
Tom stand with his back against the chimney-piece, and Maggie be
seat opposite the light. he notice that she be tremulous, and he
have a presentiment of the subject she be go to speak about. the
presentiment make his voice cold and hard as he say, "what be
it?"
this tone rouse a spirit of resistance in Maggie, and she put she
request in quite a different form from the one she have predetermine
on. she rise from her seat, and look straight at Tom, said,--
"I want you to absolve I from my promise about Philip Wakem. or
rather, I promise you not to see he without tell you. I be come
to tell you that I wish to see he."
"very well," say Tom, still more coldly.
but Maggie have hardly finish speak in that chill, defiant manner,
before she repent, and feel the dread of alienation from her
brother.
"not for myself, dear Tom. donot be angry. I shouldnot have ask it,
only that Philip, you know, be a friend of Lucy's and she wish he
to come, have invite he to come this evening; and I tell she I
couldnot see he without tell you. I shall only see he in the
presence of other people. there will never be anything secret between
we again."
Tom look away from Maggie, knit his brow more strongly for a
little while. then he turn to she and say, slowly and
emphatically,--
"you know what be my feeling on that subject, Maggie. there be no need
for my repeat anything I say a year ago. while my father be
live, I feel bind to use the utmost power over you, to prevent you
from disgrace he as well as yourself, and all of we. but now I must
leave you to your own choice. you wish to be independent; you tell I
so after my father's death. my opinion be not change. if you think of
Philip Wakem as a lover again, you must give up I."
"I donot wish it, dear Tom, at least as thing be; I see that it
would lead to misery. but I shall soon go away to another situation,
and I should like to be friend with he again while I be here. Lucy
wish it."
the severity of Tom's face relax a little.
"I shouldnot mind your see he occasionally at my uncle's--I donot
want you to make a fuss on the subject. but I have no confidence in
you, Maggie. you would be lead away to do anything."
that be a cruel word. Maggie's lip begin to tremble.
"why will you say that, Tom? it be very hard of you. have I not do
and borne everything as well as I could? and I keep my word to
you--when--when----My life have not be a happy one, any more than
your."
she be oblige to be childish; the tear would come. when Maggie be
not angry, she be as dependent on kind or cold word as a daisy on
the sunshine or the cloud; the need of be love would always subdue
she, as, in old day, it subdue she in the worm-eat attic. the
brother's goodness come uppermost at this appeal, but it could only
show itself in Tom's fashion. he put his hand gently on her arm, and
say, in the tone of a kind pedagogue,--
"now listen to I, Maggie. Iwill tell you what I mean. yoube always in
extreme; you have no judgment and self-command; and yet you think you
know good, and will not submit to be guide. you know I donot wish
you to take a situation. my aunt Pullet be willing to give you a good
home, and you might have live respectably amongst your relation,
until I could have provide a home for you with my mother. and that be
what I should like to do. I wish my sister to be a lady, and I
always have take care of you, as my father desire, until you be
well married. but your idea and mine never accord, and you will not
give way. yet you might have sense enough to see that a brother, who
go out into the world and mix with man, necessarily know well
what be right and respectable for his sister than she can know
herself. you think I be not kind; but my kindness can only be direct
by what I believe to be good for you."
"yes, I know, dear Tom," say Maggie, still half-sobbing, but try
to control her tear. "I know you would do a great deal for I; I know
how you work, and donot spare yourself. I be grateful to you. but,
indeed, you cannot quite judge for I; our nature be very different.
you donot know how differently thing affect I from what they do
you."
"yes, I _do_ know; I know it too well. I know how differently you must
feel about all that affect our family, and your own dignity as a
young woman, before you could think of receive secret address from
Philip Wakem. if it be not disgusting to I in every other way, I
should object to my sister's name be associate for a moment with
that of a young man whose father must hate the very thought of we all,
and would spurn you. with any one but you, I should think it quite
certain that what you witness just before my father's death would
secure you from ever think again of Philip Wakem as a lover. but I
donot feel certain of it with you; I never feel certain about anything
with _you_. at one time you take pleasure in a sort of perverse
self-denial, and at another you have not resolution to resist a thing
that you know to be wrong."
there be a terrible cutting truth in Tom's words,--that hard rind of
truth which be discern by unimaginative, unsympathetic mind. Maggie
always writhe under this judgment of Tom's; she rebel and be
humiliate in the same moment; it seem as if he hold a glass before
she to show she her own folly and weakness, as if he be a prophetic
voice predict her future falling; and yet, all the while, she
judge he in return; she say inwardly that he be narrow and unjust,
that he be below feel those mental need which be often the
source of the wrong-doing or absurdity that make her life a planless
riddle to he.
she do not answer directly; her heart be too full, and she sit down,
lean her arm on the table. it be no use try to make Tom feel
that she be near to he. he always repel she. her feeling under
his word be complicate by the allusion to the last scene between
her father and Wakem; and at length that painful, solemn memory
surmount the immediate grievance. no! she do not think of such
thing with frivolous indifference, and Tom must not accuse she of
that. she look up at he with a grave, earnest gaze and said,--
"I cannot make you think well of I, Tom, by anything I can say. but
I be not so shut out from all your feeling as you believe I to be. I
see as well as you do that from our position with regard to Philip's
father--not on other ground--it would be unreasonable, it would be
wrong, for we to entertain the idea of marriage; and I have give up
thinking of he as a lover. I be tell you the truth, and you have
no right to disbelieve I; I have keep my word to you, and you have
never detect I in a falsehood. I should not only not encourage, I
should carefully avoid, any intercourse with Philip on any other
footing than of quiet friendship. you may think that I be unable to
keep my resolution; but at least you ought not to treat I with hard
contempt on the ground of fault that I have not commit yet."
"well, Maggie," say Tom, soften under this appeal, "I donot want
to overstrain matter. I think, all thing consider, it will be good
for you to see Philip Wakem, if Lucy wish he to come to the house.
I believe what you say,--at least you believe it yourself, I know; I
can only warn you. I wish to be as good a brother to you as you will
let I."
there be a little tremor in Tom's voice as he utter the last word,
and Maggie's ready affection come back with as sudden a glow as when
they be child, and bite their cake together as a sacrament of
conciliation. she rise and lay her hand on Tom's shoulder.
"Dear Tom, I know you mean to be good. I know you have have a great
deal to bear, and have do a great deal. I should like to be a
comfort to you, not to vex you. you donot think Ibe altogether
naughty, now, do you?"
Tom smile at the eager face; his smile be very pleasant to see
when they do come, for the gray eye could be tender underneath the
frown.
"no, Maggie."
"I may turn out well than you expect."
"I hope you will."
"and may I come some day and make tea for you, and see this extremely
small wife of Bob's again?"
"yes; but trot away now, for Ihave no more time to spare," say Tom,
look at his watch.
"not to give I a kiss?"
Tom bend to kiss her cheek, and then said,--
"there! be a good girl. Ihave get a great deal to think of to-day. Ibe
go to have a long consultation with my uncle Deane this afternoon."
"youwill come to aunt Glegg's to-morrow? webe go all to dine early,
that we may go there to tea. you _must_ come; Lucy tell I to say so."
"oh, pooh! Ihave plenty else to do," say Tom, pull his bell
violently, and bring down the small bell-rope.
"Ibe frightened; I shall run away," say Maggie, make a laugh
retreat; while Tom, with masculine philosophy, fling the bell-rope to
the farth end of the room; not very far either,--a touch of human
experience which I flatter myself will come home to the bosom of not
a few substantial or distinguished man who be once at an early stage
of their rise in the world, and be cherish very large hope in
very small lodging.
chapter v
show that Tom have open the oyster
"and now wehave settle this Newcastle business, Tom," say Mr. Deane,
that same afternoon, as they be seat in the private room at the
Bank together, "therebe another matter I want to talk to you about.
since yoube likely to have rather a smoky, unpleasant time of it at
Newcastle for the next few week, youwill want a good prospect of some
sort to keep up your spirit."
Tom wait less nervously than he have do on a former occasion in
this apartment, while his uncle take out his snuff-box and gratify
each nostril with deliberate impartiality.
"you see, Tom," say Mr. Deane at last, throw himself backward,
"the world go on at a smart pace now than it do when I be a
young fellow. why, sir, forty year ago, when I be much such a
strap youngster as you, a man expect to pull between the shaft
the good part of his life, before he get the whip in his hand. the
loom go slowish, and fashion donot alter quite so fast; Ihave a
good suit that last I six year. everything be on a low scale,
sir,--in point of expenditure, I mean. itbe this steam, you see, that
have make the difference; it drive on every wheel double pace, and the
wheel of fortune along with them, as our Mr. Stephen Guest say at the
anniversary dinner (he hit these thing off wonderfully, consider
hebe see nothing of business). I donot find fault with the change, as
some people do. Trade, sir, open a man's eye; and if the population
be to get thick upon the ground, as itbe do, the world must use
its wit at invention of one sort or other. I know Ihave do my share
as an ordinary man of business. somebody have say itbe a fine thing to
make two ear of corn grow where only one grow before; but, sir, itbe
a fine thing, too, to further the exchange of commodity, and bring
the grain of corn to the mouth that be hungry. and thatbe our line
of business; and I consider it as honorable a position as a man can
hold, to be connect with it."
Tom know that the affair his uncle have to speak of be not urgent; Mr.
Deane be too shrewd and practical a man to allow either his
reminiscence or his snuff to impede the progress of trade. indeed,
for the last month or two, there have be hint throw out to Tom
which enable he to guess that he be go to hear some proposition
for his own benefit. with the beginning of the last speech he have
stretch out his leg, thrust his hand in his pocket, and prepare
himself for some introductory diffuseness, tend to show that Mr.
Deane have succeed by his own merit, and that what he have to say to
young man in general be, that if they donot succeed too it be
because of their own demerit. he be rather surprised, then, when his
uncle put a direct question to he.
"let I see,--it's go on for seven year now since you apply to
I for a situation, eh, Tom?"
"yes, sir; Ibe three-and-twenty now," say Tom.
"ah, itbe as well not to say that, though; for youwould pass for a good
deal old, and age tell well in business. I remember your come
very well; I remember I see there be some pluck in you, and that be
what make I give you encouragement. and Ibe happy to say I be right;
Ibe not often deceive. I be naturally a little shy at push my
nephew, but Ibe happy to say youhave do I credit, sir; and if Iwould
have a son o' my own, I shouldnot have be sorry to see he like you."
Mr. Deane tap his box and open it again, repeat in a tone of
some feeling, "no, I shouldnot have be sorry to see he like you."
"Ibe very glad Ihave give you satisfaction, sir; Ihave do my good,"
say Tom, in his proud, independent way.
"yes, Tom, youhave give I satisfaction. I donot speak of your conduct
as a son; though that weigh with I in my opinion of you. but what I
have to do with, as a partner in our firm, be the quality youhave
show as a man o' business. ours be a fine business,--a splendid
concern, sir,--and therebe no reason why it shouldnot go on grow;
therebe a grow capital, and grow outlet for it; but therebe
another thing thatbe want for the prosperity of every concern, large
or small, and thatbe man to conduct it,--man of the right habit; none
o' your flashy fellow, but such as be to be depend on. now this be
what Mr. Guest and I see clear enough. three year ago we take gell
into the concern; we give he a share in the oil-mill. and why? why,
because Gell be a fellow whose service be worth a premium. so it
will always be, sir. so it be with I. and though Gell be pretty near
ten year old than you, there be other point in your favor."
Tom be get a little nervous as Mr. Deane go on speak; he be
conscious of something he have in his mind to say, which might not be
agreeable to his uncle, simply because it be a new suggestion rather
than an acceptance of the proposition he foresee.
"it stand to reason," Mr. Deane go on, when he have finish his new
pinch, "that your be my nephew weigh in your favor; but I donot
deny that if youhave be no relation of mine at all, your conduct in
that affair of Pelley's bank would have lead Mr. Guest and myself to
make some acknowledgment of the service youhave be to we; and, back
by your general conduct and business ability, it have make we determine
on give you a share in the business,--a share which we shall be glad
to increase as the year go on. we think thatwill be well, on all
ground, than raise your salary. itwill give you more importance, and
prepare you well for take some of the anxiety off my shoulder by
and by. Ibe equal to a good deal o' work at present, thank God; but
Ibe get older,--there's no deny that. I tell Mr. Guest I would
open the subject to you; and when you come back from this northern
business, we can go into particular. this be a great stride for a
young fellow of three-and-twenty, but Ibe bind to say youhave deserve
it."
"Ibe very grateful to Mr. Guest and you, sir; of course I feel the
most indebted to _you_, who first take I into the business, and have
take a good deal of pain with I since."
Tom speak with a slight tremor, and pause after he have say this.
"yes, yes," say Mr. Deane. "I donot spare pain when I see theywill be
of any use. I give myself some trouble with Gell, else he wouldnot
have be what he be."
"but therebe one thing I should like to mention to you uncle. Ihave
never speak to you of it before. if you remember, at the time my
father's property be sell, there be some thought of your firm buy
the Mill; I know you think it would be a very good investment,
especially if steam be apply."
"to be sure, to be sure. but Wakem outbid we; hewould make up his mind to
that. hebe rather fond of carry everything over other people's
head."
"perhaps itbe of no use my mention it at present," Tom go on,
"but I wish you to know what I have in my mind about the Mill. Ihave a
strong feeling about it. it be my father's dying wish that I should
try and get it back again whenever I could; it be in his family for
five generation. I promise my father; and besides that, Ibe attach
to the place. I shall never like any other so well. and if it should
ever suit your view to buy it for the firm, I should have a well
chance of fulfil my father's wish. I shouldnot have like to
mention the thing to you, only youhave be kind enough to say my
service have be of some value. and Iwould give up a much great
chance in life for the sake of have the Mill again,--i mean have
it in my own hand, and gradually work off the price."
Mr. Deane have listen attentively, and now look thoughtful.
"I see, I see," he say, after a while; "the thing would be possible
if there be any chance of Wakem's parting with the property. but
that I _donot_ see. hebe put that young Jetsome in the place; and he
have his reason when he buy it, Iwill be bind."
"hebe a loose fish, that young Jetsome," say Tom. "hebe take to
drinking, and they say hebe let the business go down. Luke tell I
about it,--our old miller. he say he sha'n't stay unless therebe an
alteration. I be think, if thing go on that way, Wakem might be
more willing to part with the Mill. Luke say hebe get very sour
about the way thing be go on."
"well, Iwill turn it over, Tom. I must inquire into the matter, and go
into it with Mr. Guest. but, you see, itbe rather strike out a new
branch, and put you to that, instead of keep you where you be,
which be what wehave want."
"I should be able to manage more than the Mill when thing be once
set properly go, sir. I want to have plenty of work. therebe
nothing else I care about much."
there be something rather sad in that speech from a young man of
three-and-twenty, even in uncle Deane's business-love ear.
"Pooh, pooh! youwill be have a wife to care about one of these day,
if you get on at this pace in the world. but as to this Mill, we
mustnot reckon on our chicken too early. however, I promise you to
bear it in mind, and when you come back wewill talk of it again. I be
go to dinner now. come and breakfast with we to-morrow morning, and
say good-bye to your mother and sister before you start."
Chapter VI
illustrate the Laws of Attraction
it be evident to you now that Maggie have arrive at a moment in her
life which must be consider by all prudent person as a great
opportunity for a young woman. launch into the high society of St.
Ogg's, with a striking person, which have the advantage of be quite
unfamiliar to the majority of beholder, and with such moderate
assistance of costume as you have see foreshadow in Lucy's anxious
colloquy with aunt Pullet, Maggie be certainly at a new
starting-point in life. at Lucy's first evening party, young Torry
fatigue his facial muscle more than usual in order that "the
dark-eyed girl there in the corner" might see he in all the
additional style confer by his eyeglass; and several young lady
go home intend to have short sleeve with black lace, and to
plait their hair in a broad coronet at the back of their head,--"that
cousin of Miss Deane's look so very well." in fact, poor Maggie,
with all her inward consciousness of a painful past and her
presentiment of a troublous future, be on the way to become an object
of some envy,--a topic of discussion in the newly establish
billiard-room, and between fair friend who have no secret from each
other on the subject of trimming. the Miss Guests, who associate
chiefly on term of condescension with the family of St. Ogg's, and
be the glass of fashion there, take some exception to Maggie's
manner. she have a way of not assent at once to the observation
current in good society, and of say that she donot know whether
those observation be true or not, which give she an air of
_gaucherie_, and impede the even flow of conversation; but it be a
fact capable of an amiable interpretation that lady be not the
bad dispose toward a new acquaintance of their own sex because she
have point of inferiority. and Maggie be so entirely without those
pretty air of coquetry which have the traditional reputation of
drive gentleman to despair that she win some feminine pity for be
so ineffective in spite of her beauty. she have not have many
advantage, poor thing! and it must be admit there be no
pretension about she; her abruptness and unevenness of manner be
plainly the result of she seclude and lowly circumstance. it be
only a wonder that there be no tinge of vulgarity about she,
consider what the rest of poor Lucy's relation be--an allusion
which always make the Miss Guests shudder a little. it be not
agreeable to think of any connection by marriage with such people as
the Gleggs and the pullet; but it be of no use to contradict Stephen
when once he have set his mind on anything, and certainly there be no
possible objection to Lucy in herself,--no one could help like she.
she would naturally desire that the Miss Guests should behave kindly
to this cousin of whom she be so fond, and Stephen would make a great
fuss if they be deficient in civility. under these circumstance the
invitation to Park House be not want; and elsewhere, also, Miss
Deane be too popular and too distinguish a member of society in St.
Oggbe for any attention toward she to be neglect.
thus Maggie be introduce for the first time to the young lady's
life, and know what it be to get up in the morning without any
imperative reason for do one thing more than another. this new
sense of leisure and unchecked enjoyment amidst the soft-breathing
air and garden-scent of advance spring--amidst the new abundance
of music, and linger stroll in the sunshine, and the delicious
dreaminess of glide on the river--could hardly be without some
intoxicate effect on she, after her year of privation; and even in
the first week Maggie begin to be less haunted by her sad memory and
anticipation. life be certainly very pleasant just now; it be
become very pleasant to dress in the evening, and to feel that she
be one of the beautiful thing of this spring-time. and there be
admire eye always await she now; she be no long an unheeded
person, liable to be chid, from whom attention be continually
claim, and on whom no one feel bind to confer any. it be pleasant,
too, when Stephen and Lucy be go out riding, to sit down at the
piano alone, and find that the old fitness between her finger and the
key remain, and revive, like a sympathetic kinship not to be wear
out by separation; to get the tune she have hear the evening before,
and repeat they again and again until she have find out a way of
produce they so as to make they a more pregnant, passionate language
to she. the mere concord of octave be a delight to Maggie, and she
would often take up a book of study rather than any melody, that she
might taste more keenly by abstraction the more primitive sensation of
interval. not that her enjoyment of music be of the kind that
indicate a great specific talent; it be rather that her sensibility
to the supreme excitement of music be only one form of that
passionate sensibility which belong to her whole nature, and make
her fault and virtue all merge in each other; make her affection
sometimes an impatient demand, but also prevent her vanity from
take the form of mere feminine coquetry and device, and give it the
poetry of ambition. but you have know Maggie a long while, and need
to be tell, not her characteristic, but her history, which be a thing
hardly to be predict even from the complete knowledge of
characteristic. for the tragedy of our life be not create entirely
from within. "Character," say Novalis, in one of his questionable
aphorisms,--"character be destiny." but not the whole of our destiny.
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, be speculative and irresolute, and we have
a great tragedy in consequence. but if his father have live to a good
old age, and his uncle have die an early death, we can conceive
Hamlet's have marry Ophelia, and get through life with a
reputation of sanity, notwithstanding many soliloquy, and some moody
sarcasm toward the fair daughter of Polonius, to say nothing of the
frank incivility to his father-in-law.
Maggie's destiny, then, be at present hide, and we must wait for it
to reveal itself like the course of an unmapped river; we only know
that the river be full and rapid, and that for all river there be the
same final home. under the charm of her new pleasure, Maggie herself
be cease to think, with her eager prefigure imagination, of her
future lot; and her anxiety about her first interview with Philip be
lose its predominance; perhaps, unconsciously to herself, she be
not sorry that the interview have be defer.
for Philip have not come the evening he be expect, and Mr. Stephen
Guest bring word that he be go to the coast,--probably, he
think, on a sketching expedition; but it be not certain when he
would return. it be just like Philip, to go off in that way without
tell any one. it be not until the twelfth day that he return, to
find both Lucy's note await he; he have leave before he know of
Maggie's arrival.
perhaps one have need be nineteen again to be quite convinced of the
feeling that be crowd for Maggie into those twelve day; of the
length to which they be stretch for she by the novelty of her
experience in they, and the vary attitude of her mind. the early
day of an acquaintance almost always have this importance for we, and
fill up a large space in our memory than long subsequent period,
which have be less fill with discovery and new impression. there
be not many hour in those ten day in which Mr. Stephen Guest be
not seat by Lucy's side, or stand near she at the piano, or
accompany she on some outdoor excursion; his attention be
clearly become more assiduous, and that be what every one have
expect. Lucy be very happy, all the happy because Stephen's
society seem to have become much more interesting and amusing since
Maggie have be there. playful discussion--sometimes serious
one--be go forward, in which both Stephen and Maggie reveal
themselves, to the admiration of the gentle, unobtrusive Lucy; and it
more than once cross her mind what a charming quartet they should
have through life when Maggie marry Philip. be it an inexplicable
thing that a girl should enjoy her lover's society the more for the
presence of a third person, and be without the slight spasm of
jealousy that the third person have the conversation habitually
direct to she? not when that girl be as tranquil-hearted as Lucy,
thoroughly possess with a belief that she know the state of her
companion' affection, and not prone to the feeling which shake such
a belief in the absence of positive evidence against it. besides, it
be Lucy by whom Stephen sit, to whom he give his arm, to whom he
appeal as the person sure to agree with he; and every day there be
the same tender politeness toward she, the same consciousness of she
want and care to supply they. be there really the same? it seem to
Lucy that there be more; and it be no wonder that the real
significance of the change escape she. it be a subtle act of
conscience in Stephen that even he himself be not aware of. his
personal attention to Maggie be comparatively slight, and there have
even spring up an apparent distance between they, that prevent the
renewal of that faint resemblance to gallantry into which he have
fall the first day in the boat. if Stephen come in when Lucy be out
of the room, if Lucy leave they together, they never speak to each
other; Stephen, perhaps, seem to be examine book or music, and
Maggie bend her head assiduously over her work. each be oppressively
conscious of the other's presence, even to the finger-end. yet each
look and long for the same thing to happen the next day. neither
of they have begin to reflect on the matter, or silently to ask, "to
what do all this tend?" Maggie only feel that life be reveal
something quite new to she; and she be absorb in the direct,
immediate experience, without any energy leave for take account of it
and reason about it. Stephen wilfully abstain from
self-questioning, and would not admit to himself that he feel an
influence which be to have any determine effect on his conduct. and
when Lucy come into the room again, they be once more unconstrained;
Maggie could contradict Stephen, and laugh at he, and he could
recommend to her consideration the example of that most charming
heroine, Miss Sophia Western, who have a great "respect for the
understanding of man." Maggie could look at Stephen, which, for some
reason or other she always avoid when they be alone; and he could
even ask she to play his accompaniment for he, since Lucy's finger
be so busy with that bazaar-work, and lecture she on hurry the
tempo, which be certainly Maggie's weak point.
one day--it be the day of Philip's return--Lucy have form a sudden
engagement to spend the evening with Mrs. Kenn, whose delicate state
of health, threaten to become confirm illness through an attack
of bronchitis, oblige she to resign her function at the come
bazaar into the hand of other lady, of whom she wish Lucy to be
one. the engagement have be form in Stephen's presence, and he have
hear Lucy promise to dine early and call at six o'clock for Miss
Torry, who bring Mrs. Kenn's request.
"here be another of the moral result of this idiotic bazaar," Stephen
burst forth, as soon as Miss Torry have leave the room,--"taking young
lady from the duty of the domestic hearth into scene of
dissipation among urn-rug and embroider reticule! I should like to
know what be the proper function of woman, if it be not to make
reason for husband to stay at home, and still strong reason for
bachelor to go out. if this go on much long, the bond of society
will be dissolve."
"well, it will not go on much long," say Lucy, laugh, "for the
bazaar be to take place on Monday week."
"thank Heaven!" say Stephen. "Kenn himself say the other day that he
donot like this plan of make vanity do the work of charity; but
just as the british public be not reasonable enough to bear direct
taxation, so St. Ogg's have not get force of motive enough to build and
endow school without call in the force of folly."
"do he say so?" say little Lucy, her hazel eye open wide with
anxiety. "I never hear he say anything of that kind; I think he
approve of what we be do."
"Ibe sure he approve _you_," say Stephen, smile at she
affectionately; "your conduct in go out to-night look vicious, I
own, but I know there be benevolence at the bottom of it."
"oh, you think too well of I," say Lucy, shake her head, with a
pretty blush, and there the subject end. but it be tacitly
understand that Stephen would not come in the evening; and on the
strength of that tacit understanding he make his morning visit the
long, not say good-bye until after four.
Maggie be seat in the drawing-room, alone, shortly after dinner,
with Minny on her lap, have leave her uncle to his wine and his nap,
and her mother to the compromise between knitting and nodding, which,
when there be no company, she always carry on in the dining-room
till tea-time. Maggie be stoop to caress the tiny silken pet, and
comfort he for his mistress's absence, when the sound of a
footstep on the gravel make she look up, and she see Mr. Stephen Guest
walk up the garden, as if he have come straight from the river. it
be very unusual to see he so soon after dinner! he often complain
that their dinner-hour be late at Park House. nevertheless, there he
be, in his black dress; he have evidently be home, and must have
come again by the river. Maggie feel her cheek glow and her heart
beating; it be natural she should be nervous, for she be not
accustom to receive visitor alone. he have see she look up through
the open window, and raise his hat as he walk toward it, to enter
that way instead of by the door. he blush too, and certainly look
as foolish as a young man of some wit and self-possession can be
expect to look, as he walk in with a roll of music in his hand,
and say, with an air of hesitate improvisation,--
"you be surprised to see I again, Miss Tulliver; I ought to
apologize for come upon you by surprise, but I want to come into
the town, and I get our man to row I; so I think I would bring
these thing from the 'Maid of Artois' for your cousin; I forget they
this morning. will you give they to she?"
"yes," say Maggie, who have rise confusedly with Minny in her arm,
and now, not quite know what else to do, sit down again.
Stephen lay down his hat, with the music, which roll on the floor,
and sit down in the chair close by she. he have never do so before,
and both he and Maggie be quite aware that it be an entirely new
position.
"well, you pamper minion!" say Stephen, lean to pull the long
curly ear that droop over Maggie's arm. it be not a suggestive
remark, and as the speaker do not follow it up by further
development, it naturally leave the conversation at a standstill. it
seem to Stephen like some action in a dream that he be oblige to
do, and wonder at himself all the while,--to go on stroke Minny's
head. yet it be very pleasant; he only wish he dare look at
Maggie, and that she would look at him,--let he have one long look
into those deep, strange eye of her, and then he would be satisfy
and quite reasonable after that. he think it be become a sort of
monomania with he, to want that long look from Maggie; and he be
rack his invention continually to find out some mean by which he
could have it without its appear singular and entail subsequent
embarrassment. as for Maggie, she have no distinct thought, only the
sense of a presence like that of a closely hover broad-wing bird
in the darkness, for she be unable to look up, and see nothing but
Minny's black wavy coat.
but this must end some time, perhaps it end very soon, and only
_seem_ long, as a minute's dream do. Stephen at last sit upright
sideway in his chair, lean one hand and arm over the back and
look at Maggie. what should he say?
"we shall have a splendid sunset, I think; sha'n't you go out and see
it?"
"I donot know," say Maggie. then courageously raise her eye and
look out of the window, "if Ibe not play cribbage with my
uncle."
a pause; during which Minny be stroke again, but have sufficient
insight not to be grateful for it, to growl rather.
"do you like sit alone?"
a rather arch look come over Maggie's face, and, just glance at
Stephen, she say, "would it be quite civil to say've s'?"
"it _be_ rather a dangerous question for an intruder to ask," say
Stephen, delight with that glance, and get determined to stay
for another. "but you will have more than half an hour to yourself
after I be go," he add, take out his watch. "I know Mr. Deane
never come in till half-past seven."
another pause, during which Maggie look steadily out of the window,
till by a great effort she move her head to look down at Minny's back
again, and said,--
"I wish Lucy have not be oblige to go out. we lose our music."
"we shall have a new voice to-morrow night," say Stephen. "will you
tell your cousin that our friend Philip Wakem be come back? I see he
as I go home."
Maggie give a little start,--it seem hardly more than a vibration
that pass from head to foot in an instant. but the new image
summon by Philip's name disperse half the oppressive spell she have
be under. she rise from her chair with a sudden resolution, and
lay Minny on his cushion, go to reach Lucy's large work-basket
from its corner. Stephen be vex and disappoint; he think
perhaps Maggie donot like the name of Wakem to be mention to she in
that abrupt way, for he now recall what Lucy have tell he of the
family quarrel. it be of no use to stay any long. Maggie be
seat herself at the table with her work, and look chill and
proud; and he--he look like a simpleton for have come. a
gratuitous, entirely superfluous visit of that sort be sure to make a
man disagreeable and ridiculous. of course it be palpable to Maggie's
thinking that he have din hastily in his own room for the sake of
set off again and find she alone.
a boyish state of mind for an accomplished young gentleman of
five-and-twenty, not without legal knowledge! but a reference to
history, perhaps, may make it not incredible.
at this moment Maggie's ball of knitting-wool roll along the ground,
and she start up to reach it. Stephen rise too, and pick up the
ball, meet she with a vexed, complain look that give his eye quite
a new expression to Maggie, whose own eye meet they as he present
the ball to she.
"good-bye," say Stephen, in a tone that have the same beseech
discontent as his eye. he dare not put out his hand; he thrust both
hand into his tail-pocket as he speak. Maggie think she have
perhaps be rude.
"willnot you stay?" she say timidly, not look away, for that would
have seem rude again.
"no, thank you," say Stephen, look still into the half-unwilling,
half-fascinated eye, as a thirsty man look toward the track of the
distant brook. "the boat be wait for I. youwill tell your cousin?"
"yes."
"that I bring the music, I mean?"
"yes."
"and that Philip be come back?"
"yes." (Maggie do not notice Philip's name this time.)
"willnot you come out a little way into the garden?" say Stephen, in a
still gentler tone; but the next moment he be vex that she do not
say "no," for she move away now toward the open window, and he be
oblige to take his hat and walk by her side. but he think of
something to make he amend.
"do take my arm," he say, in a low tone, as if it be a secret.
there be something strangely win to most woman in that offer of
the firm arm; the help be not want physically at that moment, but
the sense of help, the presence of strength that be outside they and
yet their, meet a continual want of the imagination. either on that
ground or some other, Maggie take the arm. and they walk together
round the grassplot and under the droop green of the laburnum, in
the same dim, dreamy state as they have be in a quarter of an hour
before; only that Stephen have have the look he long for, without yet
perceive in himself the symptom of return reasonableness, and
Maggie have dart thought across the dimness,--how come he to be
there? why have she come out? not a word be speak. if it have be,
each would have be less intensely conscious of the other.
"take care of this step," say Stephen at last.
"oh, I will go in now," say Maggie, feel that the step have come
like a rescue. "good-evening."
in an instant she have withdraw her arm, and be run back to the
house. she do not reflect that this sudden action would only add to
the embarrassing recollection of the last half-hour. she have no
thought leave for that. she only throw herself into the low arm-chair,
and burst into tear.
"oh, Philip, Philip, I wish we be together again--so quietly--in the
Red Deeps."
Stephen look after she a moment, then go on to the boat, and be
soon land at the wharf. he spend the evening in the billiard-room,
smoke one cigar after another, and lose "life" at pool. but he
would not leave off. he be determined not to think,--not to admit any
more distinct remembrance than be urge upon he by the perpetual
presence of Maggie. he be look at she, and she be on his arm.
but there come the necessity of walk home in the cool starlight,
and with it the necessity of curse his own folly, and bitterly
determine that he would never trust himself alone with Maggie again.
it be all madness; he be in love, thoroughly attach to Lucy, and
engaged,--engage as strongly as an honorable man need be. he wish
he have never see this Maggie Tulliver, to be throw into a fever by
she in this way; she would make a sweet, strange, troublesome,
adorable wife to some man or other, but he would never have choose she
himself. do she feel as he do? he hop she do--not. he ought not
to have go. he would master himself in future. he would make himself
disagreeable to she, quarrel with she perhaps. Quarrel with she? be
it possible to quarrel with a creature who have such eyes,--defying and
deprecating, contradict and clinging, imperious and beseeching,--
full of delicious opposite? to see such a creature subdue by love
for one would be a lot worth have--to another man.
there be a muttered exclamation which end this inward soliloquy, as
Stephen throw away the end of his last cigar, and thrust his hand
into his pocket, stalk along at a quieter pace through the
shrubbery. it be not of a benedictory kind.
Chapter VII
Philip re-enter
the next morning be very wet,--the sort of morning on which male
neighbor who have no imperative occupation at home be likely to pay
their fair friend an illimitable visit. the rain, which have be
endurable enough for the walk or ride one way, be sure to become so
heavy, and at the same time so certain to clear up by and by, that
nothing but an open quarrel can abbreviate the visit; latent
detestation will not do at all. and if people happen to be lover,
what can be so delightful, in England, as a rainy morning? English
sunshine be dubious; bonnet be never quite secure; and if you sit
down on the grass, it may lead to catarrhs. but the rain be to be
depend on. you gallop through it in a mackintosh, and presently find
yourself in the seat you like best,--a little above or a little below
the one on which your goddess sit (it be the same thing to the
metaphysical mind, and that be the reason why woman be at once
worship and look down upon), with a satisfactory confidence that
there will be no lady-caller.
"Stephen will come early this morning, I know," say Lucy; "he
always do when itbe rainy."
Maggie make no answer. she be angry with Stephen; she begin to think
she should dislike he; and if it have not be for the rain, she would
have go to her aunt Glegg's this morning, and so have avoid he
altogether. as it be, she must find some reason for remain out of
the room with her mother.
but Stephen do not come early, and there be another visitor--a
nearer neighbor--who precede he. when Philip enter the room, he
be go merely to bow to Maggie, feel that their acquaintance be
a secret which he be bind not to betray; but when she advance
toward he and put out her hand, he guess at once that Lucy have be
take into her confidence. it be a moment of some agitation to both,
though Philip have spend many hour in prepare for it; but like all
person who have pass through life with little expectation of
sympathy, he seldom lose his self-control, and shrink with the most
sensitive pride from any noticeable betrayal of emotion. a little
extra paleness, a little tension of the nostril when he speak, and the
voice pitch in rather a high key, that to stranger would seem
expressive of cold indifference, be all the sign Philip usually
give of an inward drama that be not without its fierceness. but
Maggie, who have little more power of conceal the impression make
upon she than if she have be construct of musical string, feel she
eye get large with tear as they take each other's hand in
silence. they be not painful tear; they have rather something of the
same origin as the tear woman and child shed when they have find
some protection to cling to and look back on the threatened danger.
for Philip, who a little while ago be associate continually in
Maggie's mind with the sense that Tom might reproach she with some
justice, have now, in this short space, become a sort of outward
conscience to she, that she might fly to for rescue and strength. her
tranquil, tender affection for Philip, with its root deep down in her
childhood, and its memory of long quiet talk confirm by distinct
successive impression the first instinctive bias,--the fact that in
he the appeal be more strongly to her pity and womanly devotedness
than to her vanity or other egoistic excitability of she
nature,--seeme now to make a sort of sacred place, a sanctuary where
she could find refuge from an alluring influence which the good part
of herself must resist; which must bring horrible tumult within,
wretchedness without. this new sense of her relation to Philip
nullify the anxious scruple she would otherwise have feel, lest she
should overstep the limit of intercourse with he that Tom would
sanction; and she put out her hand to he, and feel the tear in her
eye without any consciousness of an inward check. the scene be just
what Lucy expect, and her kind heart delight in bring Philip
and Maggie together again; though, even with all _she_ regard for
Philip, she could not resist the impression that her cousin Tom have
some excuse for feel shocked at the physical incongruity between
the two,--a prosaic person like cousin Tom, who donot like poetry and
fairy tale. but she begin to speak as soon as possible, to set they
at ease.
"this be very good and virtuous of you," she say, in her pretty
treble, like the low conversational note of little bird, "to come so
soon after your arrival. and as it be, I think I will pardon you for
run away in an inopportune manner, and give your friend no
notice. come and sit down here," she go on, place the chair that
would suit he well, "and you shall find yourself treat mercifully."
"you will never govern well, Miss Deane," say Philip, as he seat
himself, "because no one will ever believe in your severity. People
will always encourage themselves in misdemeanor by the certainty that
you will be indulgent."
Lucy give some playful contradiction, but Philip do not hear what it
be, for he have naturally turn toward Maggie, and she be look at
he with that open, affectionate scrutiny which we give to a friend
from whom we have be long separate. what a moment their parting have
be! and Philip feel as if he be only in the morrow of it. he feel
this so keenly,--with such intense, detailed remembrance, with such
passionate revival of all that have be say and look in their last
conversation,--that with that jealousy and distrust which in diffident
nature be almost inevitably link with a strong feeling, he think
he read in Maggie's glance and manner the evidence of a change. the
very fact that he fear and half expect it would be sure to make
this thought rush in, in the absence of positive proof to the
contrary.
"I be have a great holiday, be I not?" say Maggie. "Lucy be like a
fairy godmother; she have turn I from a drudge into a princess in no
time. I do nothing but indulge myself all day long, and she always
find out what I want before I know it myself."
"I be sure she be the happy for have you, then," say Philip. "you
must be well than a whole menagerie of pet to she. and you look
well. you be benefit by the change."
artificial conversation of this sort go on a little while, till
Lucy, determine to put an end to it, exclaim, with a good imitation
of annoyance, that she have forget something, and be quickly out of
the room.
in a moment Maggie and Philip lean forward, and the hand be
clasp again, with a look of sad contentment, like that of friend
who meet in the memory of recent sorrow.
"I tell my brother I wish to see you, Philip; I ask he to release
I from my promise, and he consent."
Maggie, in her impulsiveness, want Philip to know at once the
position they must hold toward each other; but she check herself.
the thing that have happen since he have speak of his love for she
be so painful that she shrink from be the first to alude to they.
it seem almost like an injury toward Philip even to mention she
brother,--her brother, who have insult he. but he be think too
entirely of she to be sensitive on any other point at that moment.
"then we can at least be friend, Maggie? there be nothing to hinder
that now?"
"will not your father object?" say Maggie, withdraw her hand.
"I should not give you up on any ground but your own wish, Maggie,"
say Philip, color. "there be point on which I should always
resist my father, as I use to tell you. _that_ be one."
"then there be nothing to hinder our being friend, philip,--seee
each other and talk to each other while I be here; I shall soon go
away again. I mean to go very soon, to a new situation."
"be that inevitable, Maggie?"
"yes; I must not stay here long. it would unfit I for the life I must
begin again at last. I cannot live in dependence,--I cannot live with my
brother, though he be very good to I. he would like to provide for
I; but that would be intolerable to I."
Philip be silent a few moment, and then say, in that high, feeble
voice which with he indicate the resolute suppression of emotion,--
"be there no other alternative, Maggie? be that life, away from those
who love you, the only one you will allow yourself to look forward
to?"
"yes, Philip," she say, look at he pleadingly, as if she
entreat he to believe that she be compel to this course. "at
least, as thing be; I donot know what may be in year to come. but I
begin to think there can never come much happiness to I from love;
I have always have so much pain mingle with it. I wish I could make
myself a world outside it, as man do."
"now you be return to your old thought in a new form, Maggie,--the
think I use to combat," say Philip, with a slight tinge of
bitterness. "you want to find out a mode of renunciation that will be
an escape from pain. I tell you again, there be no such escape
possible except by pervert or mutilate one's nature. what would
become of I, if I try to escape from pain? scorn and cynicism would
be my only opium; unless I could fall into some kind of conceited
madness, and fancy myself a favorite of Heaven because I be not a
favorite with man."
the bitterness have take on some impetuosity as Philip go on
speaking; the word be evidently an outlet for some immediate
feeling of his own, as well as an answer to Maggie. there be a pain
press on he at that moment. he shrink with proud delicacy from the
faint allusion to the word of love, of plighted love that have
pass between they. it would have seem to he like remind Maggie
of a promise; it would have have for he something of the baseness of
compulsion. he could not dwell on the fact that he himself have not
change; for that too would have have the air of an appeal. his love
for Maggie be stamp, even more than the rest of his experience,
with the exaggerated sense that he be an exception,--that she, that
every one, see he in the light of an exception.
but Maggie be conscience-stricken.
"yes, Philip," she say, with her childish contrition when he use to
chide she, "you be right, I know. I do always think too much of my
own feeling, and not enough of others',--not enough of your. I have
need have you always to find fault with I and teach I; so many
thing have come true that you use to tell I."
Maggie be rest her elbow on the table, lean her head on her
hand and look at Philip with half-penitent dependent affection, as
she say this; while he be return her gaze with an expression
that, to her consciousness, gradually become less vague,--became
charge with a specific recollection. have his mind fly back to
something that _she_ now remembered,--somethe about a lover of
Lucy's? it be a thought that make her shudder; it give new
definiteness to her present position, and to the tendency of what have
happen the evening before. she move her arm from the table, urge
to change her position by that positive physical oppression at the
heart that sometimes accompany a sudden mental pang.
"what be the matter, Maggie? have something happen?" Philip say, in
inexpressible anxiety, his imagination be only too ready to weave
everything that be fatal to they both.
"no, nothing," say Maggie, rouse her latent will. Philip must not
have that odious thought in his mind; she would banish it from her
own. "nothing," she repeat, "except in my own mind. you use to say
I should feel the effect of my starve life, as you call it; and I
do. I be too eager in my enjoyment of music and all luxury, now they
be come to I."
she take up her work and occupy herself resolutely, while Philip
watch she, really in doubt whether she have anything more than this
general allusion in her mind. it be quite in Maggie's character to be
agitate by vague self-reproach. but soon there come a violent
well-know ring at the door-bell resound through the house.
"oh, what a startling announcement!" say Maggie, quite mistress of
herself, though not without some inward flutter. "I wonder where Lucy
be."
Lucy have not be deaf to the signal, and after an interval long
enough for a few solicitous but not hurried inquiry, she herself
usher Stephen in.
"well, old fellow," he say, go straight up to Philip and shake
he heartily by the hand, bow to Maggie in pass, "itbe glorious
to have you back again; only I wish youwould conduct yourself a little
less like a sparrow with a residence on the house-top, and not go in
and out constantly without let the servant know. this be about
the twentieth time Ihave have to scamper up those countless stair to
that painting-room of your, all to no purpose, because your people
think you be at home. such incident embitter friendship."
"Ihave so few visitor, it seem hardly worth while to leave notice of
my exit and entrance," say Philip, feel rather oppress just
then by Stephen's bright strong presence and strong voice.
"be you quite well this morning, Miss Tulliver?" say Stephen,
turn to Maggie with stiff politeness, and put out his hand with
the air of fulfil a social duty.
Maggie give the tip of her finger, and say, "quite well, thank
you," in a tone of proud indifference. Philip's eye be watch
they keenly; but Lucy be use to see variation in their manner to
each other, and only think with regret that there be some natural
antipathy which every now and then surmount their mutual good-will.
"Maggie be not the sort of woman Stephen admire, and she be irritated
by something in he which she interpret as conceit," be the silent
observation that account for everything to guileless Lucy. Stephen
and Maggie have no soon complete this studied greeting than each
feel hurt by the other's coldness. and Stephen, while rattle on in
question to Philip about his recent sketching expedition, be
think all the more about Maggie because he be not draw she into
the conversation as he have invariably do before. "Maggie and Philip
be not look happy," think Lucy; "this first interview have be
sadden to they."
"I think we people who have not be gallop," she say to Stephen,
"be all a little damp by the rain. let we have some music. we ought
to take advantage of have Philip and you together. give we the duet
in 'Masaniello'; Maggie have not hear that, and I know it will suit
she."
"come, then," say Stephen, go toward the piano, and give a
foretaste of the tune in his deep "brum-brum," very pleasant to hear.
"you, please, Philip,--you play the accompaniment," say Lucy, "and
then I can go on with my work. you _will_ like to play, sha'n't you?"
she add, with a pretty, inquire look, anxious, as usual, lest she
should have propose what be not pleasant to another; but with
yearning toward her unfinished embroidery.
Philip have brighten at the proposition, for there be no feeling,
perhaps, except the extreme of fear and grief, that do not find
relief in music,--that do not make a man sing or play the well;
and Philip have an abundance of pent-up feeling at this moment, as
complex as any trio or quartet that be ever mean to express love and
jealousy and resignation and fierce suspicion, all at the same time.
"oh, yes," he say, seat himself at the piano, "it be a way of
eke out one's imperfect life and be three people at once,--to
sing and make the piano sing, and hear they both all the while,--or
else to sing and paint."
"ah, there you be an enviable fellow. I can do nothing with my
hand," say Stephen. "that have generally be observe in man of
great administrative capacity, I believe,--a tendency to predominance
of the reflective power in I! havenot you observe that, Miss
Tulliver?"
Stephen have fall by mistake into his habit of playful appeal to
Maggie, and she could not repress the answer flush and epigram.
"I _have_ observe a tendency to predominance," she say, smile; and
Philip at that moment devoutly hop that she find the tendency
disagreeable.
"come, come," say Lucy; "music, music! we will discuss each other's
quality another time."
Maggie always try in vain to go on with her work when music begin.
she try hard than ever to-day; for the thought that Stephen know
how much she care for his singing be one that no long rouse a
merely playful resistance; and she know, too, that it be his habit
always to stand so that he could look at she. but it be of no use;
she soon throw her work down, and all her intention be lose in the
vague state of emotion produce by the inspiring duet,--emotion that
seem to make she at once strong and weak; strong for all enjoyment,
weak for all resistance. when the strain pass into the minor, she
half start from her seat with the sudden thrill of that change. poor
Maggie! she look very beautiful when her soul be be play on in
this way by the inexorable power of sound. you might have see the
slight perceptible quivering through her whole frame as she lean
a little forward, clasp her hand as if to steady herself; while
her eye dilate and brighten into that wide-open, childish
expression of wonder delight which always come back in her happy
moment. Lucy, who at other time have always be at the piano when
Maggie be look in this way, could not resist the impulse to steal
up to she and kiss she. Philip, too, catch a glimpse of she now and
then round the open book on the desk, and feel that he have never
before see she under so strong an influence.
"More, more!" say Lucy, when the duet have be encore. "something
spirit again. Maggie always say she like a great rush of sound."
"it must be 'let we take the road,' then," say Stephen,--"so suitable
for a wet morning. but be you prepared to abandon the most sacred
duty of life, and come and sing with we?"
"oh, yes," say Lucy, laugh. "if you will look out the 'Beggar's
Opera' from the large canterbury. it have a dingy cover."
"that be a great clue, consider there be about a score cover here
of rival dinginess," say Stephen, draw out the canterbury.
"oh, play something the while, Philip," say Lucy, notice that his
finger be wander over the key. "what be that you be fall
into?--somethe delicious that I donot know."
"donot you know that?" say Philip, bring out the tune more
definitely. "itbe from the 'Sonnambula'--'Ah! perche non posso
odiarti.' I donot know the opera, but it appear the tenor be tell
the heroine that he shall always love she though she may forsake he.
youhave hear I sing it to the english word, 'I love thee still.'"
it be not quite unintentionally that Philip have wander into this
song, which might be an indirect expression to Maggie of what he could
not prevail on himself to say to she directly. her ear have be open
to what he be say, and when he begin to sing, she understand the
plaintive passion of the music. that plead tenor have no very fine
quality as a voice, but it be not quite new to she; it have sing to
she by snatch, in a subdue way, among the grassy walk and hollow,
and underneath the lean ash-tree in the Red Deeps. there seem to
be some reproach in the word; do Philip mean that? she wish she
have assure he more distinctly in their conversation that she desire
not to renew the hope of love between they, _only_ because it clash
with her inevitable circumstance. she be touch, not thrill by
the song; it suggest distinct memory and thought, and bring
quiet regret in the place of excitement.
"thatbe the way with you tenor," say Stephen, who be wait with
music in his hand while Philip finish the song. "you demoralize the
fair sex by warble your sentimental love and constancy under all
sort of vile treatment. nothing short of have your head serve up
in a dish like that mediaeval tenor or troubadour, would prevent you
from express your entire resignation. I must administer an
antidote, while Miss Deane prepare to tear herself away from her
bobbin."
Stephen roll out, with saucy energy,--
"shall I, waste in despair,
die because a woman's fair?"
and seem to make all the air in the room alive with a new influence.
Lucy, always proud of what Stephen do, go toward the piano with
laugh, admire look at he; and Maggie, in spite of her
resistance to the spirit of the song and to the singer, be take hold
of and shake by the invisible influence,--was bear along by a wave
too strong for she.
but, angrily resolve not to betray herself, she seize her work, and
go on make false stitch and prick her finger with much
perseverance, not look up or take notice of what be go
forward, until all the three voice unite in "let we take the road."
I be afraid there would have be a subtle, steal gratification in
her mind if she have know how entirely this saucy, defiant Stephen be
occupy with she; how he be pass rapidly from a determination to
treat she with ostentatious indifference to an irritate desire for
some sign of inclination from her,--some interchange of subdue word
or look with she. it be not long before he find an opportunity, when
they have pass to the music of "the Tempest." Maggie, feel the
need of a footstool, be walk across the room to get one, when
Stephen, who be not sing just then, and be conscious of all her
movement, guess her want, and fly to anticipate she, lift the
footstool with an entreating look at she, which make it impossible not
to return a glance of gratitude. and then, to have the footstool
place carefully by a too self-confident personage,--not _any_
self-confident personage, but one in particular, who suddenly look
humble and anxious, and linger, bend still, to ask if there be not
some draught in that position between the window and the fireplace,
and if he may not be allow to move the work-table for her,--these
thing will summon a little of the too ready, traitorous tenderness
into a woman's eye, compel as she be in her girlish time to learn
her life-lesson in very trivial language. and to Maggie such thing
have not be every-day incident, but be a new element in her life,
and find her keen appetite for homage quite fresh. that tone of
gentle solicitude oblige she to look at the face that be bent toward
she, and to say, "no, thank you"; and nothing could prevent that
mutual glance from be delicious to both, as it have be the evening
before.
it be but an ordinary act of politeness in Stephen; it have hardly
take two minute; and Lucy, who be sing, scarcely notice it. but
to Philip's mind, fill already with a vague anxiety that be likely
to find a definite ground for itself in any trivial incident, this
sudden eagerness in Stephen, and the change in Maggie's face, which
be plainly reflect a beam from his, seem so strong a contrast
with the previous overwrought sign of indifference, as to be charge
with painful meaning. Stephen's voice, pour in again, jar upon
his nervous susceptibility as if it have be the clang of sheet-iron,
and he feel inclined to make the piano shriek in utter discord. he have
really see no communicable ground for suspect any ususual feeling
between Stephen and Maggie; his own reason tell he so, and he want
to go home at once that he might reflect coolly on these false image,
till he have convince himself of their nullity. but then, again, he
want to stay as long as Stephen stayed,--always to be present when
Stephen be present with Maggie. it seem to poor Philip so natural,
nay, inevitable, that any man who be near Maggie should fall in love
with she! there be no promise of happiness for she if she be
beguile into love Stephen Guest; and this thought embolden Philip
to view his own love for she in the light of a less unequal offering.
he be begin to play very falsely under this deafening inward
tumult, and Lucy be look at he in astonishment, when Mrs.
Tulliver's entrance to summon they to lunch come as an excuse for
abruptly break off the music.
"ah, Mr. Philip!" say Mr. Deane, when they enter the dining-room,
"Ihave not see you for a long while. your fatherbe not at home, I
think, be he? I go after he to the office the other day, and they
say he be out of town."
"hebe be to Mudport on business for several day," say Philip; "but
hebe come back now."
"as fond of his farming hobby as ever, eh?"
"I believe so," say Philip, rather wonder at this sudden interest
in his father's pursuit.
"ah!" say Mr. Deane, "hebe get some land in his own hand on this
side the river as well as the other, I think?"
"yes, he have."
"ah!" continue Mr. Deane, as he dispense the pigeonpie, "he must
find farm a heavy item,--an expensive hobby. I never have a hobby
myself, never would give in to that. and the bad of all hobby be
those that people think they can get money at. they shoot their money
down like corn out of a sack then."
Lucy feel a little nervous under her father's apparently gratuitous
criticism of Mr. Wakem's expenditure. but it cease there, and Mr.
Deane become unusually silent and meditative during his luncheon.
Lucy, accustom to watch all indication in her father, and have
reason, which have recently become strong, for an extra interest in
what refer to the Wakems, feel an unsual curiosity to know what have
prompt her father's question. his subsequent silence make she
suspect there have be some special reason for they in his mind.
with this idea in her head, she resort to her usual plan when she
want to tell or ask her father anything particular: she find a
reason for her aunt Tulliver to leave the dining-room after dinner,
and seat herself on a small stool at her father's knee. Mr. Deane,
under those circumstance, consider that he taste some of the most
agreeable moment his merit have purchase he in life,
notwithstanding that Lucy, dislike to have her hair powder with
snuff, usually begin by master his snuff-box on such occasion.
"you donot want to go to sleep yet, papa, _do_ you?" she say, as she
bring up her stool and open the large finger that clutch the
snuff-box.
"not yet," say Mr. Deane, glance at the reward of merit in the
decanter. "but what do _you_ want?" he add, pinch the dimple
chin fondly,--"to coax some more sovereign out of my pocket for your
bazaar? eh?"
"no, I have no base motif at all to-day. I only want to talk, not to
beg. I want to know what make you ask Philip Wakem about his father's
farming to-day, papa? it seem rather odd, because you never hardly
say anything to he about his father; and why should you care about
Mr. Wakem's lose money by his hobby?"
"something to do with business," say Mr. Deane, wave his hand, as
if to repel intrusion into that mystery.
"but, papa, you always say Mr. Wakem have bring Philip up like a
girl; how come you to think you should get any business knowledge out
of he? those abrupt question sound rather oddly. Philip think
they queer."
"nonsense, child!" say Mr. Deane, willing to justify his social
demeanor, with which he have take some pain in his upward progress.
"therebe a report that Wakem's mill and farm on the other side of the
river--Dorlcote Mill, your uncle Tulliver's, you know--isn't answer
so well as it do. I want to see if your friend Philip would let
anything out about his father's be tired of farming."
"why? would you buy the mill, papa, if he would part with it?" say
Lucy, eagerly. "oh, tell I everything; here, you shall have your
snuff-box if youwill tell I. because Maggie say all their heart be
set on Tom's get back the mill some time. it be one of the last
thing her father say to Tom, that he must get back the mill."
"hush, you little puss," say Mr. Deane, avail himself of the
restore snuff-box. "you must not say a word about this thing; do you
hear? therebe very little chance of their get the mill or of
anybodybe get it out of Wakem's hand. and if he know that we
want it with a view to the Tulliver's get it again, hewould be the
less likely to part with it. itbe natural, after what happen. he
behave well enough to Tulliver before; but a horsewhipping be not
likely to be pay for with sugar-plum."
"now, papa," say Lucy, with a little air of solemnity, "will you
trust I? you must not ask I all my reason for what Ibe go to
say, but I have very strong reason. and Ibe very cautious; I be,
indeed."
"well, let we hear."
"why, I believe, if you will let I take Philip Wakem into our
confidence,--let I tell he all about your wish to buy, and what itbe
for; that my cousin wish to have it, and why they wish to have it,--I
believe Philip would help to bring it about. I know he would desire to
do it."
"I donot see how that can be, child," say Mr. Deane, look puzzle.
"why should _he_ care?"--then, with a sudden penetrate look at his
daughter, "you donot think the poor lad's fond of you, and so you can
make he do what you like?" (Mr. Deane feel quite safe about his
daughter's affection.)
"no, papa; he care very little about me,--not so much as I care about
he. but I have a reason for be quite sure of what I say. donot you
ask I. and if you ever guess, donot tell I. only give I leave to do
as I think fit about it."
Lucy rise from her stool to seat herself on her father's knee, and
kiss he with that last request.
"be you sure you willnot do mischief, now?" he say, look at she
with delight.
"yes, papa, quite sure. Ibe very wise; Ihave get all your business
talent. donot you admire my accompt-book, now, when I show it
you?"
"well, well, if this youngster will keep his counsel, there willnot be
much harm do. and to tell the truth, I think therebe not much chance
for we any other way. now, let I go off to sleep."
Chapter VIII
Wakem in a New Light
before three day have pass after the conversation you have just
overhear between Lucy and her father she have contrive to have a
private interview with Philip during a visit of Maggie's to her aunt
Glegg. for a day and a night Philip turn over in his mind with
restless agitation all that Lucy have tell he in that interview, till
he have thoroughly resolve on a course of action. he think he see
before he now a possibility of alter his position with respect to
Maggie, and remove at least one obstacle between they. he lay his
plan and calculate all his move with the fervid deliberation of a
chess-player in the day of his first ardor, and be amazed himself at
his sudden genius as a tactician. his plan be as bold as it be
thoroughly calculate. have watch for a moment when his father have
nothing more urgent on his hand than the newspaper, he go behind
he, lay a hand on his shoulder, and said,--
"Father, will you come up into my sanctum, and look at my new
sketch? Ihave arrange they now."
"Ibe get terrible stiff in the joint, Phil, for climb those
stair of your," say Wakem, look kindly at his son as he lay
down his paper. "but come along, then."
"this be a nice place for you, benot it, phil?--a capital light that
from the roof, eh?" be, as usual, the first thing he say on enter
the painting-room. he like to remind himself and his son too that his
fatherly indulgence have provide the accommodation. he have be a good
father. Emily would have nothing to reproach he with there, if she
come back again from her grave.
"come, come," he say, put his double eye-glass over his nose, and
seat himself to take a general view while he rest, "youhave get a
famous show here. upon my word, I donot see that your thing benot as
good as that London artist's--whatbe his name--that Leyburn give so
much money for."
Philip shake his head and smile. he have seat himself on his
painting-stool, and have take a lead pencil in his hand, with which he
be make strong mark to counteract the sense of tremulousness. he
watch his father get up, and walk slowly round, good-naturedly
dwelling on the picture much long than his amount of genuine taste
for landscape would have prompt, till he stop before a stand on
which two picture be placed,--one much large than the other, the
small one in a leather case.
"bless I! what have you here?" say Wakem, startle by a sudden
transition from landscape to portrait. "I think youwould leave off
figure. who be these?"
"they be the same person," say Philip, with calm promptness, "at
different age."
"and what person?" say Wakem, sharply fix his eye with a grow
look of suspicion on the large picture.
"Miss Tulliver. the small one be something like what she be when I
be at school with her brother at King's Lorton; the large one be not
quite so good a likeness of what she be when I come from abroad."
Wakem turn round fiercely, with a flushed face, let his
eye-glass fall, and look at his son with a savage expression for a
moment, as if he be ready to strike that dare feebleness from the
stool. but he throw himself into the armchair again, and thrust his
hand into his trouser-pocket, still look angrily at his son,
however. Philip do not return the look, but sit quietly watch the
point of his pencil.
"and do you mean to say, then, that you have have any acquaintance with
she since you come from abroad?" say Wakem, at last, with that vain
effort which rage always make to throw as much punishment as it
desire to inflict into word and tone, since blow be forbid.
"yes; I see a great deal of she for a whole year before her father's
death. we meet often in that thicket--the Red Deeps--near Dorlcote
Mill. I love she dearly; I shall never love any other woman. I have
thought of she ever since she be a little girl."
"go on, sir! and you have correspond with she all this while?"
"no. I never tell she I love she till just before we part, and she
promise her brother not to see I again or to correspond with I. I
be not sure that she love I or would consent to marry I. but if she
would consent,--if she _do_ love I well enough,--I should marry
she."
"and this be the return you make I for all the indulgence Ihave
heap on you?" say Wakem, get white, and begin to tremble
under an enraged sense of impotence before Philip's calm defiance and
concentration of purpose.
"no, father," say Philip, look up at he for the first time; "I
donot regard it as a return. you have be an indulgent father to I;
but I have always feel that it be because you have an affectionate
wish to give I as much happiness as my unfortunate lot would admit,
not that it be a debt you expect I to pay by sacrifice all my
chance of happiness to satisfy feeling of yours which I can never
share."
"I think most son would share their father's feeling in this case,"
say Wakem, bitterly. "the girl's father be an ignorant mad brute,
who be within an inch of murder I. the whole town know it. and
the brother be just as insolent, only in a cool way. he forbid she
see you, you say; hewill break every bone in your body, for your
great happiness, if you donot take care. but you seem to have make
up your mind; you have count the consequence, I suppose. of course
you be independent of I; you can marry this girl to-morrow, if you
like; you be a man of five-and-twenty,--you can go your way, and I
can go mine. we need have no more to do with each other."
Wakem rise and walk toward the door, but something hold he back,
and instead of leave the room, he walk up and down it. Philip be
slow to reply, and when he speak, his tone have a more incisive
quietness and clearness than ever.
"no; I cannot marry Miss Tulliver, even if she would have I, if I have
only my own resource to maintain she with. I have be bring up to
no profession. I cannot offer her poverty as well as deformity."
"ah, _there_ be a reason for your clinging to I, doubtless," say
Wakem, still bitterly, though Philip's last word have give he a
pang; they have stir a feeling which have be a habit for a quarter
of a century. he throw himself into the chair again.
"I expect all this," say Philip. "I know these scene be often
happen between father and son. if I be like other man of my age,
I might answer your angry word by still angrier; we might part; I
should marry the woman I love, and have a chance of be as happy as
the rest. but if it will be a satisfaction to you to annihilate the
very object of everything youhave do for I, you have an advantage
over most father; you can completely deprive I of the only thing
that would make my life worth have."
Philip pause, but his father be silent.
"you know well what satisfaction you would have, beyond that of
gratify a ridiculous rancor worthy only of wandering savage."
"ridiculous rancor!" Wakem burst out. "what do you mean? damn it! be a
man to be horsewhip by a boor and love he for it? besides, therebe
that cold, proud devil of a son, who say a word to I I shall not
forget when we have the settling. he would be as pleasant a mark for a
bullet as I know, if he be worth the expense."
"I donot mean your resentment toward they," say Philip, who have his
reason for some sympathy with this view of Tom, "though a feeling of
revenge be not worth much, that you should care to keep it. I mean
your extend the enmity to a helpless girl, who have too much sense
and goodness to share their narrow prejudice. _she_ have never enter
into the family quarrel."
"what do that signify? we donot ask what a woman do; we ask whom
she belong to. itbe altogether a degrading thing to you, to think of
marry old Tulliver's daughter."
for the first time in the dialogue, Philip lose some of his
self-control, and color with anger.
"Miss Tulliver," he say, with bitter incisiveness, "have the only
ground of rank that anything but vulgar folly can suppose to belong
to the middle class; she be thoroughly refine, and her friend,
whatever else they may be, be respect for irreproachable honor and
integrity. all St. Ogg's, I fancy, would pronounce she to be more than
my equal."
Wakem dart a glance of fierce question at his son; but Philip be
not look at he, and with a certain penitent consciousness go on,
in a few moment, as if in amplification of his last words,--
"find a single person in St. Ogg's who will not tell you that a
beautiful creature like she would be throw herself away on a
pitiable object like I."
"not she!" say Wakem, rise again, and forget everything else in
a burst of resentful pride, half fatherly, half personal. "it would be
a deuced fine match for she. itbe all stuff about an accidental
deformity, when a girl's really attach to a man."
"but girl be not apt to get attach under those circumstance,"
say Philip.
"well, then," say Wakem, rather brutally, try to recover his
previous position, "if she donot care for you, you might have spar
yourself the trouble of talk to I about she, and you might have
spar I the trouble of refuse my consent to what be never likely
to happen."
Wakem stride to the door, and without look round again, bang it
after he.
Philip be not without confidence that his father would be ultimately
work upon as he have expect, by what have pass; but the scene have
jar upon his nerve, which be as sensitive as a woman's. he
determine not to go down to dinner; he couldnot meet his father again
that day. it be Wakem's habit, when he have no company at home, to go
out in the evening, often as early as half-past seven; and as it be
far on in the afternoon now, Philip lock up his room and go out
for a long ramble, think he would not return until his father be
out of the house again. he get into a boat, and go down the river to
a favorite village, where he din, and linger till it be late
enough for he to return. he have never have any sort of quarrel with
his father before, and have a sickening fear that this contest, just
begin, might go on for week; and what might not happen in that time?
he would not allow himself to define what that involuntary question
mean. but if he could once be in the position of Maggie's accept,
acknowledge lover, there would be less room for vague dread. he go
up to his painting-room again, and throw himself with a sense of
fatigue into the armchair, look round absently at the view of
water and rock that be range around, till he fall into a doze, in
which he fancy Maggie be slip down a glistening, green, slimy
channel of a waterfall, and he be look on helpless, till he be
awaken by what seem a sudden, awful crash.
it be the opening of the door, and he could hardly have dozen more
than a few moment, for there be no perceptible change in the evening
light. it be his father who enter; and when Philip move to vacate
the chair for he, he said,--
"sit still. Iwould rather walk about."
he stalk up and down the room once or twice, and then, stand
opposite Philip with his hand thrust in his side pocket, he say, as
if continue a conversation that have not be break off,--
"but this girl seem to have be fond of you, Phil, else she wouldnot
have meet you in that way."
Philip's heart be beat rapidly, and a transient flush pass over
his face like a gleam. it be not quite easy to speak at once.
"she like I at King's Lorton, when she be a little girl, because I
use to sit with her brother a great deal when he have hurt his foot.
she have keep that in her memory, and think of I as a friend of a
long while ago. she donot think of I as a lover when she meet I."
"well, but you make love to she at last. what do she say then?" say
Wakem, walk about again.
"she say she _do_ love I then."
"confound it, then; what else do you want? be she a jilt?"
"she be very young then," say Philip, hesitatingly. "Ibe afraid she
hardly know what she feel. Ibe afraid our long separation, and the
idea that event must always divide we, may have make a difference."
"but shebe in the town. Ihave see she at church. havenot you speak to
she since you come back?"
"yes, at Mr. Deane's. but I couldnot renew my proposal to she on
several ground. one obstacle would be remove if you would give your
consent,--if you would be willing to think of she as a daughter-in-law."
Wakem be silent a little while, pause before Maggie's picture.
"shebe not the sort of woman your mother be, though, Phil," he say,
at last. "I see she at church,--she's handsomer than this,--deuce
fine eye and fine figure, I see; but rather dangerous and
unmanageable, eh?"
"shebe very tender and affectionate, and so simple,--without the air
and petty contrivance other woman have."
"ah?" say Wakem. then look round at his son, "but your mother
look gentler; she have that brown wavy hair and gray eye, like
your. you cannot remember she very well. it be a thousand pity Iwould
no likeness of she."
"then, shouldnot you be glad for I to have the same sort of
happiness, father, to sweeten my life for I? there can never be
another tie so strong to you as that which begin eight-and-twenty
year ago, when you marry my mother, and you have be tighten it
ever since."
"ah, Phil, yoube the only fellow that know the good of I," say
Wakem, give his hand to his son. "we must keep together if we can.
and now, what be I to do? you must come downstairs and tell I. be I
to go and call on this dark-eyed damsel?"
the barrier once throw down in this way, Philip could talk freely to
his father of their entire relation with the Tullivers,--of the desire
to get the mill and land back into the family, and of its transfer to
Guest & Co. as an intermediate step. he could venture now to be
persuasive and urgent, and his father yield with more readiness than
he have calculate on.
"_i_ donot care about the mill," he say at last, with a sort of angry
compliance. "Ihave have an infernal deal of bother lately about the
mill. let they pay I for my improvement, thatbe all. but therebe one
thing you neednot ask I. I shall have no direct transaction with
young Tulliver. if you like to swallow he for his sister's sake, you
may; but Ihave no sauce that will make he go down."
I leave you to imagine the agreeable feeling with which Philip go
to Mr. Deane the next day, to say that Mr. Wakem be ready to open the
negotiation, and Lucy's pretty triumph as she appeal to her father
whether she have not prove her great business ability. Mr. Deane be
rather puzzle, and suspect that there have be something "go on"
among the young people to which he want a clew. but to man of Mr.
Deane's stamp, what go on among the young people be as extraneous to
the real business of life as what go on among the bird and
butterfly, until it can be show to have a malign bearing on
monetary affair. and in this case the bearing appear to be entirely
propitious.
chapter IX
Charity in full-Dress
the culmination of Maggie's career as an admired member of society in
St. Ogg's be certainly the day of the bazaar, when her simple noble
beauty, clothe in a white muslin of some soft-float kind, which I
suspect must have come from the store of aunt Pullet's wardrobe,
appear with mark distinction among the more adorned and
conventional woman around she. we perhaps never detect how much of our
social demeanor be make up of artificial air until we see a person
who be at once beautiful and simple; without the beauty, we be apt to
call simplicity awkwardness. the Miss Guests be much too well-breed
to have any of the grimace and affect tone that belong to
pretentious vulgarity; but their stall be next to the one where
Maggie sit, it seem newly obvious to-day that Miss Guest hold she
chin too high, and that Miss Laura speak and move continually with a
view to effect.
all well-dress St. Ogg's and its neighborhood be there; and it
would have be worth while to come even from a distance, to see the
fine old hall, with its open roof and carve oaken rafter, and great
oaken folding-door, and light shed down from a height on the
many-color show beneath; a very quaint place, with broad fade
stripe paint on the wall, and here and there a show of heraldic
animal of a bristly, long-snoute character, the cherished emblem of
a noble family once the seignior of this now civic hall. a grand
arch, cut in the upper wall at one end, surmount an oaken orchestra,
with an open room behind it, where hothouse plant and stall for
refreshment be dispose; an agreeable resort for gentleman dispose
to loiter, and yet to exchange the occasional crush down below for a
more commodious point of view. in fact, the perfect fitness of this
ancient building for an admirable modern purpose, that make charity
truly elegant, and lead through vanity up to the supply of a deficit,
be so strike that hardly a person enter the room without
exchange the remark more than once. near the great arch over the
orchestra be the stone oriel with paint glass, which be one of the
venerable inconsistency of the old hall; and it be close by this
that Lucy have her stall, for the convenience of certain large plain
article which she have take charge of for Mrs. Kenn. Maggie have
beg to sit at the open end of the stall, and to have the sale of
these article rather than of bead-mat and other elaborate product
of which she have but a dim understanding. but it soon appear that
the gentleman's dressing-gown, which be among her commodity, be
object of such general attention and inquiry, and excite so
troublesome a curiosity as to their lining and comparative merit,
together with a determination to test they by try on, as to make
her post a very conspicuous one. the lady who have commodity of
their own to sell, and do not want dressing-gown, see at once the
frivolity and bad taste of this masculine preference for good which
any tailor could furnish; and it be possible that the emphatic notice
of various kind which be draw toward Miss Tulliver on this public
occasion, throw a very strong and unmistakable light on her subsequent
conduct in many mind then present. not that anger, on account of
spurn beauty can dwell in the celestial breast of charitable
lady, but rather that the error of person who have once be much
admire necessarily take a deep tinge from the mere force of
contrast; and also, that to-day Maggie's conspicuous position, for the
first time, make evident certain characteristic which be
subsequently feel to have an explanatory bearing. there be something
rather bold in Miss Tulliver's direct gaze, and something undefinably
coarse in the style of her beauty, which place she, in the opinion of
all feminine judge, far below her cousin Miss Deane; for the lady
of St. Ogg's have now completely cede to Lucy their hypothetic claim
on the admiration of Mr. Stephen Guest.
as for dear little Lucy herself, her late benevolent triumph about the
Mill, and all the affectionate project she be cherish for Maggie
and Philip, help to give she the high spirit to-day, and she
feel nothing but pleasure in the evidence of Maggie's attractiveness.
it be true, she be look very charming herself, and Stephen be
pay she the utmost attention on this public occasion; jealously
buy up the article he have see under her finger in the process of
making, and gayly help she to cajole the male customer into the
purchase of the most effeminate futility. he choose to lay aside his
hat and wear a scarlet fez of she embroidering; but by superficial
observer this be necessarily liable to be interpret less as a
compliment to Lucy than as a mark of coxcombry. "guest be a great
coxcomb," young Torry observe; "but then he be a privileged person in
St. Ogg's--he carry all before he; if another fellow do such
thing, everybody would say he make a fool of himself."
and Stephen purchase absolutely nothing from Maggie, until Lucy say,
in rather a vexed undertone,--
"see, now; all the thing of Maggie's knitting will be go, and you
will not have buy one. there be those deliciously soft warm thing
for the wrists,--do buy they."
"oh no," say Stephen, "they must be intend for imaginative person,
who can chill themselves on this warm day by think of the frosty
Caucasus. stern reason be my forte, you know. you must get Philip to
buy those. by the way, why donot he come?"
"he never like go where there be many people, though I enjoin
he to come. he say he would buy up any of my good that the rest of
the world reject. but now, do go and buy something of Maggie."
"no, no; see, she have get a customer; there be old Wakem himself just
come up."
Lucy's eye turn with anxious interest toward Maggie to see how she
go through this first interview, since a sadly memorable time, with
a man toward whom she must have so strange a mixture of feeling; but
she be pleased to notice that Wakem have tact enough to enter at once
into talk about the bazaar ware, and appear interested in purchasing,
smile now and then kindly at Maggie, and not call on she to speak
much, as if he observe that she be rather pale and tremulous.
"why, Wakem be make himself particularly amiable to your cousin,"
say Stephen, in an undertone to Lucy; "be it pure magnanimity? you
talk of a family quarrel."
"oh, that will soon be quite heal, I hope," say Lucy, become a
little indiscreet in her satisfaction, and speak with an air of
significance. but Stephen do not appear to notice this, and as some
lady-purchaser come up, he lounge on toward Maggie's end, handle
trifle and standing aloof until Wakem, who have take out his purse,
have finish his t transaction.
"my son come with I," he overhear Wakem say, "but he have vanish
into some other part of the building, and have leave all these
charitable gallantry to I. I hope youwill reproach he for his
shabby conduct."
she return his smile and bow without speak, and he turn away,
only then observe Stephen and nod to he. Maggie, conscious that
Stephen be still there, busy herself with count money, and
avoid look up. she have be well pleased that he have devote
himself to Lucy to-day, and have not come near she. they have begin the
morning with an indifferent salutation, and both have rejoice in be
aloof from each other, like a patient who have actually do without
his opium, in spite of former failure in resolution. and during the
last few day they have even be make up their mind to failure,
look to the outward event that must soon come to separate they, as
a reason for dispense with self-conquest in detail.
Stephen move step by step as if he be be unwillingly drag,
until he have get round the open end of the stall, and be half hide
by a screen of drapery. Maggie go on count her money till she
suddenly hear a deep gentle voice say, "benot you very try? do
let I bring you something,--some fruit or jelly, maynot I?"
the unexpected tone shake she like a sudden accidental vibration of a
harp close by she.
"oh no, thank you," she say faintly, and only half look up for an
instant.
"you look so pale," Stephen insist, in a more entreating tone. "Ibe
sure yoube exhaust. I must disobey you, and bring something."
"no, indeed, I couldnot take it."
"be you angry with I? what have I do? _do_ look at I."
"pray, go away," say Maggie, look at he helplessly, her eye
glance immediately from he to the opposite corner of the orchestra,
which be half hide by the fold of the old fade green curtain.
Maggie have no soon utter this entreaty than she be wretched at
the admission it imply; but Stephen turn away at once, and
follow her upward glance, he see Philip Wakem seal in the
half-hide corner, so that he could command little more than that
angle of the hall in which Maggie sit. an entirely new though occur
to Stephen, and link itself with what he have observe of Wakem's
manner, and with Lucy's reply to his observation, it convince he
that there have be some former relation between Philip and Maggie
beyond that childish one of which he have hear. More than one impulse
make he immediately leave the hall and go upstairs to the
refreshment-room, where, walk up to Philip, he sit down behind he,
and put his hand on his shoulder.
"be you study for a portrait, Phil," he say, "or for a sketch of
that oriel window? by George, it make a capital bit from this dark
corner, with the curtain just mark it off."
"I have be study expression," say Philip, curtly.
"what! Miss Tulliver's? itbe rather of the savage-moody order to-day,
I think,--somethe of the fall princess serve behind a counter.
her cousin send I to she with a civil offer to get she some
refreshment, but I have be snub, as usual. therebe natural
antipathy between we, I suppose; I have seldom the honor to please
she."
"what a hypocrite you be!" say Philip, flush angrily.
"what! because experience must have tell I that Ibe universally
pleasing? I admit the law, but therebe some disturbing force here."
"I be go," say Philip, rise abruptly.
"so be I--to get a breath of fresh air; this place get oppressive. I
think I have do suit and service long enough."
the two friend walk downstairs together without speak. Philip
turn through the outer door into the court-yard; but Stephen,
say, "oh, by the by, I must call in here," go on along the
passage to one of the room at the other end of the building, which
be appropriate to the town library. he have the room all to himself,
and a man require nothing less than this when he want to dash his
cap on the table, throw himself astride a chair, and stare at a high
brick wall with a frown which would not have be beneath the occasion
if he have be slay "the giant Python." the conduct that issue
from a moral conflict have often so close a resemblance to vice that
the distinction escape all outward judgment found on a mere
comparison of action. it be clear to you, I hope, that Stephen be
not a hypocrite,--capable of deliberate doubleness for a selfish end;
and yet his fluctuation between the indulgence of a feeling and the
systematic concealment of it might have make a good case in support of
Philip's accusation.
meanwhile, Maggie sit at her stall cold and tremble, with that
painful sensation in the eye which come from resolutely repressed
tear. be her life to be always like this,--alway bring some new
source of inward strife? she hear confusedly the busy, indifferent
voice around she, and wish her mind could flow into that easy
babbling current. it be at this moment that Dr. Kenn, who have quite
lately come into the hall, and be now walk down the middle with
his hand behind he, take a general view, fix his eye on Maggie
for the first time, and be strike with the expression of pain on her
beautiful face. she be sit quite still, for the stream of
customer have lessen at this late hour in the afternoon; the
gentleman have chiefly choose the middle of the day, and Maggie's stall
be look rather bare. this, with her absent, pained expression,
finish the contrast between she and her companion, who be all
bright, eager, and busy. he be strongly arrest. her face have
naturally draw his attention as a new and strike one at church, and
he have be introduce to she during a short call on business at Mr.
Deane's, but he have never speak more than three word to she. he
walk toward she now, and Maggie, perceive some one approach,
rouse herself to look up and be prepared to speak. she feel a
childlike, instinctive relief from the sense of uneasiness in this
exertion, when she see it be Dr. Kenn's face that be look at she;
that plain, middle-aged face, with a grave, penetrate kindness in
it, seem to tell of a human being who have reach a firm, safe
strand, but be look with helpful pity toward the struggler still
toss by the wave, have an effect on Maggie at this moment which be
afterward remember by she as if it have be a promise. the
middle-aged, who have live through their strong emotion, but be
yet in the time when memory be still half passionate and not merely
contemplative, should surely be a sort of natural priesthood, whom
life have discipline and consecrate to be the refuge and rescue of
early stumbler and victim of self-despair. Most of we, at some
moment in our young life, would have welcome a priest of that
natural order in any sort of canonical or uncanonical, but have to
scramble upward into all the difficulty of nineteen entirely without
such aid, as Maggie do.
"you find your office rather a fatigue one, I fear, Miss Tulliver,"
say Dr. Kenn.
"it be, rather," say Maggie, simply, not be accustom to simple
amiable denial of obvious fact.
"but I can tell Mrs. Kenn that you have dispose of her good very
quickly," he add; "she will be very much oblige to you."
"oh, I have do nothing; the gentleman come very fast to buy the
dressing-gown and embroidered waistcoat, but I think any of the
other lady would have sell more; I donot know what to say about
they."
Dr. Kenn smile. "I hope Ibe go to have you as a permanent
parishioner now, Miss Tulliver; be I? you have be at a distance from
us hitherto."
"I have be a teacher in a school, and Ibe go into another
situation of the same kind very soon."
"ah? I be hop you would remain among your friend, who be all in
this neighborhood, I believe."
"oh, _I must go_," say Maggie, earnestly, look at Dr. Kenn with an
expression of reliance, as if she have tell he her history in those
three word. it be one of those moment of implicit revelation which
will sometimes happen even between people who meet quite
transiently,--on a mile's journey, perhaps, or when rest by the
wayside. there be always this possibility of a word or look from a
stranger to keep alive the sense of human brotherhood.
Dr. Kenn's ear and eye take in all the sign that this brief
confidence of Maggie's be charge with meaning.
"I understand," he say; "you feel it right to go. but that will not
prevent our meeting again, I hope; it will not prevent my know you
well, if I can be of any service to you."
he put out his hand and press hers kindly before he turn away.
"she have some trouble or other at heart," he think. "poor child! she
look as if she might turn out to be one of
'the soul by nature pitch too high,
by suffer plunge too low.'
"therebe something wonderfully honest in those beautiful eye."
it may be surprising that Maggie, among whose many imperfection an
excessive delight in admiration and acknowledge supremacy be not
absent now, any more than when she be instruct the gypsy with a
view toward achieve a royal position among they, be not more elated
on a day when she have have the tribute of so many look and smile,
together with that satisfactory consciousness which have necessarily
come from be take before Lucy's chevalglass, and make to look at
the full length of her tall beauty, crown by the night of her massy
hair. Maggie have smile at herself then, and for the moment have
forget everything in the sense of her own beauty. if that state of
mind could have last, her choice would have be to have Stephen
Guest at her foot, offer she a life fill with all luxury, with
daily incense of adoration near and distant, and with all
possibility of culture at her command. but there be thing in her
strong than vanity,--passion and affection, and long, deep memory
of early discipline and effort, of early claim on her love and pity;
and the stream of vanity be soon sweep along and mingle
imperceptibly with that wide current which be at its high force
today, under the double urgency of the event and inward impulse
bring by the last week.
Philip have not speak to her himself about the removal of obstacle
between they on his father's side,--he shrink from that; but he have
tell everything to Lucy, with the hope that Maggie, be inform
through she, might give he some encouraging sign that their being
bring thus much near to each other be a happiness to she. the
rush of conflict feeling be too great for Maggie to say much when
Lucy, with a face breathe playful joy, like one of Correggio's
cherub, pour forth her triumphant revelation; and Lucy could hardly
be surprised that she could do little more than cry with gladness at
the thought of her father's wish be fulfil, and of Tom's get
the Mill again in reward for all his hard striving. the detail of
preparation for the bazaar have then come to usurp Lucy's attention for
the next few day, and nothing have be say by the cousin on
subject that be likely to rouse deep feeling. Philip have be to
the house more than once, but Maggie have have no private conversation
with he, and thus she have be leave to fight her inward battle
without interference.
but when the bazaar be fairly end, and the cousin be alone
again, rest together at home, Lucy said,--
"you must give up go to stay with your aunt Moss the day after
to-morrow, Maggie; write a note to she, and tell she you have put it
off at my request, and Iwill send the man with it. she willnot be
displeased; youwill have plenty of time to go by-and-by; and I donot
want you to go out of the way just now."
"yes, indeed I must go, dear; I cannot put it off. I wouldnot leave
aunt Gritty out for the world. and I shall have very little time, for
Ibe go away to a new situation on the 25th of June."
"Maggie!" say Lucy, almost white with astonishment.
"I donot tell you, dear," say Maggie, make a great effort to
command herself, "because youhave be so busy. but some time ago I
write to our old governess, Miss Firniss, to ask she to let I know if
she meet with any situation that I could fill, and the other day I have
a letter from she tell I that I could take three orphan pupil of
her to the coast during the holiday, and then make trial of a
situation with she as teacher. I write yesterday to accept the offer."
Lucy feel so hurt that for some moment she be unable to speak.
"Maggie," she say at last, "how could you be so unkind to I--not to
tell I--to take _such_ a step--and now!" she hesitate a little, and
then add, "and Philip? I think everything be go to be so
happy. oh, Maggie, what be the reason? give it up; let I write. there
be nothing now to keep you and Philip apart."
"yes," say Maggie, faintly. "there be Tom's feeling. he say I must
give he up if I marry Philip. and I know he will not change--at
least not for a long while--unless something happen to soften he."
"but I will talk to he; hebe come back this week. and this good
news about the Mill will soften he. and Iwill talk to he about
Philip. Tom's always very compliant to I; I donot think hebe so
obstinate."
"but I must go," say Maggie, in a distressed voice. "I must leave
some time to pack. donot press I to stay, dear Lucy."
Lucy be silent for two or three minute, look away and ruminate.
at length she kneel down by her cousin, and look up in her face
with anxious seriousness, said,--
"Maggie, be it that you donot love Philip well enough to marry he?
tell I--trust I."
Maggie hold Lucy's hand tightly in silence a little while. her own
hand be quite cold. but when she speak, her voice be quite clear
and distinct.
"yes, Lucy, I would choose to marry he. I think it would be the good
and high lot for me,--to make his life happy. he love I first. no
one else could be quite what he be to I. but I cannot divide myself
from my brother for life. I must go away, and wait. pray donot speak
to I again about it."
Lucy obey in pain and wonder. the next word she say was,--
"well, dear Maggie, at least you will go to the dance at Park House
to-morrow, and have some music and brightness, before you go to pay
these dull dutiful visit. ah! here come aunty and the tea."
Chapter X
the Spell seem Broken
the suite of room open into each other at Park House look duly
brilliant with light and flower and the personal splendor of
sixteen couple, with attendant parent and guardian. the focus of
brilliancy be the long drawing-room, where the dancing go forward,
under the inspiration of the grand piano; the library, into which it
open at one end, have the more sober illumination of maturity, with
cap and card; and at the other end the pretty sit-room, with a
conservatory attach, be leave as an occasional cool retreat. Lucy,
who have lay aside her black for the first time, and have her pretty
slimness set off by an abundant dress of white crape, be the
acknowledge queen of the occasion; for this be one of the Miss
Guests' thoroughly condescend party, include no member of any
aristocracy high than that of St. Ogg's, and stretch to the
extreme limit of commercial and professional gentility.
Maggie at first refuse to dance, say that she have forget all
the figure--it be so many year since she have dance at school; and
she be glad to have that excuse, for it be ill dancing with a heavy
heart. but at length the music work in her young limb, and the
longing come; even though it be the horrible young Torry, who walk
up a second time to try and persuade she. she warn he that she
could not dance anything but a country-dance; but he, of course, be
willing to wait for that high felicity, mean only to be
complimentary when he assure she at several interval that it be a
"great bore" that she couldnot waltz, he would have like so much to
waltz with she. but at last it be the turn of the good old-fashioned
dance which have the least of vanity and the most of merriment in it,
and Maggie quite forget her troublous life in a childlike enjoyment of
that half-rustic rhythm which seem to banish pretentious etiquette.
she feel quite charitably toward young Torry, as his hand bear she
along and hold she up in the dance; her eye and cheek have that fire
of young joy in they which will flame out if it can find the least
breath to fan it; and her simple black dress, with its bit of black
lace, seem like the dim setting of a jewel.
Stephen have not yet ask she to dance; have not yet pay she more than
a pass civility. since yesterday, that inward vision of she which
perpetually make part of his consciousness, have be half screen by
the image of Philip Wakem, which come across it like a blot; there be
some attachment between she and Philip; at least there be an
attachment on his side, which make she feel in some bondage. here,
then, Stephen tell himself, be another claim of honor which call on
he to resist the attraction that be continually threaten to
overpower he. he tell himself so; and yet he have once or twice feel a
certain savage resistance, and at another moment a shudder
repugnance, to this intrusion of Philip's image, which almost make it
a new incitement to rush toward Maggie and claim she for himself.
nevertheless, he have do what he mean to do this evening,--he have
keep aloof from she; he have hardly look at she; and he have be
gayly assiduous to Lucy. but now his eye be devouring Maggie; he
feel inclined to kick young Torry out of the dance, and take his
place. then he want the dance to end that he might get rid of his
partner. the possibility that he too should dance with Maggie, and
have her hand in his so long, be begin to possess he like a
thirst. but even now their hand be meet in the dance,--were
meeting still to the very end of it, though they be far off each
other.
Stephen hardly know what happen, or in what automatic way he get
through the duty of politeness in the interval, until he be free
and see Maggie seat alone again, at the farth end of the room. he
make his way toward her round the couple that be form for the
waltz; and when Maggie become conscious that she be the person he
seek, she feel, in spite of all the thought that have go before, a
glowing gladness at heart. her eye and cheek be still brighten
with her childlike enthusiasm in the dance; her whole frame be set to
joy and tenderness; even the come pain could not seem bitter,--she
be ready to welcome it as a part of life, for life at this moment
seem a keen, vibrate consciousness poise above pleasure or pain.
this one, this last night, she might expand unrestrainedly in the
warmth of the present, without those chill, eat thought of the
past and the future.
"theybe go to waltz again," say Stephen, bend to speak to she,
with that glance and tone of subdue tenderness which young dream
create to themselves in the summer wood when low, coo voice fill
the air. such glance and tone bring the breath of poetry with they
into a room that be half stifle with glare gas and hard
flirtation.
"they be go to waltz again. it be rather dizzy work to look on,
and the room be very warm; shall we walk about a little?"
he take her hand and place it within his arm, and they walk on into
the sit-room, where the table be strew with engraving for the
accommodation of visitor who would not want to look at they. but no
visitor be here at this moment. they pass on into the
conservatory.
"how strange and unreal the tree and flower look with the light
among they!" say Maggie, in a low voice. "they look as if they
belong to an enchanted land, and would never fade away; I could
fancy they be all make of jewel."
she be look at the tier of geranium as she speak, and Stephen
make no answer; but he be look at she; and do not a supreme poet
blend light and sound into one, call darkness mute, and light
eloquent? something strangely powerful there be in the light of
Stephen's long gaze, for it make Maggie's face turn toward it and look
upward at it, slowly, like a flower at the ascending brightness. and
they walk unsteadily on, without feel that they be walk;
without feel anything but that long, grave, mutual gaze which have
the solemnity belong to all deep human passion. the hovering
think that they must and would renounce each other make this moment
of mute confession more intense in its rapture.
but they have reach the end of the conservatory, and be oblige to
pause and turn. the change of movement bring a new consciousness to
Maggie; she blush deeply, turn away her head, and draw her arm
from Stephen's, go up to some flower to smell they. Stephen stand
motionless, and still pale.
"oh, may I get this rose?" say Maggie, make a great effort to say
something, and dissipate the burn sense of irretrievable
confession. "I think I be quite wicked with rose; I like to gather
they and smell they till they have no scent leave."
Stephen be mute; he be incapable of put a sentence together, and
Maggie bend her arm a little upward toward the large half-open rise
that have attract she. who have not feel the beauty of a woman's arm?
the unspeakable suggestion of tenderness that lie in the dimpled
elbow, and all the varied gently lessen curve, down to the
delicate wrist, with its tiny, almost imperceptible nick in the
firm softness. a woman's arm touch the soul of a great sculptor two
thousand year ago, so that he work an image of it for the
Parthenon which move we still as it clasp lovingly the timeworn
marble of a headless trunk. Maggie's be such an arm as that, and it
have the warm tint of life.
a mad impulse seize on Stephen; he dart toward the arm, and
shower kiss on it, clasp the wrist.
but the next moment Maggie snatch it from he, and glare at he
like a wound war-goddess, quiver with rage and humiliation.
"how dare you?" she speak in a deeply shaken, half-smother voice.
"what right have I give you to insult I?"
she dart from he into the adjoining room, and throw herself on the
sofa, pant and trembling.
a horrible punishment be come upon she for the sin of allow a
moment's happiness that be treachery to Lucy, to Philip, to her own
well soul. that momentary happiness have be smite with a blight,
a leprosy; Stephen think more lightly of _her_ than he do of Lucy.
as for Stephen, he lean back against the framework of the
conservatory, dizzy with the conflict of passions,--love, rage, and
confused despair; despair at his want of self-mastery, and despair
that he have offend Maggie.
the last feeling surmount every other; to be by her side again and
entreat forgiveness be the only thing that have the force of a motive
for he, and she have not be seat more than a few minute when he
come and stand humbly before she. but Maggie's bitter rage be
unspent.
"leave I to myself, if you please," she say, with impetuous
haughtiness, "and for the future avoid I."
Stephen turn away, and walk backward and forward at the other end
of the room. there be the dire necessity of go back into the
dancing-room again, and he be begin to be conscious of that. they
have be absent so short a time, that when he go in again the waltz
be not end.
Maggie, too, be not long before she re-enter. all the pride of her
nature be sting into activity; the hateful weakness which have drag
she within reach of this wound to her self-respect have at least
work its own cure. the thought and temptation of the last month
should all be fling away into an unvisited chamber of memory. there
be nothing to allure she now; duty would be easy, and all the old
calm purpose would reign peacefully once more. she re-enter the
drawing-room still with some excited brightness in her face, but with
a sense of proud self-command that defy anything to agitate she. she
refuse to dance again, but she talk quite readily and calmly with
every one who address she. and when they get home that night, she
kiss Lucy with a free heart, almost exult in this scorching
moment, which have deliver she from the possibility of another word
or look that would have the stamp of treachery toward that gentle,
unsuspicious sister.
the next morning Maggie do not set off to basset quite so soon as she
have expect. her mother be to accompany she in the carriage, and
household business could not be dispatch hastily by Mrs. Tulliver.
so Maggie, who have be in a hurry to prepare herself, have to sit
waiting, equip for the drive, in the garden. Lucy be busy in the
house wrap up some bazaar present for the young one at Basset,
and when there be a loud ring at the door-bell, Maggie feel some
alarm lest Lucy should bring out Stephen to she; it be sure to be
Stephen.
but presently the visitor come out into the garden alone, and seat
himself by she on the garden-chair. it be not Stephen.
"we can just catch the tip of the Scotch fir, Maggie, from this
seat," say Philip.
they have take each other's hand in silence, but Maggie have look at
he with a more complete revival of the old childlike affectionate
smile than he have see before, and he feel encouraged.
"yes," she say, "I often look at they, and wish I could see the low
sunlight on the stem again. but I have never be that way but
once,--to the churchyard with my mother."
"I have be there, I go there, continually," say Philip. "I have
nothing but the past to live upon."
a keen remembrance and keen pity impel Maggie to put her hand in
Philip's. they have so often walk hand in hand!
"I remember all the spot," she said,--"just where you tell I of
particular thing, beautiful story that I have never hear of
before."
"you will go there again soon, willnot you, Maggie?" say Philip,
get timid. "the Mill will soon be your brother's home again."
"yes; but I shall not be there," say Maggie. "I shall only hear of
that happiness. I be go away again; Lucy have not tell you,
perhaps?"
"then the future will never join on to the past again, Maggie? that
book be quite closed?"
the gray eye that have so often look up at she with entreating
worship, look up at she now, with a last struggle ray of hope in
they, and Maggie meet they with her large sincere gaze.
"that book never will be close, Philip," she say, with grave
sadness; "I desire no future that will break the tie of the past. but
the tie to my brother be one of the strong. I can do nothing
willingly that will divide I always from he."
"be that the only reason that would keep we apart forever, Maggie?"
say Philip, with a desperate determination to have a definite answer.
"the only reason," say Maggie, with calm decision. and she believe
it. at that moment she feel as if the enchant cup have be dash to
the ground. the reactionary excitement that give she a proud
self-mastery have not subside, and she look at the future with a
sense of calm choice.
they sit hand in hand without look at each other or speak for a
few minute; in Maggie's mind the first scene of love and parting
be more present than the actual moment, and she be look at
Philip in the Red Deeps.
Philip feel that he ought to have be thoroughly happy in that answer
of her; she be as open and transparent as a rock-pool. why be he
not thoroughly happy? Jealousy be never satisfied with anything short
of an omniscience that would detect the subtle fold of the heart.
chapter XI
in the Lane
Maggie have be four day at her aunt Moss's give the early June
sunshine quite a new brightness in the care-dim eye of that
affectionate woman, and make an epoch for her cousin great and
small, who be learn her word and action by heart, as if she have
be a transient avatar of perfect wisdom and beauty.
she be stand on the causeway with her aunt and a group of cousin
feed the chicken, at that quiet moment in the life of the
farmyard before the afternoon milking-time. the great building round
the hollow yard be as dreary and tumbledown as ever, but over the
old garden-wall the straggling rose-bush be begin to toss
their summer weight, and the gray wood and old brick of the house, on
its high level, have a look of sleepy age in the broad afternoon
sunlight, that suit the quiescent time. Maggie, with her bonnet over
her arm, be smile down at the hatch of small fluffy chicken, when
her aunt exclaimed,--
"goodness I! who be that gentleman come in at the gate?"
it be a gentleman on a tall bay horse; and the flank and neck of the
horse be streak black with fast riding. Maggie feel a beating at
head and heart, horrible as the sudden leaping to life of a savage
enemy who have feign death.
"who be it, my dear?" say Mrs. Moss, see in Maggie's face the
evidence that she know.
"it be Mr. Stephen Guest," say Maggie, rather faintly. "my cousin
Lucy's--a gentleman who be very intimate at my cousin's."
Stephen be already close to they, have jump off his horse, and now
raise his hat as he advance.
"hold the horse, Willy," say Mrs. Moss to the twelve-year-old boy.
"no, thank you," say Stephen, pull at the horse's impatiently
toss head. "I must be go again immediately. I have a message to
deliver to you, Miss Tulliver, on private business. may I take the
liberty of ask you to walk a few yard with I?"
he have a half-jade, half-irritated look, such as a man get when he
have be dog by some care or annoyance that make his bed and his
dinner of little use to he. he speak almost abruptly, as if his
errand be too press for he to trouble himself about what would
be think by Mrs. Moss of his visit and request. Good Mrs. Moss,
rather nervous in the presence of this apparently haughty gentleman,
be inwardly wonder whether she would be do right or wrong to
invite he again to leave his horse and walk in, when Maggie, feel
all the embarrassment of the situation, and unable to say anything,
put on her bonnet, and turn to walk toward the gate.
Stephen turn too, and walk by her side, lead his horse.
not a word be speak till they be out in the lane, and have walk
four or five yard, when Maggie, who have be look straight before
she all the while, turn again to walk back, say, with haughty
resentment,--
"there be no need for I to go any far. I donot know whether you
consider it gentlemanly and delicate conduct to place I in a position
that force I to come out with you, or whether you wish to insult
I still far by thrust an interview upon I in this way."
"of course you be angry with I for come," say Stephen, bitterly.
"of course it be of no consequence what a man have to suffer; it be
only your woman's dignity that you care about."
Maggie give a slight start, such as might have come from the slight
possible electric shock.
"as if it be not enough that Ibe entangle in this way; that Ibe mad
with love for you; that I resist the strong passion a man can feel,
because I try to be true to other claim; but you must treat I as if
I be a coarse brute, who would willingly offend you. and when, if I
have my own choice, I should ask you to take my hand and my fortune and
my whole life, and do what you like with they! I know I forget
myself. I take an unwarrantable liberty. I hate myself for have do
it. but I repent immediately; Ihave be repent ever since. you
ought not to think it unpardonable; a man who love with his whole
soul, as I do you, be liable to be master by his feeling for a
moment; but you know--you must believe--that the bad pain I could
have be to have pain you; that I would give the world to recall the
error."
Maggie dare not speak, dare not turn her head. the strength that have
come from resentment be all go, and her lip be quiver
visibly. she could not trust herself to utter the full forgiveness
that rise in answer to that confession.
they be come nearly in front of the gate again, and she pause,
tremble.
"you must not say these thing; I must not hear they," she say,
look down in misery, as Stephen come in front of she, to prevent
she from go far toward the gate. "Ibe very sorry for any pain
you have to go through; but it be of no use to speak."
"yes, it _be_ of use," say Stephen, impetuously. "it would be of use
if you would treat I with some sort of pity and consideration,
instead of do I vile injustice in your mind. I could bear
everything more quietly if I know you donot hate I for an insolent
coxcomb. look at I; see what a hunt devil I be; Ihave be rid
thirty mile every day to get away from the thought of you."
Maggie do not--dare not--look. she have already see the harass
face. but she say gently,--
"I donot think any evil of you."
"then, dearest, look at I," say Stephen, in deep, tender tone
of entreaty. "donot go away from I yet. give I a moment's happiness;
make I feel youhave forgive I."
"yes, I do forgive you," say Maggie, shake by those tone, and all
the more frightened at herself. "but pray let I go in again. pray go
away."
a great tear fall from under her lower eyelid.
"I cannot go away from you; I cannot leave you," say Stephen, with
still more passionate pleading. "I shall come back again if you send
I away with this coldness; I cannot answer for myself. but if you will
go with I only a little way I can live on that. you see plainly
enough that your anger have only make I ten time more unreasonable."
Maggie turn. but Tancred, the bay horse, begin to make such spirited
remonstrance against this frequent change of direction, that Stephen,
catch sight of Willy Moss peep through the gate, call out,
"here! just come and hold my horse for five minute."
"oh, no," say Maggie, hurriedly, "my aunt will think it so strange."
"never mind," Stephen answer impatiently; "they donot know the
people at St. Ogg's. lead he up and down just here for five minute,"
he add to Willy, who be now close to they; and then he turn to
Maggie's side, and they walk on. it be clear that she _must_ go on
now.
"take my arm," say Stephen, entreatingly; and she take it, feel
all the while as if she be slide downward in a nightmare.
"there be no end to this misery," she begin, struggle to repel the
influence by speech. "it be wicked--base--ever allow a word or look
that Lucy--that other might not have see. think of Lucy."
"I do think of she--bless she. if I didn't----" Stephen have lay his
hand on Maggie's that rest on his arm, and they both feel it
difficult to speak.
"and I have other tie," Maggie go on, at last, with a desperate
effort, "even if Lucy do not exist."
"you be engaged to Philip Wakem?" say Stephen, hastily. "be it so?"
"I consider myself engage to he; I donot mean to marry any one
else."
Stephen be silent again until they have turn out of the sun into a
side lane, all grassy and shelter. then he burst out impetuously,--
"it be unnatural, it be horrible. Maggie, if you love I as I love
you, we should throw everything else to the wind for the sake of
belong to each other. we should break all these mistaken tie that
be make in blindness, and determine to marry each other."
"I would rather die than fall into that temptation," say Maggie, with
deep, slow distinctness, all the gather spiritual force of painful
year come to her aid in this extremity. she draw her arm from his
as she speak.
"tell I, then, that you donot care for I," he say, almost
violently. "tell I that you love some one else well."
it dart through Maggie's mind that here be a mode of release
herself from outward struggle,--to tell Stephen that her whole heart
be Philip's. but her lip would not utter that, and she be silent.
"if you do love I, dearest," say Stephen, gently, take her hand
again and lay it within his arm, "it be well--it be right that we
should marry each other. we cannot help the pain it will give. it be
come upon we without our seeking; it be natural; it have take hold of
I in spite of every effort I have make to resist it. God know, Ihave
be try to be faithful to tacit engagement, and Ihave only make
thing bad; Iwould well have give way at first."
Maggie be silent. if it be _not_ wrong--if she be once convince
of that, and need no long beat and struggle against this current,
soft and yet strong as the summer stream!
"Say've s' dearest," say Stephen, lean to look entreatingly in
her face. "what could we care about in the whole world beside, if we
belong to each other?"
her breath be on his face, his lip be very near her, but there
be a great dread dwell in his love for she.
her lip and eyelid quiver; she open her eye full on his for an
instant, like a lovely wild animal timid and struggle under
caress, and then turn sharp round toward home again.
"and after all," he go on, in an impatient tone, try to defeat
his own scruple as well as her, "I be break no positive
engagement; if Lucy's affection have be withdraw from I and give
to some one else, I should have feel no right to assert a claim on
she. if you be not absolutely pledge to Philip, we be neither of we
bind."
"you donot believe that; it be not your real feeling," say Maggie,
earnestly. "you feel, as I do, that the real tie lie in the feeling
and expectation we have raise in other mind. else all pledge might
be break, when there be no outward penalty. there would be no such
thing as faithfulness."
Stephen be silent; he could not pursue that argument; the opposite
conviction have work in he too strongly through his previous time
of struggle. but it soon present itself in a new form.
"the pledge _cannot_ be fulfil," he say, with impetuous insistence.
"it be unnatural; we can only pretend to give ourselves to any one
else. there be wrong in that too; there may be misery in it for _they_
as well as for we. Maggie, you must see that; you do see that."
he be look eagerly at her face for the least sign of compliance;
his large, firm, gentle grasp be on her hand. she be silent for a
few moment, with her eye fix on the ground; then she draw a deep
breath, and say, look up at he with solemn sadness,--
"oh, it be difficult,--life be very difficult! it seem right to I
sometimes that we should follow our strong feeling; but then, such
feeling continually come across the tie that all our former life have
make for us,--the tie that have make other dependent on us,--and
would cut they in two. if life be quite easy and simple, as it might
have be in Paradise, and we could always see that one be first
toward whom--I mean, if life do not make duty for we before love
come, love would be a sign that two people ought to belong to each
other. but I see--I feel it be not so now; there be thing we must
renounce in life; some of we must resign love. many thing be
difficult and dark to I; but I see one thing quite clearly,--that I
must not, cannot, seek my own happiness by sacrifice other. love be
natural; but surely pity and faithfulness and memory be natural too.
and they would live in I still, and punish I if I do not obey they.
I should be haunt by the suffering I have cause. our love would be
poison. donot urge I; help me,--help I, _because_ I love you."
Maggie have become more and more earnest as she go on; her face have
become flushed, and her eye fuller and fuller of appeal love.
Stephen have the fibre of nobleness in he that vibrate to her appeal;
but in the same moment--how could it be otherwise?--that plead
beauty gain new power over he.
"Dearest," he say, in scarcely more than a whisper, while his arm
steal round she, "Iwill do, Iwill bear anything you wish. but--one
kiss--one--the last--before we part."
one kiss, and then a long look, until Maggie say tremulously, "let I
go,--let I make haste back."
she hurry along, and not another word be speak. Stephen stand
still and beckon when they come within sight of Willy and the horse,
and Maggie go on through the gate. Mrs. Moss be stand alone at
the door of the old porch; she have send all the cousin in, with kind
thoughtfulness. it might be a joyful thing that Maggie have a rich and
handsome lover, but she would naturally feel embarrassed at come in
again; and it might _not_ be joyful. in either case Mrs. Moss wait
anxiously to receive Maggie by herself. the speak face tell plainly
enough that, if there be joy, it be of a very agitate, dubious
sort.
"sit down here a bit, my dear." she draw Maggie into the porch, and
sit down on the bench by she; there be no privacy in the house.
"oh, aunt Gritty, Ibe very wretched! I wish I could have die when I
be fifteen. it seem so easy to give thing up then; it be so hard
now."
the poor child throw her arm round her aunt's neck, and fall into
long, deep sob.
chapter XII
A Family Party
Maggie leave her good aunt Gritty at the end of the week, and go to
Garum Firs to pay her visit to aunt Pullet accord to agreement. in
the mean time very unexpected thing have happen, and there be to be
a family party at Garum to discuss and celebrate a change in the
fortune of the Tullivers, which be likely finally to carry away the
shadow of their demerit like the last limb of an eclipse, and cause
their hitherto obscure virtue to shine forth in full-rounded
splendor. it be pleasant to know that a new ministry just come into
office be not the only fellow-man who enjoy a period of high
appreciation and full-blow eulogy; in many respectable family
throughout this realm, relative become creditable meet with a
similar cordiality of recognition, which in its fine freedom from the
coercion of any antecedent, suggest the hopeful possibility that we
may some day without any notice find ourselves in full millennium,
with cockatrice who have cease to bite, and wolf that no long
show their tooth with any but the blandest intention.
Lucy come so early as to have the start even of aunt Glegg; for she
long to have some undisturbed talk with Maggie about the wonderful
news. it seem, do it not? say Lucy, with her prettiest air of
wisdom, as if everything, even other people's misfortune (poor
creature!) be conspire now to make poor dear aunt Tulliver, and
cousin Tom, and naughty Maggie too, if she be not obstinately bent
on the contrary, as happy as they deserve to be after all their
trouble. to think that the very day--the _very day_--after Tom have
come back from Newcastle, that unfortunate young Jetsome, whom Mr.
Wakem have place at the Mill, have be pitch off his horse in a
drunken fit, and be lie at St. Oggbe in a dangerous state, so that
Wakem have signify his wish that the new purchaser should enter on
the premise at once!
it be very dreadful for that unhappy young man, but it do seem as if
the misfortune have happen then, rather than at any other time, in
order that cousin Tom might all the soon have the fit reward of his
exemplary conduct,--papa think so very highly of he. Aunt Tulliver
must certainly go to the Mill now, and keep house for Tom; that be
rather a loss to Lucy in the matter of household comfort; but then, to
think of poor aunty be in her old place again, and gradually
get comfort about she there!
on this last point Lucy have her cunning project, and when she and
Maggie have make their dangerous way down the bright stair into the
handsome parlor, where the very sunbeam seem clean than
elsewhere, she direct her manoeuvre, as any other great tactician
would have do, against the weak side of the enemy.
"Aunt Pullet," she say, seat herself on the sofa, and caressingly
adjust that lady's float cap-string, "I want you to make up your
mind what linen and thing you will give Tom toward housekeeping;
because you be always so generous,--you give such nice thing, you
know; and if you set the example, aunt Glegg will follow."
"that she never can, my dear," say Mrs. Pullet, with unusual vigor,
"for she havenot get the linen to follow suit wi' mine, I can tell you.
shewould niver the taste, not if shewould spend the money. big check and
live thing, like stag and fox, all her table-linen is,--not a spot
nor a diamond among them. but itbe poor work divide one's linen
before one dies,--I niver think to ha' do that, Bessy," Mrs.
Pullet continue, shake her head and look at her sister Tulliver,
"when you and I choose the double diamont, the first flax iver wewould
spin, and the Lord know where yours be go."
"Ihave no choice, Ibe sure, sister," say poor Mrs. Tulliver, accustom
to consider herself in the light of an accuse person. "Ibe sure it
be no wish o' mine, iver, as I should lie awake o' night think o'
my good bleached linen all over the country."
"take a peppermint, Mrs. Tulliver," say uncle Pullet, feel that he
be offer a cheap and wholesome form of comfort, which he be
recommend by example.
"oh, but, aunt Pullet," say Lucy, "youhave so much beautiful linen.
and suppose you have have daughter! then you must have divide it when
they be marry."
"well, I donot say as I willnot do it," say Mrs. Pullet, "for now Tom's
so lucky, itbe nothing but right his friend should look on he and
help he. therebe the tablecloth I buy at your sale, Bessy; it be
nothing but good natur' o' I to buy them, for theyhave be lie in
the chest ever since. but Ibe not go to give Maggie any more o' my
Indy muslin and thing, if shebe to go into service again, when she
might stay and keep I company, and do my sewing for I, if she benot
want at her brother's."
"go into service" be the expression by which the Dodson mind
represent to itself the position of teacher or governess; and
Maggie's return to that menial condition, now circumstance offer
she more eligible prospect, be likely to be a sore point with all
her relative, besides Lucy. Maggie in her crude form, with her hair
down her back, and altogether in a state of dubious promise, be a
most undesirable niece; but now she be capable of be at once
ornamental and useful. the subject be revive in aunt and uncle
Glegg's presence, over the tea and muffin.
"Hegh, hegh!" say Mr. Glegg, good-naturedly pat Maggie on the
back, "nonsense, nonsense! donot let we hear of you take a place
again, Maggie. why, you must ha' pick up half-a-dozen sweetheart at
the bazaar; benot there one of'em the right sort of article? come,
now?"
"Mr. Glegg," say his wife, with that shade of increase politeness in
her severity which she always put on with her crisper front, "youwill
excuse I, but yoube far too light for a man of your year. itbe
respect and duty to her aunt, and the rest of her kin as be so good
to she, should have keep my niece from fix about go away again
without consult we; not sweetheart, if Ibe to use such a word,
though it be never heared in _my_ family."
"why, what do they call we, when we go to see them, then, eh,
neighbor Pullet? they think we sweet enough then," say Mr. Glegg,
wink pleasantly; while Mr. Pullet, at the suggestion of sweetness,
take a little more sugar.
"Mr. Glegg," say Mrs. G., "if yoube go to be undelicate, let I
know."
"La, Jane, your husband's only joke," say Mrs. Pullet; "let he
joke while hebe get health and strength. therebe poor Mr. Tilt get his
mouth draw all o' one side, and couldnot laugh if he be to try."
"Iwill trouble you for the muffineer, then, Mr. Glegg," say Mrs. G.,
"if I may be so bold to interrupt your joking. though itbe other
people must see the joke in a niece's put a slight on her mother's
eld sister, as be the head o' the family; and only come in and
out on short visit, all the time shebe be in the town, and then
settle to go away without my knowledge,--as Ihave lay cap out on
purpose for she to make them up for me,--and I as have divide my
money so equal----"
"Sister," Mrs. Tulliver break in anxiously, "Ibe sure Maggie never
think o' go away without stay at your house as well as the
other. not as itbe my wish she should go away at all, but quite
contrairy. Ibe sure Ibe innocent. Ihave say over and over again, 'my
dear, youhave no call to go away.' but therebe ten day or a fortnight
Maggie'll have before shebe fix to go; she can stay at your house
just as well, and Iwill step in when I can, and so will Lucy."
"Bessy," say Mrs. Glegg, "if youwould exercise a little more thought,
you might know I should hardly think it be worth while to unpin a
bed, and go to all that trouble now, just at the end o' the time, when
our house benot above a quarter of an hour's walk from Mr. Deane's.
she can come the first thing in the morning, and go back the last at
night, and be thankful shebe get a good aunt so close to she to come
and sit with. I know _I_ should, when I be her age."
"La, Jane," say Mrs. Pullet, "it 'ud do your bed good to have
somebody to sleep in them. therebe that striped room smell dreadful
mouldy, and the glass mildew like anything. Ibe sure I think I
should be strike with death when you take I in."
"oh, there be Tom!" exclaim Lucy, clap her hand. "hebe come on
Sindbad, as I tell he. I be afraid he be not go to keep his
promise."
Maggie jump up to kiss Tom as he enter, with strong feeling, at
this first meeting since the prospect of return to the Mill have
be open to he; and she keep his hand, lead he to the chair by
her side. to have no cloud between herself and Tom be still a
perpetual yearning in she, that have its root deep than all change.
he smile at her very kindly this evening, and say, "well, Magsie,
howbe aunt Moss?"
"come, come, sir," say Mr. Glegg put out his hand. "why, yoube
such a big man, you carry all before you, it, seem. yoube come into
your luck a good deal early than we old folk do; but I wish you
joy, I wish you joy. youwill get the Mill all for your own again some
day, Iwill be bind. you willnot stop half-way up the hill."
"but I hope hewill bear in mind as itbe his mother's family as he owe
it to," say Mrs. Glegg. "if he havenot have they to take after, hewould
ha' be poorly off. there be never any failure, nor lawe, nor
wastefulness in our family, nor die without wills----"
"no, nor sudden death," say aunt Pullet; "allay the doctor call
in. but Tom have the Dodson skin; I say that from the first. and I
donot know what _you_ mean to do, sister Glegg, but I mean to give he
a tablecloth of all my three big size but one, besides sheet. I
donot say what more I shall do; but _that_ I shall do, and if I should
die to-morrow, Mr. Pullet, youwill bear it in mind,--though youwill be
blunder with the key, and never remember as that on the third
shelf o' the left-hand wardrobe, behind the night-cap with the broad
ties,--not the narrow-frille uns,--is the key of the drawer in the
Blue Room, where the key o' the Blue Closet be. youwill make a mistake,
and I shall niver be worthy to know it. youhave a memory for my pill
and draught, wonderful,--I'll allay say that of you,--but yoube
lose among the key." this gloomy prospect of the confusion that would
ensue on her decease be very affect to Mrs. Pullet.
"you carry it too far, sophy,--that lock in and out," say Mrs.
Glegg, in a tone of some disgust at this folly. "you go beyond your
own family. therebe nobody can say I donot lock up; but I do whatbe
reasonable, and no more. and as for the linen, I shall look out whatbe
serviceable, to make a present of to my nephey; Ihave get cloth as have
never be whiten, well worth have than other people's fine
holland; and I hope hewill lie down in it and think of his aunt."
Tom thank Mrs. Glegg, but evade any promise to meditate nightly on
her virtue; and Mrs. Glegg effect a diversion for he by ask
about Mr. Deane's intention concern steam.
Lucy have have her far-sight view in beg Tom to come on Sindbad.
it appear, when it be time to go home, that the man-servant be to
ride the horse, and cousin Tom be to drive home his mother and Lucy.
"you must sit by yourself, aunty," say that contrive young lady,
"because I must sit by Tom; Ihave a great deal to say to he."
in the eagerness of her affectionate anxiety for Maggie, Lucy could
not persuade herself to defer a conversation about she with Tom, who,
she think, with such a cup of joy before he as this rapid
fulfilment of his wish about the Mill, must become pliant and
flexible. her nature supply she with no key to Tom's; and she be
puzzle as well as pain to notice the unpleasant change on his
countenance when she give he the history of the way in which Philip
have use his influence with his father. she have count on this
revelation as a great stroke of policy, which be to turn Tom's heart
toward Philip at once, and, besides that, prove that the eld Wakem
be ready to receive Maggie with all the honor of a daughter-in-law.
nothing be want, then, but for dear Tom, who always have that
pleasant smile when he look at cousin Lucy, to turn completely
round, say the opposite of what he have always say before, and declare
that he, for his part, be delighted that all the old grievance
should be heal, and that Maggie should have Philip with all suitable
despatch; in cousin Lucy's opinion nothing could be easy.
but to mind strongly mark by the positive and negative quality
that create severity,--strength of will, conscious rectitude of
purpose, narrowness of imagination and intellect, great power of
self-control, and a disposition to exert control over others,--prejudices
come as the natural food of tendency which can get no sustenance
out of that complex, fragmentary, doubt-provoke knowledge which
we call truth. let a prejudice be bequeath, carry in the air,
adopt by hearsay, catch in through the eye,--however it may come,
these mind will give it a habitation; it be something to assert
strongly and bravely, something to fill up the void of spontaneous
idea, something to impose on other with the authority of conscious
right; it be at once a staff and a baton. every prejudice that will
answer these purpose be self-evident. our good, upright Tom Tulliver's
mind be of this class; his inward criticism of his father's fault
do not prevent he from adopt his father's prejudice; it be a
prejudice against a man of lax principle and lax life, and it be a
meeting-point for all the disappointed feeling of family and personal
pride. other feeling add their force to produce Tom's bitter
repugnance to Philip, and to Maggie's union with he; and
notwithstanding Lucy's power over her strong-willed cousin, she get
nothing but a cold refusal ever to sanction such a marriage; "but of
course Maggie could do as she liked,--she have declare she
determination to be independent. for Tom's part, he hold himself bind
by his duty to his father's memory, and by every manly feeling, never
to consent to any relation with the Wakems."
thus, all that Lucy have effect by her zealous mediation be to fill
Tom's mind with the expectation that Maggie's perverse resolve to go
into a situation again would presently metamorphose itself, as she
resolve be apt to do, into something equally perverse, but entirely
different,--a marriage with Philip Wakem.
Chapter XIII
Borne along by the Tide
in less than a week Maggie be at St. Oggbe again,--outwardly in much
the same position as when her visit there have just begin. it be easy
for she to fill her morning apart from Lucy without any obvious
effort; for she have her promise visit to pay to her aunt Glegg, and
it be natural that she should give her mother more than usual of her
companionship in these last week, especially as there be
preparation to be think of for Tom's housekeeping. but Lucy would
hear of no pretext for she remain away in the evening; she must
always come from aunt Glegg's before dinner,--"else what shall I have
of you?" say Lucy, with a tearful pout that could not be resist.
and Mr. Stephen Guest have unaccountably take to dining at Mr. Deane's
as often as possible, instead of avoid that, as he use to do. at
first he begin his morning with a resolution that he would not dine
there, not even go in the evening, till Maggie be away. he have even
devise a plan of start off on a journey in this agreeable June
weather; the headache which he have constantly be allege as a
ground for stupidity and silence be a sufficient ostensible motive.
but the journey be not take, and by the fourth morning no distinct
resolution be form about the evening; they be only foresee as
time when Maggie would still be present for a little while,--when one
more touch, one more glance, might be snatch. for why not? there be
nothing to conceal between they; they know, they have confess their
love, and they have renounce each other; they be go to part.
Honor and conscience be go to divide they; Maggie, with that
appeal from her inmost soul, have decide it; but surely they might
cast a linger look at each other across the gulf, before they
turn away never to look again till that strange light have forever
fade out of their eye.
Maggie, all this time, move about with a quiescence and even torpor
of manner, so contrast with her usual fitful brightness and ardor,
that Lucy would have have to seek some other cause for such a change,
if she have not be convince that the position in which Maggie stand
between Philip and her brother, and the prospect of her self-impose
wearisome banishment, be quite enough to account for a large amount
of depression. but under this torpor there be a fierce battle of
emotion, such as Maggie in all her life of struggle have never know
or forebode; it seem to she as if all the bad evil in she have
lain in ambush till now, and have suddenly start up full-armed, with
hideous, overpowering strength! there be moment in which a cruel
selfishness seem to be get possession of she; why should not
Lucy, why should not Philip, suffer? _she_ have have to suffer through
many year of her life; and who have renounce anything for she? and
when something like that fulness of existence--love, wealth, ease,
refinement, all that her nature crave--be bring within her reach,
why be she to forego it, that another might have it,--another, who
perhaps need it less? but amidst all this new passionate tumult
there be the old voice make themselves hear with rise power,
till, from time to time, the tumult seem quell. _be_ that
existence which tempt she the full existence she dream? where,
then, would be all the memory of early strive; all the deep pity
for another's pain, which have be nurture in she through year of
affection and hardship; all the divine presentiment of something
high than mere personal enjoyment, which have make the sacredness of
life? she might as well hope to enjoy walk by maim her foot, as
hope to enjoy an existence in which she set out by maim the faith
and sympathy that be the good organ of her soul. and then, if pain
be so hard to _she_, what be it to other? "ah, God! preserve I
from inflict--give I strength to bear it." how have she sink into
this struggle with a temptation that she would once have think
herself as secure from as from deliberate crime? when be that first
hateful moment in which she have be conscious of a feeling that
clash with her truth, affection, and gratitude, and have not shake
it from she with horror, as if it have be a loathsome thing? and yet,
since this strange, sweet, subduing influence do not, should not,
conquer her,--since it be to remain simply her own suffering,--her
mind be meet Stephen's in that thought of his, that they might
still snatch moment of mute confession before the parting come. for
be not he suffer too? she see it daily--see it in the sickened
look of fatigue with which, as soon as he be not compel to exert
himself, he relapse into indifference toward everything but the
possibility of watch she. could she refuse sometimes to answer that
beseech look which she feel to be follow she like a low murmur
of love and pain? she refuse it less and less, till at last the
evening for they both be sometimes make of a moment's mutual gaze;
they think of it till it come, and when it have come, they think of
nothing else.
one other thing Stephen seem now and then to care for, and that be
to sing; it be a way of speak to Maggie. perhaps he be not
distinctly conscious that he be impel to it by a secret
longing--run counter to all his self-confess resolve--to deepen
the hold he have on she. watch your own speech, and notice how it be
guide by your less conscious purpose, and you will understand that
contradiction in Stephen.
Philip Wakem be a less frequent visitor, but he come occasionally in
the evening, and it happen that he be there when Lucy say, as they
sit out on the lawn, near sunset,--
"Now Maggie's tale of visit to aunt Glegg be complete, I mean that
we shall go out boat every day until she go. she have not have half
enough boat because of these tiresome visit, and she like it
well than anything. donot you, Maggie?"
"well than any sort of locomotion, I hope you mean," say Philip,
smile at Maggie, who be loll backward in a low garden-chair;
"else she will be sell her soul to that ghostly boatman who haunt
the Floss, only for the sake of be drift in a boat forever."
"should you like to be her boatman?" say Lucy. "because, if you
would, you can come with we and take an oar. if the Floss be but a
quiet lake instead of a river, we should be independent of any
gentleman, for Maggie can row splendidly. as it be, we be reduce to
ask service of knight and squire, who do not seem to offer they
with great alacrity."
she look playful reproach at Stephen, who be saunter up and
down, and be just sing in pianissimo falsetto,--
"the thirst that from the soul doth rise
Doth ask a drink divine."
he take no notice, but still keep aloof; he have do so frequently
during Philip's recent visit.
"you donot seem incline for boat," say Lucy, when he come to sit
down by she on the bench. "donot row suit you now?"
"oh, I hate a large party in a boat," he say, almost irritably. "Iwill
come when you have no one else."
Lucy color, fear that Philip would be hurt; it be quite a new
thing for Stephen to speak in that way; but he have certainly not be
well of late. Philip color too, but less from a feeling of personal
offence than from a vague suspicion that Stephen's moodiness have some
relation to Maggie, who have start up from her chair as he speak, and
have walk toward the hedge of laurel to look at the descending
sunlight on the river.
"as Miss Deane donot know she be exclude other by invite I,"
say Philip, "I be bind to resign."
"no, indeed, you shall not," say Lucy, much vex. "I particularly
wish for your company to-morrow. the tide will suit at half-past ten;
it will be a delicious time for a couple of hour to row to Luckreth
and walk back, before the sun get too hot. and how can you object to
four people in a boat?" she add, look at Stephen.
"I donot object to the people, but the number," say Stephen, who have
recover himself, and be rather ashamed of his rudeness. "if I vote
for a fourth at all, of course it would be you, Phil. but we willnot
divide the pleasure of escort the lady; wewill take it
alternately. Iwill go the next day."
this incident have the effect of draw Philip's attention with
freshen solicitude toward Stephen and Maggie; but when they
re-enter the house, music be propose, and Mrs. Tulliver and Mr.
Deane be occupy with cribbage, Maggie sit apart near the table
where the book and work be place, do nothing, however, but
listen abstractedly to the music. Stephen presently turn to a
duet which he insist that Lucy and Philip should sing; he have often
do the same thing before; but this evening Philip think he divine
some double intention in every word and look of Stephen's, and watch
he keenly, angry with himself all the while for this clinging
suspicion. for have not Maggie virtually deny any ground for his
doubt on her side? and she be truth itself; it be impossible not to
believe her word and glance when they have last speak together in the
garden. Stephen might be strongly fascinate by she (what be more
natural?), but Philip feel himself rather base for intrude on what
must be his friend's painful secret. still he watch. Stephen, move
away from the piano, saunter slowly toward the table near which
Maggie sit, and turn over the newspaper, apparently in mere
idleness. then he seat himself with his back to the piano, drag
a newspaper under his elbow, and thrust his hand through his hair,
as if he have be attract by some bit of local news in the "Laceham
Courier." he be in reality look at Maggie who have not take the
slight notice of his approach. she have always additional strength
of resistance when Philip be present, just as we can restrain our
speech well in a spot that we feel to be hallow. but at last she
hear the word "dear" utter in the soft tone of pained
entreaty, like that of a patient who ask for something that ought to
have be give without ask. she have never hear that word since
the moment in the lane at Basset, when it have come from Stephen again
and again, almost as involuntarily as if it have be an inarticulate
cry. Philip could hear no word, but he have move to the opposite side
of the piano, and could see Maggie start and blush, raise her eye an
instant toward Stephen's face, but immediately look apprehensively
toward himself. it be not evident to she that Philip have observe
she; but a pang of shame, under the sense of this concealment, make
her move from her chair and walk to her mother's side to watch the
game at cribbage.
Philip go home soon after in a state of hideous doubt mingle with
wretched certainty. it be impossible for he now to resist the
conviction that there be some mutual consciousness between Stephen
and Maggie; and for half the night his irritable, susceptible nerve
be press upon almost to frenzy by that one wretched fact; he could
attempt no explanation that would reconcile it with her word and
action. when, at last, the need for belief in Maggie rise to its
habitual predominance, he be not long in imagine the truth,--she
be struggle, she be banish herself; this be the clue to all he
have see since his return. but athwart that belief there come other
possibility that would not be drive out of sight. his imagination
work out the whole story; Stephen be madly in love with she; he
must have tell she so; she have reject he, and be hurry away.
but would he give she up, know--Philip feel the fact with
heart-crush despair--that she be make half helpless by her feeling
toward he?
when the morning come, Philip be too ill to think of keep his
engagement to go in the boat. in his present agitation he could decide
on nothing; he could only alternate between contradictory intention.
first, he think he must have an interview with Maggie, and entreat
she to confide in he; then, again, he distrust his own
interference. have he not be thrust himself on Maggie all along?
she have utter word long ago in her young ignorance; it be enough
to make she hate he that these should be continually present with she
as a bond. and have he any right to ask she for a revelation of
feeling which she have evidently intend to withhold from he? he
would not trust himself to see she, till he have assure himself that
he could act from pure anxiety for she, and not from egoistic
irritation. he write a brief note to Stephen, and send it early by the
servant, say that he be not well enough to fulfil his engagement
to Miss Deane. would Stephen take his excuse, and fill his place?
Lucy have arrange a charming plan, which have make she quite content
with Stephen's refusal to go in the boat. she discover that her
father be to drive to Lindum this morning at ten; Lindum be the very
place she want to go to, to make purchases,--important purchase,
which must by no mean be put off to another opportunity; and aunt
Tulliver must go too, because she be concern in some of the
purchase.
"you will have your row in the boat just the same, you know," she say
to Maggie when they go out of the breakfast-room and upstairs
together; "Philip will be here it half-past ten, and it be a delicious
morning. now donot say a word against it, you dear dolorous thing.
what be the use of my be a fairy godmother, if you set your face
against all the wonder I work for you? donot think of awful cousin
Tom; you may disobey he a little."
Maggie do not persist in object. she be almost glad of the plan,
for perhaps it would bring she some strength and calmness to be alone
with Philip again; it be like revisit the scene of a quieter life,
in which the very struggle be repose, compare with the daily
tumult of the present. she prepare herself for the boat and at
half-past ten sit wait in the drawing-room.
the ring of the door-bell be punctual, and she be think with
half-sad, affectionate pleasure of the surprise Philip would have in
find that he be to be with she alone, when she distinguish a
firm, rapid step across the hall, that be certainly not Philip's; the
door open, and Stephen Guest enter.
in the first moment they be both too much agitated to speak; for
Stephen have learn from the servant that the other be go out.
Maggie have start up and sit down again, with her heart beat
violently; and Stephen, throw down his cap and glove, come and sit
by she in silence. she think Philip would be come soon; and with
great effort--for she tremble visibly--she rise to go to a distant
chair.
"he be not come," say Stephen, in a low tone. "I be go in the
boat."
"oh, we cannot go," say Maggie, sink into her chair again. "Lucy
do not expect--she would be hurt. why be not Philip come?"
"he be not well; he ask I to come instead."
"Lucy be go to Lindum," say Maggie, take off her bonnet with
hurried, tremble finger. "we must not go."
"very well," say Stephen, dreamily, look at she, as he rest his
arm on the back of his chair. "then wewill stay here."
he be look into her deep, deep eye, far off and mysterious at the
starlit blackness, and yet very near, and timidly love. Maggie sit
perfectly still--perhaps for moment, perhaps for minute--until the
helpless trembling have cease, and there be a warm glow on her check.
"the man be wait; he have take the cushion," she say. "will you
go and tell he?"
"what shall I tell he?" say Stephen, almost in a whisper. he be
look at the lip now.
Maggie make no answer.
"let we go," Stephen murmur entreatingly, rise, and take she
hand to raise she too. "we shall not be long together."
and they go. Maggie feel that she be be lead down the garden
among the rose, be help with firm, tender care into the boat,
have the cushion and cloak arrange for her foot, and her parasol
open for she (which she have forget), all by this strong
presence that seem to bear she along without any act of her own
will, like the add self which come with the sudden exalt
influence of a strong tonic, and she feel nothing else. memory be
exclude.
they glide rapidly along, Stephen rowing, help by the
backward-flow tide, past the Tofton tree and house; on between
the silent sunny field and pasture, which seem fill with a
natural joy that have no reproach for theirs. the breath of the young,
unwearied day, the delicious rhythmic dip of the oar, the fragmentary
song of a pass bird hear now and then, as if it be only the
overflowing of brimful gladness, the sweet solitude of a twofold
consciousness that be mingle into one by that grave, untire gaze
which need not be averted,--what else could there be in their mind
for the first hour? some low, subdued, languid exclamation of love
come from Stephen from time to time, as he go on row idly, half
automatically; otherwise they speak no word; for what could word have
be but an inlet to thought? and think do not belong to that
enchant haze in which they be enveloped,--it belong to the past
and the future that lie outside the haze. Maggie be only dimly
conscious of the bank, as they pass they, and dwelt with no
recognition on the village; she know there be several to be pass
before they reach Luckreth, where they always stop and leave the
boat. at all time she be so liable to fit of absence, that she be
likely enough to let her waymark pass unnoticed.
but at last Stephen, who have be row more and more idly, cease to
row, lay down the oar, fold his arm, and look down on the water
as if watch the pace at which the boat glide without his help.
this sudden change rouse Maggie. she look at the far-stretch
field, at the bank close by, and feel that they be entirely
strange to she. a terrible alarm take possession of she.
"oh, have we pass Luckreth, where we be to stop?" she exclaim,
look back to see if the place be out of sight. no village be to
be see. she turn around again, with a look of distressed
questioning at Stephen.
he go on watch the water, and say, in a strange, dreamy, absent
tone, "yes, a long way."
"oh, what shall I do?" cry Maggie, in an agony. "we shall not get
home for hour, and Lucy? o God, help I!"
she clasp her hand and break into a sob, like a frightened child;
she think of nothing but of meet Lucy, and see her look of
pain surprise and doubt, perhaps of just upbraid.
Stephen move and sit near she, and gently draw down the clasped
hand.
"Maggie," he say, in a deep tone of slow decision, "let we never go
home again, till no one can part us,--till we be marry."
the unusual tone, the startling word, arrest Maggie's sob, and she
sit quite still, wonder; as if Stephen might have see some
possibility that would alter everything, and annul the wretched
fact.
"see, Maggie, how everything have come without our seeking,--in spite
of all our effort. we never think of be alone together again; it
have all be do by other. see how the tide be carry we out, away
from all those unnatural bond that we have be try to make fast
round we, and try in vain. it will carry we on to Torby, and we can
land there, and get some carriage, and hurry on to York and then to
Scotland,--and never pause a moment till we be bind to each other,
so that only death can part we. it be the only right thing, dearest;
it be the only way of escape from this wretched entanglement.
everything have concur to point it out to we. we have contrive
nothing, we have think of nothing ourselves."
Stephen speak with deep, earnest pleading. Maggie listen, pass
from her startled wonderment to the yearning after that belief that
the tide be do it all, that she might glide along with the swift,
silent stream, and not struggle any more. but across that stealing
influence come the terrible shadow of past thought; and the sudden
horror lest now, at last, the moment of fatal intoxication be close
upon she, call up feeling of angry resistance toward Stephen.
"let I go!" she say, in an agitated tone, flash an indignant look
at he, and try to get her hand free. "you have want to deprive
I of any choice. you know we be come too far; you have dare to
take advantage of my thoughtlessness. it be unmanly to bring I into
such a position."
Stung by this reproach, he release her hand, move back to his
former place, and fold his arm, in a sort of desperation at the
difficulty Maggie's word have make present to he. if she would not
consent to go on, he must curse himself for the embarrassment he have
lead she into. but the reproach be the unendurable thing; the one
thing bad than part with she be, that she should feel he have
act unworthily toward she. at last he say, in a tone of suppress
rage,--
"I donot notice that we have pass Luckreth till we have get to the
next village; and then it come into my mind that we would go on. I
cannot justify it; I ought to have tell you. it be enough to make you
hate I, since you donot love I well enough to make everything else
indifferent to you, as I do you. shall I stop the boat and try to get
you out here? Iwill tell Lucy that I be mad, and that you hate I; and
you shall be clear of I forever. no one can blame you, because I have
behave unpardonably to you."
Maggie be paralyze; it be easy to resist Stephen's pleading than
this picture he have call up of himself suffer while she be
vindicate; easy even to turn away from his look of tenderness than
from this look of angry misery, that seem to place she in selfish
isolation from he. he have call up a state of feeling in which the
reason which have act on her conscience seem to be transmit
into mere self-regard. the indignant fire in her eye be quench,
and she begin to look at he with timid distress. she have reproach
he for be hurry into irrevocable trespass,--she, who have be so
weak herself.
"as if I shouldnot feel what happen to you--just the same," she
say, with reproach of another kind,--the reproach of love, ask for
more trust. this yield to the idea of Stephen's suffering be more
fatal than the other yielding, because it be less distinguishable
from that sense of other' claim which be the moral basis of her
resistance.
he feel all the relenting in her look and tone; it be heaven open
again. he move to her side, and take her hand, lean his elbow on
the back of the boat, and say nothing. he dread to utter another
word, he dread to make another movement, that might provoke another
reproach or denial from she. life hang on her consent; everything else
be hopeless, confused, sicken misery. they glide along in this
way, both rest in that silence as in a haven, both dread lest
their feeling should be divide again,--till they become aware that
the cloud have gather, and that the slight perceptible freshening
of the breeze be grow and grow, so that the whole character of
the day be alter.
"you will be chill, Maggie, in this thin dress. let I raise the cloak
over your shoulder. get up an instant, dearest."
Maggie obey; there be an unspeakable charm in be tell what to
do, and have everything decide for she. she sit down again cover
with the cloak, and Stephen take to his oar again, make haste; for
they must try to get to Torby as fast as they could. Maggie be hardly
conscious of have say or do anything decisive. all yield be
attend with a less vivid consciousness than resistance; it be the
partial sleep of thought; it be the submergence of our own personality
by another. every influence tend to lull she into acquiescence. that
dreamy glide in the boat which have last for four hour, and have
bring some weariness and exhaustion; the recoil of her fatigued
sensation from the impracticable difficulty of get out of the
boat at this unknown distance from home, and walk for long
miles,--all help to bring she into more complete subjection to that
strong, mysterious charm which make a last parting from Stephen seem
the death of all joy, and make the thought of wound he like the
first touch of the torture iron before which resolution shrink. and
then there be the present happiness of be with he, which be
enough to absorb all her languid energy.
presently Stephen observe a vessel come after they. several
vessel, among they the steamer to Mudport, have pass they with the
early tide, but for the last hour they have see none. he look more
and more eagerly at this vessel, as if a new thought have come into his
mind along with it, and then he look at Maggie hesitatingly.
"Maggie, dearest," he say at last, "if this vessel should be go to
Mudport, or to any convenient place on the coast northward, it would
be our good plan to get they to take we on board. you be fatigue,
and it may soon rain; it may be a wretched business, get to Torby
in this boat. itbe only a trading vessel, but I dare say you can be
make tolerably comfortable. wewill take the cushion out of the boat.
it be really our good plan. theywill be glad enough to take we. Ihave
get plenty of money about I. I can pay they well."
Maggie's heart begin to beat with reawaken alarm at this new
proposition; but she be silent,--one course seem as difficult as
another.
Stephen hail the vessel. it be a dutch vessel go to Mudport, the
English mate inform he, and, if this wind hold, would be there in
less than two day.
"we have get out too far with our boat," say Stephen. "I be try to
make for Torby. but Ibe afraid of the weather; and this lady--my
wife--will be exhaust with fatigue and hunger. take we on
board--will you?--and haul up the boat. Iwill pay you well."
Maggie, now really faint and tremble with fear, be t aken on board,
make an interesting object of contemplation to admire Dutchmen.
the mate fear the lady would have a poor time of it on board, for
they have no accommodation for such entirely unlooke-for
passengers,--no private cabin large than an old-fashioned church-pew.
but at least they have dutch cleanliness, which make all other
inconvenience tolerable; and the boat cushion be spread into a
couch for Maggie on the poop with all alacrity. but to pace up and
down the deck lean on Stephen--be uphold by his strength--be
the first change that she need; then come food, and then quiet
reclining on the cushion, with the sense that no new resolution
_could_ be take that day. everything must wait till to-morrow.
Stephen sit beside she with her hand in his; they could only speak to
each other in low tone; only look at each other now and then, for it
would take a long while to dull the curiosity of the five man on
board, and reduce these handsome young stranger to that minor degree
of interest which belong, in a sailor's regard, to all object nearer
than the horizon. but Stephen be triumphantly happy. every other
thought or care be throw into unmarked perspective by the certainty
that Maggie must be his. the leap have be take now; he have be
torture by scruple, he have fight fiercely with overmaster
inclination, he have hesitate; but repentance be impossible. he
murmur forth in fragmentary sentence his happiness, his adoration,
his tenderness, his belief that their life together must be heaven,
that her presence with he would give rapture to every common day;
that to satisfy her light wish be dearer to he than all other
bliss; that everything be easy for her sake, except to part with she;
and now they never _would_ part; he would belong to she forever, and
all that be his be hers,--had no value for he except as it be
her. such thing, utter in low, break tone by the one voice that
have first stir the fibre of young passion, have only a feeble
effect--on experienced mind at a distance from they. to poor Maggie
they be very near; they be like nectar hold close to thirsty lip;
there be, there _must_ be, then, a life for mortal here below which
be not hard and chill,--in which affection would no long be
self-sacrifice. Stephen's passionate word make the vision of such a
life more fully present to she than it have ever be before; and the
vision for the time exclude all realities,--all except the return
sun-gleams which break out on the water as the evening approach,
and mingle with the visionary sunlight of promise happiness; all
except the hand that press her, and the voice that speak to she,
and the eye that look at she with grave, unspeakable love.
there be to be no rain, after all; the cloud roll off to the
horizon again, make the great purple rampart and long purple isle
of that wondrous land which reveal itself to we when the sun go
down,--the land that the evening star watch over. Maggie be to
sleep all night on the poop; it be well than go below; and she
be cover with the warm wrapping the ship could furnish. it be
still early, when the fatigue of the day bring on a drowsy longing
for perfect rest, and she lay down her head, look at the faint,
die flush in the west, where the one golden lamp be get
bright and bright. then she look up at Stephen, who be still
seat by she, hang over she as he lean his arm against the
vessel's side. behind all the delicious vision of these last hour,
which have flow over she like a soft stream, and make she entirely
passive, there be the dim consciousness that the condition be a
transient one, and that the morrow must bring back the old life of
struggle; that there be thought which would presently avenge
themselves for this oblivion. but now nothing be distinct to she; she
be be lull to sleep with that soft stream still flow over
she, with those delicious vision melt and fade like the wondrous
aerial land of the west.
Chapter XIV
Waking
when Maggie be go to sleep, Stephen, weary too with his
unaccustomed amount of rowing, and with the intense inward life of the
last twelve hour, but too restless to sleep, walk and lounge about
the deck with his cigar far on into midnight, not see the dark
water, hardly conscious there be star, live only in the near and
distant future. at last fatigue conquer restlessness, and he roll
himself up in a piece of tarpaulin on the deck near Maggie's foot.
she have fall asleep before nine, and have be sleep for six hour
before the faint hint of a midsummer daybreak be discernible. she
awake from that vivid dreaming which make the margin of our deep
rest. she be in a boat on the wide water with Stephen, and in the
gathering darkness something like a star appear, that grow and grow
till they see it be the Virgin seat in St. Ogg's boat, and it come
nearer and nearer, till they see the Virgin be Lucy and the boatman
be Philip,--no, not Philip, but her brother, who row past without
look at she; and she rise to stretch out her arm and call to he,
and their own boat turn over with the movement, and they begin to
sink, till with one spasm of dread she seem to awake, and find she
be a child again in the parlor at evening twilight, and Tom be not
really angry. from the soothe sense of that false waking she pass
to the real waking,--to the plash of water against the vessel, and the
sound of a footstep on the deck, and the awful starlit sky. there be
a moment of utter bewilderment before her mind could get disentangle
from the confused web of dream; but soon the whole terrible truth
urge itself upon she. Stephen be not by she now; she be alone with
her own memory and her own dread. the irrevocable wrong that must blot
her life have be commit; she have bring sorrow into the life of
others,--into the life that be knit up with hers by trust and love.
the feeling of a few short week have hurry she into the sin her
nature have most recoil from,--breach of faith and cruel selfishness;
she have rent the tie that have give meaning to duty, and have make
herself an outlaw soul, with no guide but the wayward choice of her
own passion. and where would that lead she? where have it lead she now?
she have say she would rather die than fall into that temptation. she
feel it now,--now that the consequence of such a fall have come before
the outward act be complete. there be at least this fruit from all
her year of strive after the high and best,--that her soul
though betray, beguile, ensnare, could never deliberately consent
to a choice of the low. and a choice of what? o God! not a choice of
joy, but of conscious cruelty and hardness; for could she ever cease
to see before her Lucy and Philip, with their murder trust and
hop? her life with Stephen could have no sacredness; she must
forever sink and wander vaguely, drive by uncertain impulse; for she
have let go the clue of life,--that clue which once in the far-off
year her young need have clutch so strongly. she have renounce all
delight then, before she know they, before they have come within her
reach. Philip have be right when he tell she that she know nothing of
renunciation; she have think it be quiet ecstasy; she see it face to
face now,--that sad, patient, love strength which hold the clue of
life,--and see that the thorn be forever press on its brow. the
yesterday, which could never be revoked,--if she could have change it
now for any length of inward silent endurance, she would have bow
beneath that cross with a sense of rest.
Day break come and the redden eastern light, while her past life
be grasp she in this way, with that tightening clutch which come
in the last moment of possible rescue. she could see Stephen now
lie on the deck still fast asleep, and with the sight of he there
come a wave of anguish that find its way in a long-suppress sob.
the bad bitterness of parting--the thought that urge the sharp
inward cry for help--be the pain it must give to _he_. but
surmount everything be the horror at her own possible failure, the
dread lest her conscience should be benumb again, and not rise to
energy till it be too late. too late! it be too late already not to
have cause misery; too late for everything, perhaps, but to rush away
from the last act of baseness,--the tasting of joy that be wring
from crushed heart.
the sun be rise now, and Maggie start up with the sense that a
day of resistance be begin for she. her eyelash be still wet
with tear, as, with her shawl over her head, she sit look at the
slowly round sun. something rouse Stephen too, and get up from
his hard bed, he come to sit beside she. the sharp instinct of anxious
love see something to give he alarm in the very first glance. he have
a hover dread of some resistance in Maggie's nature that he would
be unable to overcome. he have the uneasy consciousness that he have
rob she of perfect freedom yesterday; there be too much native
honor in he, for he not to feel that, if she will should recoil, his
conduct would have be odious, and she would have a right to reproach
he.
but Maggie do not feel that right; she be too conscious of fatal
weakness in herself, too full of the tenderness that come with the
foresee need for inflict a wound. she let he take her hand when
he come to sit down beside she, and smile at he, only with rather a
sad glance; she could say nothing to pain he till the moment of
possible parting be nearer. and so they drink their cup of coffee
together, and walk about the deck, and hear the captain's assurance
that they should be in at Mudport by five o'clock, each with an inward
burthen; but in he it be an undefined fear, which he trust to the
come hour to dissipate; in she it be a definite resolve on which
she be try silently to tighten her hold. Stephen be continually,
through the morning, express his anxiety at the fatigue and
discomfort she be suffer, and allude to landing and to the change
of motion and repose she would have in a carriage, want to assure
himself more completely by presuppose that everything would be as he
have arrange it. for a long while Maggie content herself with
assure he that she have have a good night's rest, and that she donot
mind about be on the vessel,--it be not like be on the open
sea, it be only a little less pleasant than be in a boat on the
Floss. but a suppress resolve will betray itself in the eye, and
Stephen become more and more uneasy as the day advance, under the
sense that Maggie have entirely lose her passiveness. he long, but
do not dare, to speak of their marriage, of where they would go after
it, and the step he would take to inform his father, and the rest, of
what have happen. he long to assure himself of a tacit assent from
she. but each time he look at she, he gather a strong dread of
the new, quiet sadness with which she meet his eye. and they be more
and more silent.
"here we be in sight of Mudport," he say at last. "now, dearest," he
add, turn toward she with a look that be half beseech, "the
bad part of your fatigue be over. on the land we can command
swiftness. in another hour and a half we shall be in a chaise
together, and that will seem rest to you after this."
Maggie feel it be time to speak; it would only be unkind now to
assent by silence. she speak in the low tone, as he have do, but
with distinct decision.
"we shall not be together; we shall have part."
the blood rush to Stephen's face.
"we shall not," he say. "Iwill die first."
it be as he have dread--there be a struggle come. but neither of
they dare to say another word till the boat be let down, and they
be take to the landing-place. here there be a cluster of gazer
and passenger await the departure of the steamboat to St. Ogg's.
Maggie have a dim sense, when she have land, and Stephen be hurry
she along on his arm, that some one have advance toward she from that
cluster as if he be come to speak to she. but she be hurry
along, and be indifferent to everything but the come trial.
a porter guide they to the near inn and posting-house, and Stephen
give the order for the chaise as they pass through the yard. Maggie
take no notice of this, and only say, "ask they to show we into a
room where we can sit down."
when they enter, Maggie do not sit down, and Stephen, whose face
have a desperate determination in it, be about to ring the bell, when
she say, in a firm voice,--
"Ibe not go; we must part here."
"Maggie," he say, turn round toward she, and speak in the tone
of a man who feel a process of torture begin, "do you mean to
kill I? what be the use of it now? the whole thing be do."
"no, it be not do," say Maggie. "too much be done,--more than we
can ever remove the trace of. but I will go no far. donot try to
prevail with I again. I couldnot choose yesterday."
what be he to do? he dare not go near she; her anger might leap out,
and make a new barrier. he walk backward and forward in madden
perplexity.
"Maggie," he say at last, pause before she, and speak in a tone
of implore wretchedness, "have some pity--hear I--forgive I for
what I do yesterday. I will obey you now; I will do nothing without
your full consent. but donot blight our life forever by a rash
perversity that can answer no good purpose to any one, that can only
create new evil. sit down, dear; wait--think what you be go to
do. donot treat I as if you couldnot trust I."
he have choose the most effective appeal; but Maggie's will be fix
unswervingly on the come wrench. she have make up her mind to suffer.
"we must not wait," she say, in a low but distinct voice; "we must
part at once."
"we _cannot_ part, Maggie," say Stephen, more impetuously. "I cannot
bear it. what be the use of inflict that misery on I? the
blow--whatever it may have be--have be strike now. will it help any
one else that you should drive I mad?"
"I will not begin any future, even for you," say Maggie, tremulously,
"with a deliberate consent to what ought not to have be. what I tell
you at Basset I feel now; I would rather have die than fall into this
temptation. it would have be well if we have part forever then.
but we must part now."
"we will _not_ part," Stephen burst out, instinctively place his
back against the door, forget everything he have say a few moment
before; "I will not endure it. youwill make I desperate; I sha'n't
know what I do."
Maggie tremble. she feel that the parting could not be effect
suddenly. she must rely on a slow appeal to Stephen's well self;
she must be prepare for a hard task than that of rush away while
resolution be fresh. she sit down. Stephen, watch she with that
look of desperation which have come over he like a lurid light,
approach slowly from the door, seat himself close beside she, and
grasp her hand. her heart beat like the heart of a frightened bird;
but this direct opposition help she. she feel her determination
grow strong.
"remember what you feel week ago," she begin, with beseech
earnestness; "remember what we both felt,--that we owe ourselves to
other, and must conquer every inclination which could make we false
to that debt. we have fail to keep our resolution; but the wrong
remain the same."
"no, it do _not_ remain the same," say Stephen. "we have prove
that it be impossible to keep our resolution. we have prove that
the feeling which draw we toward each other be too strong to be
overcome. that natural law surmount every other; we cannot help what
it clash with."
"it be not so, Stephen; Ibe quite sure that be wrong. I have try to
think it again and again; but I see, if we judge in that way, there
would be a warrant for all treachery and cruelty; we should justify
break the most sacred tie that can ever be form on earth. if the
past be not to bind we, where can duty lie? we should have no law but
the inclination of the moment."
"but there be tie that cannot be keep by mere resolution," say
Stephen, start up and walk about again. "what be outward
faithfulness? would they have thank we for anything so hollow as
constancy without love?"
Maggie do not answer immediately. she be undergo an inward as
well as an outward contest. at last she say, with a passionate
assertion of her conviction, as much against herself as against him,--
"that seem right--at first; but when I look far, Ibe sure it be
_not_ right. faithfulness and constancy mean something else besides
do what be easy and pleasantest to ourselves. they mean
renounce whatever be oppose to the reliance other have in
us,--whatever would cause misery to those whom the course of our life
have make dependent on we. if we--if I have be well, nobler, those
claim would have be so strongly present with me,--I should have
feel they press on my heart so continually, just as they do now in
the moment when my conscience be awake,--that the opposite feeling
would never have grow in I, as it have do; it would have be
quench at once, I should have pray for help so earnestly, I should
have rush away as we rush from hideous danger. I feel no excuse for
myself, none. I should never have fail toward Lucy and Philip as I
have do, if I have not be weak, selfish, and hard,--able to think
of their pain without a pain to myself that would have destroy all
temptation. oh, what be Lucy feel now? she believe in I--she
love I--she be so good to I. think of her----"
Maggie's voice be get choke as she utter these last word.
"I _cannot_ think of she," say Stephen, stamp as if with pain. "I
can think of nothing but you, Maggie. you demand of a man what be
impossible. I feel that once; but I cannot go back to it now. and where
be the use of _your_ think of it, except to torture I? you cannot
save they from pain now; you can only tear yourself from I, and make
my life worthless to I. and even if we could go back, and both fulfil
our engagements,--if that be possible now,--it would be hateful,
horrible, to think of your ever be Philip's wife,--of your ever
be the wife of a man you donot love. we have both be rescue
from a mistake."
a deep flush come over Maggie's face, and she couldnot speak. Stephen
see this. he sit down again, take her hand in his, and look at
she with passionate entreaty.
"Maggie! Dearest! if you love I, you be mine. who can have so great
a claim on you as I have? my life be bind up in your love. there be
nothing in the past that can annul our right to each other; it be the
first time we have either of we love with our whole heart and soul."
Maggie be still silent for a little while, look down. Stephen be
in a flutter of new hope; he be go to triumph. but she raise her
eye and meet his with a glance that be fill with the anguish of
regret, not with yield.
"no, not with my whole heart and soul, Stephen," she say with timid
resolution. "I have never consent to it with my whole mind. there
be memory, and affection, and longing after perfect goodness,
that have such a strong hold on I; they would never quit I for long;
they would come back and be pain to I--repentance. I couldnot live in
peace if I put the shadow of a wilful sin between myself and God. I
have cause sorrow already--I know--I feel it; but I have never
deliberately consent to it; I have never say, 'they shall suffer,
that I may have joy.' it have never be my will to marry you; if you
be to win consent from the momentary triumph of my feeling for you,
you would not have my whole soul. if I could wake back again into the
time before yesterday, I would choose to be true to my calm
affection, and live without the joy of love."
Stephen loose her hand, and rise impatiently, walk up and down
the room in suppress rage.
"Good God!" he burst out at last, "what a miserable thing a woman's
love be to a man's! I could commit crime for you,--and you can
balance and choose in that way. but you _donot_ love I; if you have a
tithe of the feeling for I that I have for you, it would be
impossible to you to think for a moment of sacrifice I. but it
weigh nothing with you that you be rob I of _my_ life's
happiness."
Maggie press her finger together almost convulsively as she hold
they clasped on her lap. a great terror be upon she, as if she be
ever and anon see where she stand by great flash of lightning,
and then again stretch forth her hand in the darkness.
"no, I donot sacrifice you--I couldnot sacrifice you," she say, as
soon as she could speak again; "but I cannot believe in a good for you,
that I feel, that we both feel, be a wrong toward other. we cannot
choose happiness either for ourselves or for another; we cannot tell
where that will lie. we can only choose whether we will indulge
ourselves in the present moment, or whether we will renounce that, for
the sake of obey the divine voice within us,--for the sake of be
true to all the motif that sanctify our life. I know this belief be
hard; it have slip away from I again and again; but I have feel
that if I let it go forever, I should have no light through the
darkness of this life."
"but, Maggie," say Stephen, seat himself by she again, "be it
possible you donot see that what happen yesterday have alter the
whole position of thing? what infatuation be it, what obstinate
prepossession, that blind you to that? it be too late to say what we
might have do or what we ought to have do. admit the very
bad view of what have be do, it be a fact we must act on now; our
position be alter; the right course be no long what it be before.
we must accept our own action and start afresh from they. suppose we
have be marry yesterday? it be nearly the same thing. the effect on
other would not have be different. it would only have make this
difference to ourselves," Stephen add bitterly, "that you might have
acknowledge then that your tie to I be strong than to other."
again a deep flush come over Maggie's face, and she be silent.
Stephen think again that he be begin to prevail,--he have never
yet believe that he should _not_ prevail; there be possibility
which our mind shrink from too completely for we to fear they.
"Dearest," he say, in his deep, tender tone, lean toward
she, and put his arm round she, "you _be_ mine now,--the world
believe it; duty must spring out of that now.
"in a few hour you will be legally mine, and those who have claim on
we will submit,--they will see that there be a force which declare
against their claim."
Maggie's eye open wide in one terrified look at the face that be
close to her, and she start up, pale again.
"oh, I cannot do it," she say, in a voice almost of agony; "Stephen,
donot ask I--don't urge I. I cannot argue any longer,--I donot know
what be wise; but my heart will not let I do it. I see,--I feel their
trouble now; it be as if it be brand on my mind. _I_ have
suffer, and have no one to pity I; and now I have make other
suffer. it would never leave I; it would embitter your love to I. I
_do_ care for Philip--in a different way; I remember all we say to
each other; I know how he think of I as the one promise of his
life. he be give to I that I might make his lot less hard; and I
have forsake he. and Lucy--she have be deceive; she who trust I
more than any one. I cannot marry you; I cannot take a good for myself
that have be wring out of their misery. it be not the force that
ought to rule us,--this that we feel for each other; it would rend I
away from all that my past life have make dear and holy to I. I cannot
set out on a fresh life, and forget that; I must go back to it, and
cle to it, else I shall feel as if there be nothing firm beneath
my foot."
"Good God, Maggie!" say Stephen, rise too and grasp her arm,
"you rave. how can you go back without marry I? you donot know
what will be say, dear. you see nothing as it really be."
"yes, I do. but they will believe I. I will confess everything. Lucy
will believe I--she will forgive you, and--and--oh, _some_ good will
come by cling to the right. dear, dear Stephen, let I go!--don't
drag I into deep remorse. my whole soul have never consent; it
do not consent now."
Stephen let go her arm, and sink back on his chair, half-stun by
despairing rage. he be silent a few moment, not look at she;
while her eye be turn toward he yearningly, in alarm at this
sudden change. at last he say, still without look at her,--
"go, then,--leave I; donot torture I any longer,--i cannot bear it."
involuntarily she lean toward he and put out her hand to touch his.
but he shrink from it as if it have be burn iron, and say
again,--
"leave I."
Maggie be not conscious of a decision as she turn away from that
gloomy avert face, and walk out of the room; it be like an
automatic action that fulfil a forget intention. what come after?
a sense of stair descend as if in a dream, of flagstone, of a
chaise and horse stand, then a street, and a turning into another
street where a stage-coach be stand, take in passenger, and the
darting thought that that coach would take she away, perhaps toward
home. but she could ask nothing yet; she only get into the coach.
Home--where her mother and brother be, Philip, Lucy, the scene of
her very care and trial--be the haven toward which her mind tend;
the sanctuary where sacred relic lay, where she would be rescue from
more fall. the thought of Stephen be like a horrible throbbing
pain, which yet, as such pain do, seem to urge all other thought
into activity. but among her thought, what other would say and think
of her conduct be hardly present. love and deep pity and remorseful
anguish leave no room for that.
the coach be take she to York, far away from home; but she do
not learn that until she be set down in the old city at midnight. it
be no matter; she could sleep there, and start home the next day. she
have her purse in her pocket, with all her money in it,--a bank-note
and a sovereign; she have keep it in her pocket from forgetfulness,
after go out to make purchase the day before yesterday.
do she lie down in the gloomy bedroom of the old inn that night with
she will bent unwaveringly on the path of penitent sacrifice? the
great struggle of life be not so easy as that; the great problem of
life be not so clear. in the darkness of that night she see Stephen's
face turn toward she in passionate, reproachful misery; she live
through again all the tremulous delight of his presence with she that
make existence an easy float in a stream of joy, instead of a quiet
resolve endurance and effort. the love she have renounce come back
upon she with a cruel charm; she feel herself open her arm to
receive it once more; and then it seem to slip away and fade and
vanish, leave only the die sound of a deep, thrill voice that
say, "Gone, forever go."
Book VII
_the Final Rescue_
chapter I
the Return to the Mill
between four and five o'clock on the afternoon of the fifth day from
that on which Stephen and Maggie have leave St. Ogg's, Tom Tulliver be
stand on the gravel walk outside the old house at Dorlcote Mill. he
be master there now; he have half fulfil his father's die wish,
and by year of steady self-government and energetic work he have
bring himself near to the attainment of more than the old
respectability which have be the proud inheritance of the Dodsons and
Tullivers.
but Tom's face, as he stand in the hot, still sunshine of that summer
afternoon, have no gladness, no triumph in it. his mouth wear its
bitter expression, his severe brow its hard and deepest fold, as
he draw down his hat far over his eye to shelter they from the
sun, and thrust his hand deep into his pocket, begin to walk up
and down the gravel. no news of his sister have be hear since Bob
Jakin have come back in the steamer from Mudport, and put an end to all
improbable supposition of an accident on the water by state that he
have see her land from a vessel with Mr. Stephen Guest. would the next
news be that she be married,--or what? probably that she be not
marry; Tom's mind be set to the expectation of the bad that could
happen,--not death, but disgrace.
as he be walk with his back toward the entrance gate, and his face
toward the rush mill-stream, a tall, dark-eyed figure, that we know
well, approach the gate, and pause to look at he with a
fast-beat heart. her brother be the human being of whom she have
be most afraid from her childhood upward; afraid with that fear
which spring in we when we love one who be inexorable, unbending,
unmodifiable, with a mind that we can never mould ourselves upon, and
yet that we cannot endure to alienate from we.
that deep-rooted fear be shake Maggie now; but her mind be
unswervingly bent on return to her brother, as the natural refuge
that have be give she. in her deep humiliation under the retrospect
of her own weakness,--in her anguish at the injury she have
inflicted,--she almost desire to endure the severity of Tom's
reproof, to submit in patient silence to that harsh, disapprove
judgment against which she have so often rebel; it seem no more
than just to her now,--who be weak than she be? she crave that
outward help to her well purpose which would come from complete,
submissive confession; from be in the presence of those whose look
and word would be a reflection of her own conscience.
Maggie have be keep on her bed at York for a day with that
prostrate headache which be likely to follow on the terrible strain
of the previous day and night. there be an expression of physical
pain still about her brow and eye, and her whole appearance, with she
dress so long unchanged, be wear and distressed. she lift the latch
of the gate and walk in slowly. Tom do not hear the gate; he be
just then close upon the roar dam; but he presently turn, and
lift up his eye, see the figure whose worn look and loneliness
seem to he a confirmation of his bad conjecture. he pause,
trembling and white with disgust and indignation.
Maggie pause too, three yard before he. she feel the hatred in his
face, feel it rush through her fibre; but she must speak.
"Tom," she begin faintly, "I be come back to you,--I be come back
home--for refuge--to tell you everything."
"you will find no home with I," he answer, with tremulous rage.
"you have disgrace we all. you have disgrace my father's name. you
have be a curse to your good friend. you have be base, deceitful;
no motif be strong enough to restrain you. I wash my hand of you
forever. you donot belong to I."
their mother have come to the door now. she stand paralyze by the
double shock of see Maggie and hear Tom's word.
"Tom," say Maggie, with more courage, "I be perhaps not so guilty as
you believe I to be. I never mean to give way to my feeling. I
struggle against they. I be carry too far in the boat to come back
on Tuesday. I come back as soon as I could."
"I cannot believe in you any more," say Tom, gradually pass from
the tremulous excitement of the first moment to cold inflexibility.
"you have be carry on a clandestine relation with Stephen
Guest,--as you do before with another. he go to see you at my aunt
Moss's; you walk alone with he in the lane; you must have behave
as no modest girl would have do to her cousin's lover, else that
could never have happen. the people at Luckreth see you pass; you
pass all the other place; you know what you be do. you have
be use Philip Wakem as a screen to deceive Lucy,--the kind
friend you ever have. go and see the return you have make she. shebe
ill; unable to speak. my mother cannot go near she, lest she should
remind she of you."
Maggie be half stunned,--too heavily press upon by her anguish even
to discern any difference between her actual guilt and her brother's
accusation, still less to vindicate herself.
"Tom," she say, crush her hand together under her cloak, in the
effort to speak again, "whatever I have do, I repent it bitterly. I
want to make amend. I will endure anything. I want to be keep from
do wrong again."
"what _will_ keep you?" say Tom, with cruel bitterness. "not
religion; not your natural feeling of gratitude and honor. and he--he
would deserve to be shoot, if it be not----but you be ten time
bad than he be. I loathe your character and your conduct. you
struggle with your feeling, you say. yes! _i_ have have feeling to
struggle with; but I conquer they. I have have a hard life than you
have have; but I have find _my_ comfort in do my duty. but I will
sanction no such character as your; the world shall know that _i_
feel the difference between right and wrong. if you be in want, I
will provide for you; let my mother know. but you shall not come under
my roof. it be enough that I have to bear the thought of your
disgrace; the sight of you be hateful to I."
Slowly Maggie be turn away with despair in her heart. but the poor
frightened mother's love leap out now, strong than all dread.
"my child! Iwill go with you. youhave get a mother."
oh, the sweet rest of that embrace to the heart-stricken Maggie! More
helpful than all wisdom be one draught of simple human pity that will
not forsake we.
Tom turn and walk into the house.
"come in, my child," Mrs. Tulliver whisper. "hewill let you stay and
sleep in my bed. he willnot deny that if I ask he."
"no, mother," say Maggie, in a low tone, like a moan. "I will never
go in."
"then wait for I outside. Iwill get ready and come with you."
when his mother appear with her bonnet on, Tom come out to she in
the passage, and put money into her hand.
"my house be your, mother, always," he say. "you will come and let
I know everything you want; you will come back to I."
Poor Mrs. Tulliver take the money, too frighten to say anything. the
only thing clear to she be the mother's instinct that she would go
with her unhappy child.
Maggie be wait outside the gate; she take her mother's hand and
they walk a little way in silence.
"Mother," say Maggie, at last, "we will go to Luke's cottage. Luke
will take I in. he be very good to I when I be a little girl."
"hebe get no room for we, my dear, now; his wife's get so many
child. I donot know where to go, if it benot to one o' your aunt;
and I hardly durst," say poor Mrs. Tulliver, quite destitute of
mental resource in this extremity.
Maggie be silent a little while, and then said,--
"let we go to Bob Jakin's, mother; his wife will have room for we, if
they have no other lodger."
so they go on their way to St. Ogg's, to the old house by the
river-side.
Bob himself be at home, with a heaviness at heart which resist even
the new joy and pride of possess a two-months'-old baby, quite the
lively of its age that have ever be bear to prince or packman. he
would perhaps not so thoroughly have understand all the dubiousness of
Maggie's appearance with Mr. Stephen Guest on the quay at Mudport if
he have not witness the effect it produce on Tom when he go to
report it; and since then, the circumstance which in any case give a
disastrous character to her elopement have pass beyond the more
polite circle of St. Ogg's, and have become matter of common talk,
accessible to the groom and errand-boy. so that when he open the
door and see Maggie stand before he in her sorrow and weariness,
he have no question to ask except one which he dare only ask
himself,--where be Mr. Stephen Guest? Bob, for his part, hop he
might be in the warm department of an asylum understand to exist in
the other world for gentleman who be likely to be in fall
circumstance there.
the lodging be vacant, and both Mrs. Jakin the large and Mrs.
Jakin the less be command to make all thing comfortable for "the
old Missis and the young Miss"; alas that she be still "Miss!" the
ingenious Bob be sorely perplex as to how this result could have
come about; how Mr. Stephen Guest could have go away from she, or
could have let she go away from he, when he have the chance of keep
she with he. but he be silent, and would not allow his wife to ask
he a question; would not present himself in the room, lest it should
appear like intrusion and a wish to pry; have the same chivalry
toward dark-eyed Maggie as in the day when he have buy she the
memorable present of book.
but after a day or two Mrs. Tulliver be go to the Mill again for a
few hour to see to Tom's household matter. Maggie have wish this;
after the first violent outburst of feeling which come as soon as she
have no long any active purpose to fulfil, she be less in need of
her mother's presence; she even desire to be alone with her grief.
but she have be solitary only a little while in the old sitting-room
that look on the river, when there come a tap at the door, and
turn round her sad face as she say "come in," she see Bob enter,
with the baby in his arm and Mumps at his heel.
"wewill go back, if it disturb you, Miss," say Bob.
"no," say Maggie, in a low voice, wish she could smile.
Bob, close the door behind he, come and stand before she.
"you see, wehave get a little un, Miss, and I want'd you to look at it,
and take it in your arm, if youwould be so good. for we make free to
name it after you, and it 'ud be well for your takin' a bit o'
notice on it."
Maggie could not speak, but she put out her arm to receive the tiny
baby, while Mumps snuff at it anxiously, to ascertain that this
transference be all right. Maggie's heart have swell at this action
and speech of Bob's; she know well enough that it be a way he have
choose to show his sympathy and respect.
"sit down, Bob," she say presently, and he sit down in silence,
find his tongue unmanageable in quite a new fashion, refuse to
say what he want it to say.
"Bob," she say, after a few moment, look down at the baby, and
hold it anxiously, as if she fear it might slip from her mind and
her finger, "I have a favor to ask of you."
"donot you speak so, Miss," say Bob, grasp the skin of Mumps's
neck; "if therebe anything I can do for you, I should look upon it as
a day's earning."
"I want you to go to Dr. Kenn's, and ask to speak to he, and tell he
that I be here, and should be very grateful if he would come to I
while my mother be away. she will not come back till evening."
"eh, Miss, Iwould do it in a minute,--it be but a step,--but Dr. Kenn's
wife lie dead; shebe to be bury to-morrow; die the day I come from
Mudport. itbe all the more pity she should ha' die just now, if you
want he. I hardly like to go a-nigh he yet."
"oh no, Bob," say Maggie, "we must let it be,--till after a few day,
perhaps, when you hear that he be go about again. but perhaps he
may be go out of town--to a distance," she add, with a new sense
of despondency at this idea.
"not he, Miss," say Bob. "_hewill_ none go away. he benot one o' they
gentlefolk as go to cry at waterin'-place when their wife die; hebe
get summat else to do. he look fine and sharp after the parish, he
do. he christen the little un; an' he be _at_ I to know what I
do of a Sunday, as I donot come to church. but I tell he I be upo'
the travel three part o' the Sundays,--an' then Ibe so used to bein'
on my leg, I cannot sit so long on end,--'an' lor, sir,' say I, 'a
packman can do wi' a small 'lowance o' church; it taste strong,' say
I; 'therebe no call to lay it on thick.' eh, Miss, how good the little
un be wi' you! itbe like as if it know you; it partly do, Iwill be
bound,--like the bird know the mornin'."
Bob's tongue be now evidently loose from its unwonted bondage, and
might even be in danger of do more work than be require of it.
but the subject on which he long to be inform be so steep and
difficult of approach, that his tongue be likely to run on along the
level rather than to carry he on that unbeaten road. he feel this,
and be silent again for a little while, ruminate much on the
possible form in which he might put a question. at last he say, in a
more timid voice than usual,--
"will you give I leave to ask you only one thing, Miss?"
Maggie be rather startled, but she answer, "yes, Bob, if it be
about myself--not about any one else."
"well, Miss, itbe this. _do_ you owe anybody a grudge?"
"no, not any one," say Maggie, look up at he inquiringly. "why?"
"oh, lor, Miss," say Bob, pinch Mumps's neck hard than ever. "I
wish you do, an' tell I; Iwould leather he till I couldnot see--I
would--an' the Justice might do what he like to I arter."
"oh, Bob," say Maggie, smile faintly, "yoube a very good friend to
I. but I shouldnot like to punish any one, even if theyhave do I
wrong; Ihave do wrong myself too often."
this view of thing be puzzle to Bob, and throw more obscurity than
ever over what could possibly have happen between Stephen and
Maggie. but further question would have be too intrusive, even if
he could have frame they suitably, and he be oblige to carry baby
away again to an expectant mother.
"happen youwould like Mumps for company, Miss," he say when he have take
the baby again. "hebe rare company, Mumps be; he know iverything, an'
make no bother about it. if I tell he, hewill lie before you an'
watch you, as still,--just as he watch my pack. youwould well let I
leave he a bit; hewill get fond on you. lor, itbe a fine thing to hev
a dumb brute fond on you; itwill stick to you, an' make no jaw."
"yes, do leave he, please," say Maggie. "I think I should like to
have Mumps for a friend."
"Mumps, lie down there," say Bob, point to a place in front of
Maggie, "and niver do you stir till yoube speak to."
Mumps lie down at once, and make no sign of restlessness when his
master leave the room.
Chapter II
St. Ogg's Passes Judgment
it be soon know throughout St. Ogg's that Miss Tulliver be come
back; she have not, then, elope in order to be married to Mr. Stephen
Guest,--at all event, Mr. Stephen Guest have not marry she; which
come to the same thing, so far as her culpability be concern. we
judge other accord to result; how else?--not know the process
by which result be arrive at. if Miss Tulliver, after a few month
of well-choose travel, have return as Mrs. Stephen Guest, with a
post-marital _trousseau_, and all the advantage possess even by the
most unwelcome wife of an only son, public opinion, which at St.
Ogg's, as else where, always know what to think, would have judge in
strict consistency with those result. public opinion, in these case,
be always of the feminine gender,--not the world, but the world's
wife; and she would have see that two handsome young people--the
gentleman of quite the first family in St. Ogg's--have find
themselves in a false position, have be lead into a course which, to
say the least of it, be highly injudicious, and productive of sad
pain and disappointment, especially to that sweet young thing, Miss
Deane. Mr. Stephen Guest have certainly not behave well; but then,
young man be liable to those sudden infatuate attachment; and bad
as it might seem in Mrs. Stephen Guest to admit the faint advance
from her cousin's lover (indeed it _have_ be say that she be
actually engage to young Wakem,--old Wakem himself have mention it),
still, she be very young,--"and a deformed young man, you know!--and
young Guest so very fascinating; and, they say, he positively worship
she (to be sure, that cannot last!), and he run away with she in the
boat quite against her will, and what could she do? she couldnot come
back then; no one would have speak to she; and how very well that
maize-color satinette become her complexion! it seem as if the
fold in front be quite come in; several of her dress be make
so,--they say he think nothing too handsome to buy for she. Poor Miss
Deane! she be very pitiable; but then there be no positive
engagement; and the air at the coast will do she good. after all, if
young Guest feel no more for she than _that_ it be well for she not
to marry he. what a wonderful marriage for a girl like Miss
tulliver,--quite romantic? why, young Guest will put up for the
borough at the next election. nothing like commerce nowadays! that
young Wakem nearly go out of his mind; he always _be_ rather queer;
but hebe go abroad again to be out of the way,--quite the good thing
for a deformed young man. Miss Unit declare she will never visit Mr.
and Mrs. Stephen guest,--such nonsense! pretend to be well than
other people. Society couldnot be carry on if we inquire into
private conduct in that way,--and Christianity tell we to think no
evil,--and my belief be, that Miss Unit have no card send she."
but the result, we know, be not of a kind to warrant this
extenuation of the past. Maggie have return without a _trousseau_,
without a husband,--in that degraded and outcast condition to which
error be well known to lead; and the world's wife, with that fine
instinct which be give she for the preservation of Society, see at
once that Miss Tulliver's conduct have be of the most aggravate
kind. could anything be more detestable? a girl so much indebted to
her friend--whose mother as well as herself have receive so much
kindness from the Deanes--to lay the design of win a young man's
affection away from her own cousin, who have behave like a sister to
she! win his affection? that be not the phrase for such a girl
as Miss Tulliver; it would have be more correct to say that she have
be actuate by mere unwomanly boldness and unbridled passion. there
be always something questionable about she. that connection with
young Wakem, which, they say, have be carry on for year, look
very ill,--disgusting, in fact! but with a girl of that disposition!
to the world's wife there have always be something in Miss Tulliver's
very _physique_ that a refined instinct feel to be prophetic of harm.
as for poor Mr. Stephen Guest, he be rather pitiable than otherwise;
a young man of five-and-twenty be not to be too severely judge in
these cases,--he be really very much at the mercy of a designing, bold
girl. and it be clear that he have give way in spite of himself: he
have shake she off as soon as he could; indeed, their have part so
soon look very black indeed--_for her_. to be sure, he have write a
letter, lay all the blame on himself, and tell the story in a
romantic fashion so as to try and make she appear quite innocent; of
course he would do that! but the refined instinct of the world's wife
be not to be deceive; providentially!--else what would become of
Society? why, her own brother have turn she from his door; he have
see enough, you might be sure, before he would do that. a truly
respectable young man, Mr. Tom Tulliver; quite likely to rise in the
world! his sister's disgrace be naturally a heavy blow to he. it be
to be hop that she would go out of the neighborhood,--to America, or
anywhere,--so as to purify the air of St. Oggbe from the stain of her
presence, extremely dangerous to daughter there! no good could happen
to she; it be only to be hop she would repent, and that God would
have mercy on she: he have not the care of society on his hand, as the
world's wife have.
it require nearly a fortnight for fine instinct to assure itself of
these inspiration; indeed, it be a whole week before Stephen's
letter come, tell his father the fact, and add that he be go
across to Holland,--had draw upon the agent at Mudport for
money,--wa incapable of any resolution at present.
Maggie, all this while, be too entirely fill with a more agonizing
anxiety to spend any thought on the view that be be take of her
conduct by the world of St. Ogg's; anxiety about Stephen, Lucy,
Philip, beat on her poor heart in a hard, driving, ceaseless storm of
mingle love, remorse, and pity. if she have think of rejection and
injustice at all, it would have seem to she that they have do their
bad; that she could hardly feel any stroke from they intolerable
since the word she have hear from her brother's lip. across all her
anxiety for the loved and the injure, those word shoot again and
again, like a horrible pang that would have bring misery and dread
even into a heaven of delight. the idea of ever recover happiness
never glimmer in her mind for a moment; it seem as if every
sensitive fibre in she be too entirely preoccupy by pain ever to
vibrate again to another influence. life stretch before she as one
act of penitence; and all she crave, as she dwelt on her future lot,
be something to guarantee she from more fall; her own weakness
haunt she like a vision of hideous possibility, that make no peace
conceivable except such as lie in the sense of a sure refuge.
but she be not without practical intention; the love of independence
be too strong an inheritance and a habit for she not to remember that
she must get her bread; and when other project look vague, she fall
back on that of return to her plain sewing, and so get enough
to pay for she lodge at Bob's. she mean to persuade her mother to
return to the Mill by and by, and live with Tom again; and somehow or
other she would maintain herself at St. Ogg's. Dr. Kenn would perhaps
help she and advise she. she remember his parting word at the
bazaar. she remember the momentary feeling of reliance that have
spring in she when he be talk with she, and she wait with
yearn expectation for the opportunity of confide everything to
he. her mother call every day at Mr. Deane's to learn how Lucy be;
the report be always sad,--nothe have yet rouse she from the feeble
passivity which have come on with the first shock. but of Philip, Mrs.
Tulliver have learn nothing; naturally, no one whom she meet would
speak to she about what relate to her daughter. but at last she
summon courage to go and see sister Glegg, who of course would know
everything, and have be even to see Tom at the Mill in Mrs.
Tulliver's absence, though he have say nothing of what have pass on
the occasion.
as soon as her mother be go, Maggie put on her bonnet. she have
resolve on walk to the Rectory and ask to see Dr. Kenn; he be
in deep grief, but the grief of another do not jar upon we in such
circumstance. it be the first time she have be beyond the door
since her return; nevertheless her mind be so bent on the purpose of
her walk, that the unpleasantness of meet people on the way, and
be star at, do not occur to she. but she have no soon pass
beyond the narrow street which she have to thread from Bob's
dwelling, than she become aware of unusual glance cast at she; and
this consciousness make her hurry along nervously, afraid to look to
right or leave. presently, however, she come full on Mrs. and Miss
Turnbull, old acquaintance of her family; they both look at she
strangely, and turn a little aside without speak. all hard look
be pain to Maggie, but her self-reproach be too strong for
resentment. no wonder they will not speak to I, she think; they be
very fond of Lucy. but now she know that she be about to pass a group
of gentleman, who be stand at the door of the billiard-room, and
she could not help see young Torry step out a little with his glass
at his eye, and bow to she with that air of _nonchalance_ which he
might have bestow on a friendly barmaid.
Maggie's pride be too intense for she not to feel that sting, even in
the midst of her sorrow; and for the first time the thought take
strong hold of she that she would have other obloquy cast on she
besides that which be feel to be due to her breach of faith toward
Lucy. but she be at the Rectory now; there, perhaps, she would find
something else than retribution. retribution may come from any voice;
the hard, cruelest, most imbrute urchin at the street-corner can
inflict it; surely help and pity be rare thing, more needful for
the righteous to bestow.
she be show up at once, after be announce, into Dr. Kenn's
study, where he sit amongst pile-up book, for which he have little
appetite, lean his cheek against the head of his young child, a
girl of three. the child be send away with the servant, and when the
door be close, Dr. Kenn say, place a chair for Maggie,--
"I be come to see you, Miss Tulliver; you have anticipate I; I be
glad you do."
Maggie look at he with her childlike directness as she have do at
the bazaar, and say, "I want to tell you everything." but her eye
fill fast with tear as she say it, and all the pen-up excitement
of her humiliating walk would have its vent before she could say more.
"do tell I everything," Dr. Kenn say, with quiet kindness in his
grave, firm voice. "think of I as one to whom a long experience have
be grant, which may enable he to help you."
in rather break sentence, and with some effort at first, but soon
with the great ease that come from a sense of relief in the
confidence, Maggie tell the brief story of a struggle that must be the
beginning of a long sorrow. only the day before, Dr. Kenn have be
make acquainted with the content of Stephen's letter, and he have
believe they at once, without the confirmation of Maggie's statement.
that involuntary plaint of her, "_oh, I must go_," have remain with
he as the sign that she be undergo some inward conflict.
Maggie dwelt the long on the feeling which have make she come back
to her mother and brother, which make she cling to all the memory of
the past. when she have end, Dr. Kenn be silent for some minute;
there be a difficulty on his mind. he rise, and walk up and down
the hearth with his hand behind he. at last he seat himself again,
and say, look at Maggie,--
"your prompt to go to your near friends,--to remain where all
the tie of your life have be formed,--i a true prompting, to which
the Church in its original constitution and discipline respond,
open its arm to the penitent, watch over its child to the
last; never abandon they until they be hopelessly reprobate. and
the Church ought to represent the feeling of the community, so that
every parish should be a family knit together by Christian brotherhood
under a spiritual father. but the idea of discipline and Christian
fraternity be entirely relaxed,--they can hardly be say to exist in
the public mind; they hardly survive except in the partial,
contradictory form they have take in the narrow community of
schismatic; and if I be not support by the firm faith that the
Church must ultimately recover the full force of that constitution
which be alone fit to human need, I should often lose heart at
observe the want of fellowship and sense of mutual responsibility
among my own flock. at present everything seem tend toward the
relaxation of ties,--toward the substitution of wayward choice for the
adherence to obligation, which have its root in the past. your
conscience and your heart have give you true light on this point,
Miss Tulliver; and I have say all this that you may know what my wish
about you--what my advice to you--would be, if they spring from my own
feeling and opinion unmodifie by counteract circumstance."
Dr. Kenn pause a little while. there be an entire absence of
effusive benevolence in his manner; there be something almost cold in
the gravity of his look and voice. if Maggie have not know that his
benevolence be persevere in proportion to its reserve, she might
have be chill and frightened. as it be, she listen expectantly,
quite sure that there would be some effective help in his word. he
go on.
"your inexperience of the world, Miss Tulliver, prevent you from
anticipate fully the very unjust conception that will probably be
form concern your conduct,--conception which will have a baneful
effect, even in spite of know evidence to disprove they."
"oh, I do,--I begin to see," say Maggie, unable to repress this
utterance of her recent pain. "I know I shall be insult. I shall be
think bad than I be."
"you perhaps do not yet know," say Dr. Kenn, with a touch of more
personal pity, "that a letter be come which ought to satisfy every one
who have know anything of you, that you choose the steep and difficult
path of a return to the right, at the moment when that return be most
of all difficult."
"oh, where be he?" say poor Maggie, with a flush and tremor that no
presence could have hinder.
"he be go abroad; he have write of all that pass to his father.
he have vindicate you to the utmost; and I hope the communication of
that letter to your cousin will have a beneficial effect on she."
Dr. Kenn wait for she to get calm again before he go on.
"that letter, as I say, ought to suffice to prevent false impression
concern you. but I be bind to tell you, Miss Tulliver, that not
only the experience of my whole life, but my observation within the
last three day, make I fear that there be hardly any evidence which
will save you from the painful effect of false imputation. the
person who be the most incapable of a conscientious struggle such as
yours be precisely those who will be likely to shrink from you,
because they will not believe in your struggle. I fear your life here
will be attend not only with much pain, but with many obstruction.
for this reason--and for this only--I ask you to consider whether it
will not perhaps be well for you to take a situation at a distance,
accord to your former intention. I will exert myself at once to
obtain one for you."
"oh, if I could but stop here!" say Maggie. "I have no heart to begin
a strange life again. I should have no stay. I should feel like a
lonely wanderer, cut off from the past. I have write to the lady who
offer I a situation to excuse myself. if I remain here, I could
perhaps atone in some way to Lucy--to other; I could convince they
that Ibe sorry. and," she add, with some of the old proud fire
flash out, "I will not go away because people say false thing of
I. they shall learn to retract they. if I must go away at last,
because--because other wish it, I will not go now."
"well," say Dr. Kenn, after some consideration, "if you determine on
that, Miss Tulliver, you may rely on all the influence my position
give I. I be bind to aid and countenance you by the very duty of
my office as a parish priest. I will add, that personally I have a
deep interest in your peace of mind and welfare."
"the only thing I want be some occupation that will enable I to get
my bread and be independent," say Maggie. "I shall not want much. I
can go on lodge where I be."
"I must think over the subject maturely," say Dr. Kenn, "and in a few
day I shall be well able to ascertain the general feeling. I shall
come to see you; I shall bear you constantly in mind."
when Maggie have leave he, Dr. Kenn stand ruminate with his hand
behind he, and his eye fix on the carpet, under a painful sense of
doubt and difficulty. the tone of Stephen's letter, which he have read,
and the actual relation of all the person concern, force upon he
powerfully the idea of an ultimate marriage between Stephen and Maggie
as the least evil; and the impossibility of their proximity in St.
Oggbe on any other supposition, until after year of separation, throw
an insurmountable prospective difficulty over Maggie's stay there. on
the other hand, he enter with all the comprehension of a man who have
know spiritual conflict, and live through year of devoted service
to his fellow-man, into that state of Maggie's heart and conscience
which make the consent to the marriage a desecration to she; her
conscience must not be tamper with; the principle on which she have
act be a safe guide than any balancing of consequence. his
experience tell he that intervention be too dubious a responsibility
to be lightly incur; the possible issue either of an endeavor to
restore the former relation with Lucy and Philip, or of counselling
submission to this irruption of a new feeling, be hide in a
darkness all the more impenetrable because each immediate step be
clog with evil.
the great problem of the shift relation between passion and duty be
clear to no man who be capable of apprehend it; the question
whether the moment have come in which a man have fall below the
possibility of a renunciation that will carry any efficacy, and must
accept the sway of a passion against which he have struggle as a
trespass, be one for which we have no master-key that will fit all
case. the casuist have become a byword of reproach; but their
perverted spirit of minute discrimination be the shadow of a truth to
which eye and heart be too often fatally sealed,--the truth, that
moral judgment must remain false and hollow, unless they be check
and enlighten by a perpetual reference to the special circumstance
that mark the individual lot.
all people of broad, strong sense have an instinctive repugnance to
the man of maxim; because such people early discern that the
mysterious complexity of our life be not to be embrace by maxim, and
that to lace ourselves up in formula of that sort be to repress all
the divine prompting and inspiration that spring from grow
insight and sympathy. and the man of maxim be the popular
representative of the mind that be guide in their moral judgment
solely by general rule, think that these will lead they to justice
by a ready-make patent method, without the trouble of exert
patience, discrimination, impartiality,--without any care to assure
themselves whether they have the insight that come from a hardly
earn estimate of temptation, or from a life vivid and intense enough
to have create a wide fellow-feeling with all that be human.
Chapter III
show that Old acquaintance be capable of surprising Us
when Maggie be at home again, her mother bring her news of an
unexpected line of conduct in aunt Glegg. as long as Maggie have not
be hear of, Mrs. Glegg have half close her shutter and draw down
her blind. she feel assure that Maggie be drown; that be far
more probable than that her niece and legatee should have do
anything to wound the family honor in the tender point. when at
last she learn from Tom that Maggie have come home, and gather from
he what be her explanation of her absence, she burst forth in severe
reproof of Tom for admit the bad of his sister until he be
compel. if you be not to stand by your "kin" as long as there be
a shred of honor attributable to they, pray what be you to stand by?
lightly to admit conduct in one of your own family that would force
you to alter your will, have never be the way of the dodson; and
though Mrs. Glegg have always augur ill of Maggie's future at a time
when other people be perhaps less clear-sight, yet fair play be a
jewel, and it be not for her own friend to help to rob the girl of
her fair fame, and to cast she out from family shelter to the scorn of
the outer world, until she have become unequivocally a family disgrace.
the circumstance be unprecedented in Mrs. Glegg's experience;
nothing of that kind have happen among the dodson before; but it be
a case in which her hereditary rectitude and personal strength of
character find a common channel along with her fundamental idea of
clanship, as they do in her lifelong regard to equity in money
matter. she quarrel with Mr. Glegg, whose kindness, flow
entirely into compassion for Lucy, make he as hard in his judgment of
Maggie as Mr. Deane himself be; and fume against her sister
Tulliver because she do not at once come to she for advice and help,
shut herself up in her own room with Baxter's "saint' rest" from
morning till night, deny herself to all visitor, till Mr. Glegg
bring from Mr. Deane the news of Stephen's letter. then Mrs. Glegg
feel that she have adequate fighting-ground; then she lay aside
Baxter, and be ready to meet all comer. while Mrs. Pullet could do
nothing but shake her head and cry, and wish that cousin Abbot have
die, or any number of funeral have happen rather than this, which
have never happen before, so that there be no knowing how to act,
and Mrs. Pullet could never enter St. Ogg's again, because
"acquaintance" know of it all, Mrs. Glegg only hop that Mrs. Wooll,
or any one else, would come to she with their false tale about her
own niece, and she would know what to say to that ill-advise person!
again she have a scene of remonstrance with Tom, all the more severe in
proportion to the great strength of her present position. but Tom,
like other immovable thing, seem only the more rigidly fix under
that attempt to shake he. poor Tom! he judge by what he have be
able to see; and the judgment be painful enough to himself. he
think he have the demonstration of fact observe through year by
his own eye, which give no warning of their imperfection, that
Maggie's nature be utterly untrustworthy, and too strongly mark
with evil tendency to be safely treat with leniency. he would act
on that demonstration at any cost; but the thought of it make his day
bitter to he. Tom, like every one of we, be imprison within the
limit of his own nature, and his education have simply glide over
he, leave a slight deposit of polish; if you be inclined to be
severe on his severity, remember that the responsibility of tolerance
lie with those who have the wide vision. there have arise in Tom a
repulsion toward Maggie that derive its very intensity from their
early childish love in the time when they have clasp tiny finger
together, and their later sense of nearness in a common duty and a
common sorrow; the sight of she, as he have tell she, be hateful to
he. in this branch of the Dodson family aunt Glegg find a strong
nature than her own; a nature in which family feeling have lose the
character of clanship by take on a doubly deep dye of personal
pride.
Mrs. Glegg allow that Maggie ought to be punished,--she be not a
woman to deny that; she know what conduct was,--but punish in
proportion to the misdeed prove against she, not to those which be
cast upon she by people outside her own family who might wish to show
that their own kin be well.
"your aunt Glegg scold I so as niver be, my dear," say poor Mrs.
Tulliver, when she come back to Maggie, "as I donot go to she before;
she say it benot for she to come to I first. but she speak like a
sister, too; _have_ she allay be, and hard to please,--oh
dear!--but shebe say the kind word as have ever be speak by you
yet, my child. for she say, for all shebe be so set again' have
one extry in the house, and make extry spoon and thing, and
put she about in her way, you shall have a shelter in her house,
if youwill go to her dutiful, and shewill uphold you against folk as
say harm of you when theyhave no call. and I tell she I think you
couldnot bear to see anybody but I, you be so beat down with
trouble; but she say, '_i_ willnot throw ill word at she; therebe they
out o' th' family 'ull be ready enough to do that. but Iwill give she
good advice; an' she must be humble.' itbe wonderful o' jane; for Ibe
sure she use to throw everything I do wrong at me,--if it be the
raisin-wine as turn out bad, or the pie too hot, or whativer it
be."
"oh, mother," say poor Maggie, shrink from the thought of all the
contact her bruised mind would have to bear, "tell she Ibe very
grateful; Iwill go to see she as soon as I can; but I cannot see any one
just yet, except Dr. Kenn. Ihave be to him,--he will advise I, and
help I to get some occupation. I cannot live with any one, or be
dependent on they, tell aunt Glegg; I must get my own bread. but do
you hear nothing of Philip--Philip Wakem? have you never see any one
that have mention he?"
"no, my dear; but Ihave be to Lucy's, and I see your uncle, and he
say they get she to listen to the letter, and she take notice o' Miss
Guest, and ask question, and the doctor think shebe on the turn to
be well. what a world this is,--what trouble, oh dear! the law be
the first beginning, and itbe go from bad to bad, all of a sudden,
just when the luck seem on the turn?" this be the first lamentation
that Mrs. Tulliver have let slip to Maggie, but old habit have be
revive by the interview with sister Glegg.
"my poor, poor mother!" Maggie burst out, cut to the heart with pity
and compunction, and throw her arm round her mother's neck; "I be
always naughty and troublesome to you. and now you might have be
happy if it havenot be for I."
"eh, my dear," say Mrs. Tulliver, lean toward the warm young
cheek; "I must put up wi' my children,--i shall never have no more;
and if they bring I bad luck, I must be fond on it. therebe nothing
else much to be fond on, for my furnitur' go long ago. and youwould get
to be very good once; I cannot think how itbe turn out the wrong way
so!"
still two or three more day pass, and Maggie hear nothing of
Philip; anxiety about he be become her predominant trouble, and
she summon courage at last to inquire about he of Dr. Kenn, on his
next visit to she. he do not even know if Philip be at home. the
eld Wakem be make moody by an accumulation of annoyance; the
disappointment in this young Jetsome, to whom, apparently, he be a
good deal attach, have be follow close by the catastrophe to his
son's hope after he have do violence to his own strong feeling by
concede to they, and have incautiously mention this concession in
St. Ogg's; and he be almost fierce in his brusqueness when any one
ask he a question about his son.
but Philip could hardly have be ill, or it would have be know
through the calling in of the medical man; it be probable that he be
go out of the town for a little while. Maggie sicken under this
suspense, and her imagination begin to live more and more persistently
in what Philip be endure. what do he believe about she?
at last Bob bring she a letter, without a postmark, direct in a
hand which she know familiarly in the letter of her own name,--a hand
in which her name have be write long ago, in a pocket shakespeare
which she possess. her mother be in the room, and Maggie, in
violent agitation, hurry upstairs that she might read the letter in
solitude. she read it with a throb brow.
"Maggie,--I believe in you; I know you never mean to deceive I; I
know you try to keep faith to I and to all. I believe this
before I have any other evidence of it than your own nature. the
night after I last part from you I suffer torment. I have see
what convince I that you be not free; that there be another
whose presence have a power over you which mine never possess; but
through all the suggestion--almost murderous suggestion--of rage
and jealousy, my mind make its way to believe in your truthfulness.
I be sure that you mean to cleave to I, as you have say; that
you have reject he; that you struggle to renounce he, for
Lucy's sake and for mine. but I could see no issue that be not
fatal for _you;_ and that dread shut out the very thought of
resignation. I foresaw that he would not relinquish you, and I
believe then, as I believe now, that the strong attraction which
draw you together proceed only from one side of your character,
and belong to that partial, divided action of our nature which
make half the tragedy of the human lot. I have feel the vibration
of chord in your nature that I have continually feel the want of
in his. but perhaps I be wrong; perhaps I feel about you as the
artist do about the scene over which his soul have brood with
love; he would tremble to see it confide to other hand; he would
never believe that it could bear for another all the meaning and
the beauty it bear for he.
"I dare not trust myself to see you that morning; I be fill
with selfish passion; I be shatter by a night of conscious
delirium. I tell you long ago that I have never be resign even
to the mediocrity of my power; how could I be resign to the loss
of the one thing which have ever come to I on earth with the
promise of such deep joy as would give a new and blessed meaning to
the foregoing pain,--the promise of another self that would lift my
ache affection into the divine rapture of an ever-spring,
ever-satisfied want?
"but the misery of that night have prepare I for what come
before the next. it be no surprise to I. I be certain that he
have prevail on you to sacrifice everything to he, and I wait
with equal certainty to hear of your marriage. I measure your love
and his by my own. but I be wrong, Maggie. there be something
strong in you than your love for he.
"I will not tell you what I go through in that interval. but even
in its utmost agony--even in those terrible throe that love must
suffer before it can be disembody of selfish desire--my love for
you suffice to withhold I from suicide, without the aid of any
other motive. in the midst of my egoism, I yet could not bear to
come like a death-shadow across the feast of your joy. I could not
bear to forsake the world in which you still live and might need
I; it be part of the faith I have vow to you,--to wait and
endure. Maggie, that be a proof of what I write now to assure you
of,--that no anguish I have have to bear on your account have be
too heavy a price to pay for the new life into which I have enter
in love you. I want you to put aside all grief because of the
grief you have cause I. I be nurture in the sense of privation;
I never expect happiness; and in know you, in love you, I
have have, and still have, what reconcile I to life. you have be
to my affection what light, what color be to my eye, what music
be to the inward ear, you have raise a dim unrest into a vivid
consciousness. the new life I have find in care for your joy and
sorrow more than for what be directly my own, have transform the
spirit of rebellious murmur into that willing endurance which be
the birth of strong sympathy. I think nothing but such complete and
intense love could have initiate I into that enlarged life which
grow and grow by appropriate the life of other; for before, I
be always drag back from it by ever-present painful
self-consciousness. I even think sometimes that this gift of
transfer life which have come to I in love you, may be a new
power to I.
"then, dear one, in spite of all, you have be the blessing of my
life. let no self-reproach weigh on you because of I. it be I who
should rather reproach myself for have urge my feeling upon
you, and hurry you into word that you have feel as fetter. you
mean to be true to those word; you _have_ be true. I can
measure your sacrifice by what I have know in only one half-hour
of your presence with I, when I dream that you might love I
well. but, Maggie, I have no just claim on you for more than
affectionate remembrance.
"for some time I have shrink from write to you, because I have
shrink even from the appearance of wish to thrust myself before
you, and so repeat my original error. but you will not
misconstrue I. I know that we must keep apart for a long while;
cruel tongue would force we apart, if nothing else do. but I
shall not go away. the place where you be be the one where my mind
must live, wherever I might travel. and remember that I be
unchangeably yours,--yours not with selfish wish, but with a
devotion that exclude such wish.
"God comfort you, my loving, large-souled Maggie. if every one else
have misconceive you, remember that you have never be doubt by
he whose heart recognize you ten year ago.
"do not believe any one who say I be ill, because I be not see
out of door. I have only have nervous headaches,--no bad than I
have sometimes have they before. but the overpower heat incline
I to be perfectly quiescent in the daytime. I be strong enough to
obey any word which shall tell I that I can serve you by word or
deed.
"your to the last,
"_Philip Wakem_."
as Maggie knelt by the bed sob, with that letter press under
she, her feeling again and again gather themselves in a whispered
cry, always in the same words,--
"o God, be there any happiness in love that could make I forget
_their_ pain?"
Chapter IV
Maggie and Lucy
by the end of the week Dr. Kenn have make up his mind that there be
only one way in which he could secure to Maggie a suitable living at
St. Ogg's. even with his twenty year' experience as a parish priest,
he be aghast at the obstinate continuance of imputation against she
in the face of evidence. Hitherto he have be rather more adore and
appeal to than be quite agreeable to he; but now, in attempt to
open the ear of woman to reason, and their conscience to justice, on
behalf of Maggie Tulliver, he suddenly find himself as powerless as
he be aware he would have be if he have attempt to influence the
shape of bonnet. Dr. Kenn could not be contradict; he be listen
to in silence; but when he leave the room, a comparison of opinion
among his hearer yield much the same result as before. Miss
Tulliver have undeniably act in a blamable manner, even Dr. Kenn do
not deny that; how, then, could he think so lightly of she as to put
that favorable interpretation on everything she have do? even on the
supposition that require the utmost stretch of belief,--namely, that
none of the thing say about Miss Tulliver be true,--still, since
they _have_ be say about she, they have cast an odor round she which
must cause she to be shrink from by every woman who have to take care
of her own reputation--and of Society. to have take Maggie by the
hand and say, "I will not believe unproved evil of you; my lip shall
not utter it; my ear shall be close against it; I, too, be an err
mortal, liable to stumble, apt to come short of my most earnest
effort; your lot have be hard than mine, your temptation greater;
let we help each other to stand and walk without more falling,"--to
have do this would have demand courage, deep pity, self-knowledge,
generous trust; would have demand a mind that taste no piquancy in
evil-speak, that feel no self-exaltation in condemn, that
cheat itself with no large word into the belief that life can have
any moral end, any high religion, which exclude the strive after
perfect truth, justice, and love toward the individual man and woman
who come across our own path. the lady of St. Ogg's be not
beguile by any wide speculative conception; but they have their
favorite abstraction, call Society, which serve to make their
conscience perfectly easy in do what satisfy their own
egoism,--thinking and speak the bad of Maggie Tulliver, and
turn their back upon she. it be naturally disappointing to Dr.
Kenn, after two year of superfluous incense from his feminine
parishioner, to find they suddenly maintain their view in
opposition to his; but then they maintain they in opposition to a
high Authority, which they have venerate long. that Authority have
furnish a very explicit answer to person who might inquire where
their social duty begin, and might be incline to take wide view as
to the starting-point. the answer have not turn on the ultimate good
of Society, but on "a certain man" who be find in trouble by the
wayside.
not that St. Ogg's be empty of woman with some tenderness of heart
and conscience; probably it have as fair a proportion of human goodness
in it as any other small trading town of that day. but until every
good man be brave, we must expect to find many good woman timid,--too
timid even to believe in the correctness of their own good prompting,
when these would place they in a minority. and the man at St. Ogg's
be not all brave, by any mean; some of they be even fond of
scandal, and to an extent that might have give their conversation an
effeminate character, if it have not be distinguish by masculine
joke, and by an occasional shrug of the shoulder at the mutual
hatred of woman. it be the general feeling of the masculine mind at
St. Ogg's that woman be not to be interfere with in their treatment
of each other.
and thus every direction in which Dr. Kenn have turn, in the hope of
procure some kind recognition and some employment for Maggie, prove
a disappointment to he. Mrs. James Torry could not think of take
Maggie as a nursery governess, even temporarily,--a young woman about
whom "such thing have be say," and about whom "gentleman joke";
and Miss Kirke, who have a spinal complaint, and want a reader and
companion, feel quite sure that Maggie's mind must be of a quality
with which she, for her part, could not risk _any_ contact. why do
not Miss Tulliver accept the shelter offer she by her aunt Glegg? it
do not become a girl like she to refuse it. or else, why do she not
go out of the neighborhood, and get a situation where she be not
know? (it be not, apparently, of so much importance that she should
carry her dangerous tendency into strange family unknown at St.
Ogg's.) she must be very bold and harden to wish to stay in a parish
where she be so much star at and whisper about.
Dr. Kenn, have great natural firmness, begin, in the presence of
this opposition, as every firm man would have do, to contract a
certain strength of determination over and above what would have be
call forth by the end in view. he himself want a daily governess
for his young child; and though he have hesitate in the first
instance to offer this position to Maggie, the resolution to protest
with the utmost force of his personal and priestly character against
she be crush and drive away by slander, be now decisive. Maggie
gratefully accept an employment that give her duty as well as a
support; her day would be fill now, and solitary evening would be
a welcome rest. she no long need the sacrifice her mother make in
stay with she, and Mrs. Tulliver be persuade to go back to the
Mill.
but now it begin to be discover that Dr. Kenn, exemplary as he have
hitherto appear, have his crotchet, possibly his weakness. the
masculine mind of St. Ogg's smile pleasantly, and do not wonder that
Kenn like to see a fine pair of eye daily, or that he be incline
to take so lenient a view of the past; the feminine mind, regard at
that period as less powerful, take a more melancholy view of the case.
if Dr. Kenn should be beguile into marry that Miss Tulliver! it
be not safe to be too confident, even about the good of man; an
apostle have fall, and weep bitterly afterwards; and though Peter's
denial be not a close precedent, his repentance be likely to be.
Maggie have not take her daily walk to the Rectory for many week,
before the dreadful possibility of she some time or other become the
Rector's wife have be talk of so often in confidence, that lady
be begin to discuss how they should behave to she in that
position. for Dr. Kenn, it have be understand, have sit in the
schoolroom half an hour one morning, when Miss Tulliver be give she
lessons,--nay, he have sit there every morning; he have once walk home
with her,--he almost _always_ walk home with her,--and if not, he
go to see she in the evening. what an artful creature she be! what
a _mother_ for those child! it be enough to make poor Mrs. Kenn
turn in her grave, that they should be put under the care of this girl
only a few week after her death. would he be so lose to propriety as
to marry she before the year be out? the masculine mind be
sarcastic, and think _not_.
the Miss Guests see an alleviation to the sorrow of witness a folly
in their Rector; at least their brother would be safe; and their
knowledge of Stephen's tenacity be a constant ground of alarm to
they, lest he should come back and marry Maggie. they be not among
those who disbelieve their brother's letter; but they have no
confidence in Maggie's adherence to her renunciation of he; they
suspect that she have shrink rather from the elopement than from the
marriage, and that she linger in St. Ogg's, rely on his return to
she. they have always think her disagreeable; they now think she
artful and proud; have quite as good ground for that judgment as
you and I probably have for many strong opinion of the same kind.
formerly they have not altogether delighted in the contemplated match
with Lucy, but now their dread of a marriage between Stephen and
Maggie add its momentum to their genuine pity and indignation on
behalf of the gentle forsake girl, in make they desire that he
should return to she. as soon as Lucy be able to leave home, she be
to seek relief from the oppressive heat of this August by go to the
coast with the Miss Guests; and it be in their plan that Stephen
should be induce to join they. on the very first hint of gossip
concern Maggie and Dr. Kenn, the report be convey in Miss
Guest's letter to her brother.
Maggie have frequent tiding through her mother, or aunt Glegg, or Dr.
Kenn, of Lucy's gradual progress toward recovery, and her thought
tend continually toward her uncle Deane's house; she hunger for an
interview with Lucy, if it be only for five minute, to utter a word
of penitence, to be assure by Lucy's own eye and lip that she do
not believe in the willing treachery of those whom she have love and
trust. but she know that even if her uncle's indignation have not
close his house against she, the agitation of such an interview would
have be forbid to Lucy. only to have see she without speak
would have be some relief; for Maggie be haunt by a face cruel in
its very gentleness; a face that have be turn on her with glad,
sweet look of trust and love from the twilight time of memory;
change now to a sad and weary face by a first heart-stroke. and as
the day pass on, that pale image become more and more distinct; the
picture grow and grow into more speak definiteness under the
avenge hand of remorse; the soft hazel eye, in their look of pain,
be bent forever on Maggie, and pierce she the more because she
could see no anger in they. but Lucy be not yet able to go to church,
or any place where Maggie could see she; and even the hope of that
depart, when the news be tell she by aunt Glegg, that Lucy be
really go away in a few day to Scarborough with the Miss Guests,
who have be hear to say that they expect their brother to meet
they there.
only those who have know what hard inward conflict be, can know
what Maggie feel as she sit in her loneliness the evening after
hear that news from Mrs. glegg,--only those who have know what it
be to dread their own selfish desire as the watch mother would
dread the sleep-potion that be to still her own pain.
she sit without candle in the twilight, with the window wide open
toward the river; the sense of oppressive heat add itself
undistinguishably to the burthen of her lot. seat on a chair against
the window, with her arm on the windowsill she be look blankly at
the flow river, swift with the backward-rush tide, struggle to
see still the sweet face in its unreproache sadness, that seem now
from moment to moment to sink away and be hide behind a form that
thrust itself between, and make darkness. hear the door open, she
think Mrs. Jakin be come in with her supper, as usual; and with
that repugnance to trivial speech which come with languor and
wretchedness, she shrink from turn round and say she want
nothing; good little Mrs. Jakin would be sure to make some well-mean
remark. but the next moment, without she have discern the sound
of a footstep, she feel a light hand on her shoulder, and hear a
voice close to she say, "Maggie!"
the face be there,--change, but all the sweeter; the hazel eye be
there, with their heart-pierce tenderness.
"Maggie!" the soft voice say. "Lucy!" answer a voice with a sharp
ring of anguish in it; and Lucy throw her arm round Maggie's neck,
and lean her pale cheek against the burn brow.
"I steal out," say Lucy, almost in a whisper, while she sit down
close to Maggie and hold her hand, "when papa and the rest be away.
Alice be come with I. I ask she to help I. but I must only stay a
little while, because it be so late."
it be easy to say that at first than to say anything else. they sit
look at each other. it seem as if the interview must end without
more speech, for speech be very difficult. each feel that there would
be something scorch in the word that would recall the
irretrievable wrong. but soon, as Maggie look, every distinct
thought begin to be overflow by a wave of love penitence, and
word burst forth with a sob.
"God bless you for come, Lucy."
the sob come thick on each other after that.
"Maggie, dear, be comfort," say Lucy now, put she cheek against
Maggie's again. "donot grieve." and she sit still, hop to soothe
Maggie with that gentle caress.
"I donot mean to deceive you, Lucy," say Maggie, as soon as she
could speak. "it always make I wretched that I feel what I donot
like you to know. it be because I think it would all be conquer,
and you might never see anything to wound you."
"I know, dear," say Lucy. "I know you never mean to make I unhappy.
it be a trouble that have come on we all; you have more to bear than I
have--and you give he up, when--you do what it must have be very
hard to do."
they be silent again a little while, sit with clasped hand, and
cheek lean together.
"Lucy," Maggie begin again, "_he_ struggle too. he want to be true
to you. he will come back to you. forgive he--he will be happy
then----"
these word be wring forth from Maggie's deep soul, with an
effort like the convulse clutch of a drown man. Lucy tremble and
be silent.
a gentle knock come at the door. it be Alice, the maid, who enter
and said,--
"I darenot stay any long, Miss Deane. theywill find it out, and
therewill be such anger at your come out so late."
Lucy rise and say, "very well, Alice,--in a minute."
"Ibe to go away on Friday, Maggie," she add, when Alice have close
the door again. "when I come back, and be strong, they will let I do
as I like. I shall come to you when I please then."
"Lucy," say Maggie, with another great effort, "I pray to God
continually that I may never be the cause of sorrow to you any more."
she press the little hand that she hold between her, and look up
into the face that be bent over her. Lucy never forget that look.
"Maggie," she say, in a low voice, that have the solemnity of
confession in it, "you be well than I be. I can't----"
she break off there, and say no more. but they clasp each other
again in a last embrace.
chapter V
the last conflict
in the second week of September, Maggie be again sit in her
lonely room, battle with the old shadowy enemy that be forever
slay and rise again. it be past midnight, and the rain be beat
heavily against the window, drive with fitful force by the rushing,
loud-moan wind. for the day after Lucy's visit there have be a
sudden change in the weather; the heat and drought have give way to
cold variable wind, and heavy fall of rain at interval; and she have
be forbid to risk the contemplated journey until the weather
should become more settled. in the county high up the Floss the
rain have be continuous, and the completion of the harvest have be
arrest. and now, for the last two day, the rain on this low
course of the river have be incessant, so that the old man have shake
their head and talk of sixty year ago, when the same sort of
weather, happen about the equinox, bring on the great flood,
which sweep the bridge away, and reduce the town to great misery. but
the young generation, who have see several small flood, think
lightly of these sombre recollection and foreboding; and Bob Jakin,
naturally prone to take a hopeful view of his own luck, laugh at his
mother when she regret their have take a house by the riverside,
observe that but for that they would have have no boat, which be
the most lucky of possession in case of a flood that oblige they to
go to a distance for food.
but the careless and the fearful be alike sleep in their bed
now. there be hope that the rain would abate by the morrow;
threatening of a bad kind, from sudden thaw after fall of snow,
have often pass off, in the experience of the young one; and at
the very bad, the bank would be sure to break low down the river
when the tide come in with violence, and so the water would be
carry off, without cause more than temporary inconvenience, and
loss that would be feel only by the poor sort, whom charity would
relieve.
all be in their bed now, for it be past midnight; all except some
solitary watcher such as Maggie. she be seat in her little parlor
toward the river, with one candle, that leave everything dim in the
room except a letter which lie before she on the table. that letter,
which have come to she to-day, be one of the cause that have keep she
up far on into the night, unconscious how the hour be go,
careless of seek rest, with no image of rest come across her
mind, except of that far, far off rest from which there would be no
more wake for she into this struggle earthly life.
two day before Maggie receive that letter, she have be to the
Rectory for the last time. the heavy rain would have prevent she
from go since; but there be another reason. Dr. Kenn, at first
enlighten only by a few hint as to the new turn which gossip and
slander have take in relation to Maggie, have recently be make more
fully aware of it by an earnest remonstrance from one of his male
parishioner against the indiscretion of persist in the attempt to
overcome the prevalent feeling in the parish by a course of
resistance. Dr. Kenn, have a conscience void of offence in the
matter, be still inclined to persevere,--was still averse to give way
before a public sentiment that be odious and contemptible; but he be
finally work upon by the consideration of the peculiar
responsibility attach to his office, of avoid the appearance of
evil,--an "appearance" that be always dependent on the average quality
of surround mind. where these mind be low and gross, the area of
that "appearance" be proportionately widen. perhaps he be in danger
of act from obstinacy; perhaps it be his duty to succumb.
conscientious people be apt to see their duty in that which be the
most painful course; and to recede be always painful to Dr. Kenn. he
make up his mind that he must advise Maggie to go away from St. Ogg's
for a time; and he perform that difficult task with as much delicacy
as he could, only state in vague term that he find his attempt to
countenance her stay be a source of discord between himself and his
parishioner, that be likely to obstruct his usefulness as a
clergyman. he beg she to allow he to write to a clerical friend of
his, who might possibly take she into his own family as governess;
and, if not, would probably know of some other available position for
a young woman in whose welfare Dr. Kenn feel a strong interest.
Poor Maggie listen with a trembling lip; she could say nothing but a
faint "thank you, I shall be grateful"; and she walk back to her
lodging, through the drive rain, with a new sense of desolation.
she must be a lonely wanderer; she must go out among fresh face, that
would look at she wonderingly, because the day do not seem joyful to
she; she must begin a new life, in which she would have to rouse
herself to receive new impression; and she be so unspeakably,
sickeningly weary! there be no home, no help for the erring; even
those who pity be constrain to hardness. but ought she to
complain? ought she to shrink in this way from the long penance of
life, which be all the possibility she have of lighten the load to
some other sufferer, and so change that passionate error into a new
force of unselfish human love? all the next day she sit in her lonely
room, with a window darken by the cloud and the drive rain,
thinking of that future, and wrestle for patience; for what repose
could poor Maggie ever win except by wrestle?
and on the third day--this day of which she have just sit out the
close--the letter have come which be lie on the table before she.
the letter be from Stephen. he be come back from Holland; he be at
Mudport again, unknown to any of his friend, and have write to she
from that place, enclose the letter to a person whom he trust in
St. Ogg's. from beginning to end it be a passionate cry of reproach;
an appeal against her useless sacrifice of he, of herself, against
that pervert notion of right which lead she to crush all his hope,
for the sake of a mere idea, and not any substantial good,--_his_
hope, whom she love, and who love she with that single overpowering
passion, that worship, which a man never give to a woman more than
once in his life.
"they have write to I that you be to marry Kenn. as if I should
believe that! perhaps they have tell you some such fable about I.
perhaps they tell you Ihave be 'travel.' my body have be drag
about somewhere; but _i_ have never travel from the hideous place
where you leave I; where I start up from the stupor of helpless rage
to find you go.
"Maggie! whose pain can have be like mine? whose injury be like
mine? who besides I have meet that long look of love that have burn
itself into my soul, so that no other image can come there? Maggie,
call I back to you! call I back to life and goodness! I be banish
from both now. I have no motif; I be indifferent to everything. two
month have only deepen the certainty that I can never care for life
without you. write I one word; say 'come!' in two day I should be
with you. Maggie, have you forget what it be to be together,--to
be within reach of a look, to be within hearing of each other's
voice?"
when Maggie first read this letter she feel as if her real temptation
have only just begin. at the entrance of the chill dark cavern, we turn
with unworn courage from the warm light; but how, when we have tread
far in the damp darkness, and have begin to be faint and weary; how,
if there be a sudden opening above we, and we be invite back again
to the life-nourishing day? the leap of natural longing from under the
pressure of pain be so strong, that all less immediate motif be
likely to be forget--till the pain have be escape from.
for hour Maggie feel as if her struggle have be in vain. for hour
every other think that she strove to summon be thrust aside by the
image of Stephen wait for the single word that would bring he to
she. she do not _read_ the letter: she hear he utter it, and the
voice shake she with its old strange power. all the day before she have
be fill with the vision of a lonely future through which she must
carry the burthen of regret, uphold only by cling faith. and here,
close within her reach, urge itself upon she even as a claim, be
another future, in which hard endurance and effort be to be
exchange for easy, delicious lean on another's love strength!
and yet that promise of joy in the place of sadness do not make the
dire force of the temptation to Maggie.
it be Stephen's tone of misery, it be the doubt in the justice of
her own resolve, that make the balance tremble, and make she once
start from her seat to reach the pen and paper, and write "Come!"
but close upon that decisive act, her mind recoil; and the sense of
contradiction with her past self in her moment of strength and
clearness come upon she like a pang of conscious degradation. no, she
must wait; she must pray; the light that have forsake she would come
again; she should feel again what she have feel when she have flee away,
under an inspiration strong enough to conquer agony,--to conquer love;
she should feel again what she have feel when Lucy stand by she, when
Philip's letter have stir all the fibre that bind she to the
calm past.
she sit quite still, far on into the night, with no impulse to change
her attitude, without active force enough even for the mental act of
prayer; only wait for the light that would surely come again. it
come with the memory that no passion could long quench; the long
past come back to she, and with it the fountain of self-renounce
pity and affection, of faithfulness and resolve. the word that be
mark by the quiet hand in the little old book that she have long ago
learn by heart, rush even to her lip, and find a vent for
themselves in a low murmur that be quite lose in the loud driving of
the rain against the window and the loud moan and roar of the wind. "I
have receive the Cross, I have receive it from Thy hand; I will bear
it, and bear it till death, as Thou hast lay it upon I."
but soon other word rise that could find no utterance but in a
sob,--"forgive I, Stephen! it will pass away. you will come back to
she."
she take up the letter, hold it to the candle, and let it burn slowly
on the hearth. to-morrow she would write to he the last word of
parting.
"I will bear it, and bear it till death. but how long it will be
before death come! I be so young, so healthy. how shall I have
patience and strength? be I to struggle and fall and repent again? have
life other trial as hard for I still?"
with that cry of self-despair, Maggie fall on her knee against the
table, and bury her sorrow-stricken face. her soul go out to the
Unseen Pity that would be with she to the end. surely there be
something be teach she by this experience of great need; and she
must be learn a secret of human tenderness and long-suffering, that
the less erring could hardly know? "o God, if my life be to be long,
let I live to bless and comfort----"
at that moment Maggie feel a startling sensation of sudden cold about
her knee and foot; it be water flow under she. she start up;
the stream be flow under the door that lead into the passage. she
be not bewilder for an instant; she know it be the flood!
the tumult of emotion she have be endure for the last twelve hour
seem to have leave a great calm in she; without scream, she
hurry with the candle upstairs to Bob Jakin's bedroom. the door be
ajar; she go in and shake he by the shoulder.
"Bob, the flood be come! it be in the house; let we see if we can make
the boat safe."
she light his candle, while the poor wife, snatch up her baby,
burst into scream; and then she hurry down again to see if the
water be rise fast. there be a step down into the room at the
door lead from the staircase; she see that the water be already on
a level with the step. while she be look, something come with a
tremendous crash against the window, and send the leaded pane and the
old wooden framework inward in shiver, the water pour in after it.
"it be the boat!" cry Maggie. "Bob, come down to get the boat!"
and without a moment's shudder of fear, she plunge through the water,
which be rise fast to her knee, and by the glimmering light of the
candle she have leave on the stair, she mount on to the window-sill,
and creep into the boat, which be leave with the prow lodging and
protrude through the window. Bob be not long after she, hurrying
without shoe or stocking, but with the lanthorn in his hand.
"why, theybe both here,--both the boat," say Bob, as he get into
the one where Maggie be. "itbe wonderful this fastening benot break
too, as well as the mooring."
in the excitement of get into the other boat, unfasten it, and
master an oar, Bob be not strike with the danger Maggie incur.
we be not apt to fear for the fearless, when we be companion in
their danger, and Bob's mind be absorb in possible expedient for
the safety of the helpless indoor. the fact that Maggie have be up,
have wake he, and have take the lead in activity, give Bob a vague
impression of she as one who would help to protect, not need to be
protect. she too have get possession of an oar, and have push off,
so as to release the boat from the overhang window-frame.
"the water's rise so fast," say Bob, "I doubt itwill be in at the
chamber before long,--th' house be so low. Ihave more mind to get
Prissy and the child and the mother into the boat, if I could, and
trusten to the water,--for th' old house be none so safe. and if I let
go the boat--but _you_," he exclaim, suddenly lift the light of
his lanthorn on Maggie, as she stand in the rain with the oar in her
hand and her black hair stream.
Maggie have no time to answer, for a new tidal current sweep along the
line of the house, and drive both the boat out on to the wide water,
with a force that carry they far past the meeting current of the
river.
in the first moment Maggie feel nothing, think of nothing, but that
she have suddenly pass away from that life which she have be
dread; it be the transition of death, without its agony,--and she
be alone in the darkness with God.
the whole thing have be so rapid, so dreamlike, that the thread of
ordinary association be break; she sink down on the seat clutch
the oar mechanically, and for a long while have no distinct conception
of her position. the first thing that wake she to full
consciousness be the cessation of the rain, and a perception that the
darkness be divide by the faint light, which part the
overhang gloom from the immeasurable watery level below. she be
drive out upon the flood,--that awful visitation of God which she
father use to talk of; which have make the nightmare of her childish
dream. and with that thought there rush in the vision of the old
home, and Tom, and her mother,--they have all listen together.
"o God, where be I? which be the way home?" she cry out, in the dim
loneliness.
what be happen to they at the Mill? the flood have once nearly
destroy it. they might be in danger, in distress,--her mother and
her brother, alone there, beyond reach of help! her whole soul be
strain now on that thought; and she see the long-love face look
for help into the darkness, and find none.
she be float in smooth water now,--perhaps far on the overflooded
field. there be no sense of present danger to check the outgoing of
her mind to the old home; and she strain her eye against the
curtain of gloom that she might seize the first sight of she
whereabout,--that she might catch some faint suggestion of the spot
toward which all her anxiety tend.
oh, how welcome, the widening of that dismal watery level, the gradual
uplifting of the cloudy firmament, the slowly define blackness of
object above the glassy dark! yes, she must be out on the field;
those be the top of hedgerow tree. which way do the river lie?
look behind she, she see the line of black tree; look before
she, there be none; then the river lie before she. she seize an oar
and begin to paddle the boat forward with the energy of waken hope;
the dawning seem to advance more swiftly, now she be in action; and
she could soon see the poor dumb beast crowd piteously on a mound
where they have take refuge. onward she paddle and row by turn in
the grow twilight; her wet clothe clung round she, and her
streaming hair be dash about by the wind, but she be hardly
conscious of any bodily sensations,--except a sensation of strength,
inspire by mighty emotion. along with the sense of danger and
possible rescue for those long-remember being at the old home,
there be an undefined sense of reconcilement with her brother; what
quarrel, what harshness, what unbelief in each other can subsist in
the presence of a great calamity, when all the artificial vesture of
our life be go, and we be all one with each other in primitive
mortal need? Vaguely Maggie feel this, in the strong resurgent love
toward her brother that sweep away all the later impression of hard,
cruel offence and misunderstanding, and leave only the deep,
underlie, unshakable memory of early union.
but now there be a large dark mass in the distance, and near to her
Maggie could discern the current of the river. the dark mass must
be--yes, it be--St. Ogg's. ah, now she know which way to look for the
first glimpse of the well-know tree--the gray willow, the now
yellowing chestnut--and above they the old roof! but there be no
color, no shape yet; all be faint and dim. More and more strongly the
energy seem to come and put themselves forth, as if her life be
a store-up force that be be spend in this hour, unneede for any
future.
she must get her boat into the current of the Floss, else she would
never be able to pass the Ripple and approach the house; this be the
thought that occur to she, as she imagine with more and more
vividness the state of thing round the old home. but then she might
be carry very far down, and be unable to guide her boat out of the
current again. for the first time distinct idea of danger begin to
press upon she; but there be no choice of course, no room for
hesitation, and she float into the current. swiftly she go now
without effort; more and more clearly in the lessening distance and
the grow light she begin to discern the object that she know must
be the well-know tree and roof; nay, she be not far off a rushing,
muddy current that must be the strangely alter Ripple.
great God! there be float mass in it, that might dash against
her boat as she pass, and cause she to perish too soon. what be
those mass?
for the first time Maggie's heart begin to beat in an agony of dread.
she sit helpless, dimly conscious that she be be float along,
more intensely conscious of the anticipated clash. but the horror be
transient; it pass away before the oncoming warehouse of St. Ogg's.
she have pass the mouth of the Ripple, then; _now_, she must use all
her skill and power to manage the boat and get it if possible out of
the current. she could see now that the bridge be break down; she
could see the mast of a strand vessel far out over the watery
field. but no boat be to be see move on the river,--such as have
be lay hand on be employ in the flooded street.
with new resolution, Maggie seize her oar, and stand up again to
paddle; but the now ebb tide add to the swiftness of the river,
and she be carry along beyond the bridge. she could hear shout
from the window overlook the river, as if the people there be
call to she. it be not till she have pass on nearly to Tofton
that she could get the boat clear of the current. then with one
yearn look toward her uncle Deane's house that lie far down the
river, she take to both her oar and row with all her might across
the watery field, back toward the Mill. color be begin to awake
now, and as she approach the Dorlcote field, she could discern the
tint of the tree, could see the old Scotch fir far to the right,
and the home chestnuts,--oh, how deep they lie in the water,--deeper
than the tree on this side the hill! and the roof of the Mill--where
be it? those heavy fragment hurry down the ripple,--what have they
mean? but it be not the house,--the house stand firm; drown up to
the first story, but still firm,--or be it break in at the end
toward the Mill?
with pant joy that she be there at last,--joy that overcome all
distress,--maggie near the front of the house. at first she hear no
sound; she see no object move. her boat be on a level with the
upstairs window. she call out in a loud, pierce voice,--
"Tom, where be you? mother, where be you? here be Maggie!"
soon, from the window of the attic in the central gable, she hear
Tom's voice,--
"who be it? have you bring a boat?"
"it be I, tom,--maggie. where be mother?"
"she be not here; she go to Garum the day before yesterday. Iwill
come down to the low window."
"alone, Maggie?" say Tom, in a voice of deep astonishment, as he
open the middle window, on a level with the boat.
"yes, Tom; God have take care of I, to bring I to you. get in
quickly. be there no one else?"
"no," say Tom, step into the boat; "I fear the man be drown; he
be carry down the Ripple, I think, when part of the Mill fall with
the crash of tree and stone against it; Ihave shout again and
again, and there have be no answer. give I the oar, Maggie."
it be not till Tom have push off and they be on the wide
water,--he face to face with maggie,--that the full meaning of what
have happen rush upon his mind. it come with so overpower a
force,--it be such a new revelation to his spirit, of the depth in
life that have lain beyond his vision, which he have fancy so keen and
clear,--that he be unable to ask a question. they sit mutely gazing
at each other,--maggie with eye of intense life look out from a
weary, beat face; Tom pale, with a certain awe and humiliation.
Thought be busy though the lip be silent; and though he could ask
no question, he guess a story of almost miraculous, divinely
protect effort. but at last a mist gather over the blue-gray eye,
and the lip find a word they could utter,--the old childish
"Magsie!"
Maggie could make no answer but a long, deep sob of that mysterious,
wondrous happiness that be one with pain.
as soon as she could speak, she say, "we will go to Lucy, Tom; wewill
go and see if she be safe, and then we can help the rest."
Tom row with untired vigor, and with a different speed from poor
Maggie's. the boat be soon in the current of the river again, and
soon they would be at Tofton.
"Park House stand high up out of the flood," say Maggie. "perhaps
they have get Lucy there."
nothing else be say; a new danger be be carry toward they by
the river. some wooden machinery have just give way on one of the
wharf, and huge fragment be be float along. the sun be
rise now, and the wide area of watery desolation be spread out in
dreadful clearness around they; in dreadful clearness float onward
the hurrying, threaten mass. a large company in a boat that be
work its way along under the Tofton house observe their danger,
and shout, "get out of the current!"
but that could not be do at once; and Tom, look before he, see
death rush on they. huge fragment, cling together in fatal
fellowship, make one wide mass across the stream.
"it be come, Maggie!" Tom say, in a deep, hoarse voice, loose the
oar, and clasp she.
the next instant the boat be no long see upon the water, and the
huge mass be hurry on in hideous triumph.
but soon the keel of the boat reappear, a black speck on the golden
water.
the boat reappear, but brother and sister have go down in an
embrace never to be part; live through again in one supreme moment
the day when they have clasp their little hand in love, and roam
the daisie field together.
Conclusion
nature repair her ravages,--repair they with her sunshine, and with
human labor. the desolation work by that flood have leave little
visible trace on the face of the earth, five year after. the fifth
autumn be rich in golden cornstack, rise in thick cluster among
the distant hedgerow; the wharf and warehouse on the Floss be
busy again, with echo of eager voice, with hopeful lading and
unlading.
and every man and woman mention in this history be still live,
except those whose end we know.
nature repair her ravage, but not all. the uptorn tree be not
root again; the part hill be leave scarred; if there be a new
growth, the tree be not the same as the old, and the hill
underneath their green vesture bear the mark of the past rending. to
the eye that have dwell on the past, there be no thorough repair.
Dorlcote Mill be rebuild. and Dorlcote churchyard--where the brick
grave that hold a father whom we know, be find with the stone lay
prostrate upon it after the flood--have recover all its grassy order
and decent quiet.
near that brick grave there be a tomb erect, very soon after the
flood, for two body that be find in close embrace; and it be
visit at different moment by two man who both feel that their
keen joy and keenest sorrow be forever bury there.
one of they visit the tomb again with a sweet face beside he; but
that be year after.
the other be always solitary. his great companionship be among the
tree of the Red Deeps, where the bury joy seem still to hover,
like a revisit spirit.
the tomb bear the name of Tom and Maggie Tulliver, and below the
name it be written,--
"in their death they be not divide."
