JOSEPH ANDREWS
VOL. I.
content.
INTRODUCTION.
PREFACE.
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I.
_of write life in general, and particularly of Pamela, with a word
by the bye of Colley Cibber and other_
CHAPTER II.
_of Mr Joseph Andrews, his birth, parentage, education, and great
endowment, with a word or two concern ancestor_
CHAPTER III.
_of Mr Abraham Adams the curate, Mrs Slipslop the chambermaid, and
other_
CHAPTER IV.
_what happen after their journey to London_
CHAPTER V.
_the death of Sir Thomas Booby, with the affectionate and mournful
behaviour of his widow, and the great purity of Joseph Andrews_
CHAPTER VI.
_how Joseph Andrews writ a letter to his sister Pamela_
CHAPTER VII.
_saying of wise man. a dialogue between the lady and she maid; and
a panegyric, or rather satire, on the passion of love, in the sublime
style_
CHAPTER VIII.
_in which, after some very fine writing, the history go on, and
relate the interview between the lady and Joseph; where the latter
hath set an example which we despair of seeing follow by his sex in
this vicious age_
CHAPTER IX.
_what pass between the lady and Mrs Slipslop; in which we prophesy
there be some stroke which every one will not truly comprehend at
the first reading_
CHAPTER X.
_Joseph write another letter; his transaction with Mr Peter Pounce,
&c., with his departure from Lady Booby_
CHAPTER XI.
_of several new matter not expect_
CHAPTER XII.
_contain many surprizing adventure which Joseph Andrews meet with
on the road, scarce credible to those who have never travel in a
stage-coach_
CHAPTER XIII.
_what happen to Joseph during his sickness at the inn, with the
curious discourse between he and Mr Barnabas, the parson of the
parish_
CHAPTER XIV.
_be very full of adventure which succeed each other at the inn_
CHAPTER XV.
_show how Mrs Tow-wouse be a little mollify; and how officious
Mr Barnabas and the surgeon be to prosecute the thief: with a
dissertation account for their zeal, and that of many other
person not mention in this history_
CHAPTER XVI.
_the escape of the thief. Mr Adams's disappointment. the arrival of
two very extraordinary personage, and the introduction of parson
Adams to parson Barnabas_
CHAPTER XVII.
_a pleasant discourse between the two parson and the bookseller,
which be break off by an unlucky accident happen in the inn,
which produce a dialogue between Mrs Tow-wouse and her maid of no
gentle kind._
CHAPTER XVIII.
_the history of Betty the chambermaid, and an account of what
occasion the violent scene in the precede chapter_
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
_of division in Authors_
CHAPTER II.
_a surprize instance of Mr Adams's short memory, with the
unfortunate consequence which it bring on Joseph_
CHAPTER III.
_the opinion of two lawyer concern the same gentleman, with Mr
Adams's inquiry into the religion of his host_
CHAPTER IV.
_the history of Leonora, or the unfortunate jilt_
CHAPTER V.
_a dreadful quarrel which happen at the inn where the company
din, with its bloody consequence to Mr Adams_
CHAPTER VI.
_conclusion of the unfortunate jilt_
CHAPTER VII.
_a very short chapter, in which parson Adams go a great way_
CHAPTER VIII.
_a notable dissertation by Mr Abraham Adams; wherein that gentleman
appear in a political light_
CHAPTER IX.
_in which the gentleman discant on bravery and heroic virtue, till
an unlucky accident put an end to the discourse_
CHAPTER X.
_give an account of the strange catastrophe of the precede
adventure, which draw poor Adams into fresh calamity; and who the
woman be who owe the preservation of her chastity to his victorious
arm_
CHAPTER XI.
_what happen to they while before the justice. a chapter very full
of learn_
CHAPTER XII.
_a very delightful adventure, as well to the person concern as to
the good-natured reader_
CHAPTER XIII.
_a dissertation concern high people and low people, with Mrs
Slipslop's departure in no very good temper of mind, and the evil
plight in which she leave Adams and his company_
list of illustration.
portrait of fielding, from BUST in the SHIRE HALL, TAUNTON
"JOSEPH, I be sorry to hear such complaint against you"
the HOSTLER present HIM a BILL
JOSEPH thank she on his knees
GENERAL INTRODUCTION.
there be few amusement more dangerous for an author than the
indulgence in ironic description of his own work. if the irony be
depreciatory, posterity be but too likely to say, "many a true word be
speak in jest;" if it be encomiastic, the same ruthless and ungrateful
critic be but too likely to take it as an involuntary confession of
folly and vanity. but when Fielding, in one of his serio-comic
introduction to _Tom Jones_, describe it as "this prodigious work," he
all unintentionally (for he be the least pretentious of man)
anticipate the verdict which posterity almost at once, and with
ever-increase suffrage of the good judge as time go on, be about
to pass not merely upon this particular book, but upon his whole genius
and his whole production as a novelist. his work in other kind be of a
very different order of excellence. it be sufficiently interesting at
time in itself; and always more than sufficiently interesting as his;
for which reason, as well as for the further one that it be
comparatively little know, a considerable selection from it be offer
to the reader in the last two volume of this edition. until the present
occasion (which make it necessary that I should acquaint myself with
it) I own that my own knowledge of these miscellaneous writing be by
no mean thorough. it be now pretty complete; but the idea which I
previously have of they at first and second hand, though a little
improve, have not very materially alter. though in all this hack-work
fielding display, partially and at interval, the same quality which
he display eminently and constantly in the four great book here
give, he be not, as the french idiom express it, _dans son
assiette_, in his own natural and impregnable disposition and situation
of character and ability, when he be occupy on it. the novel be for
he that _assiette_; and all his novel be here.
although Henry Fielding live in quite modern time, although by family
and connection he be of a high rank than most man of letter, and
although his genius be at once recognise by his contemporary so soon
as it display itself in its proper sphere, his biography until very
recently be by no means full; and the most recent research, include
those of Mr Austin Dobson--a critic unsurpasse for combination of
literary faculty and knowledge of the eighteenth century--have not
altogether suffice to fill up the gap. his family, say to have
descend from a member of the great house of Hapsburg who come to
England in the reign of Henry II., distinguish itself in the Wars of
the Roses, and in the seventeenth century be advanced to the peerage
of Denbigh in England and (later) of Desmond in Ireland. the novelist
be the grandson of John Fielding, Canon of Salisbury, the fifth son of
the first Earl of Desmond of this creation. the canon's third son,
Edmond, enter the army, serve under Marlborough, and married Sarah
Gold or Gould, daughter of a judge of the King's Bench. their eld son
be Henry, who be bear on April 22, 1707, and have an uncertain number
of brother and sister of the whole blood. after his first wife's
death, General Fielding (for he attain that rank) marry again. the
most remarkable offspring of the first marriage, next to Henry, be his
sister Sarah, also a novelist, who write David Simple; of the second,
John, afterwards Sir John Fielding, who, though blind, succeed his
half-brother as a Bow Street magistrate, and in that office combine an
equally honourable record with a long tenure.
Fielding be bear at Sharpham Park in Somersetshire, the seat of his
maternal grandfather; but most of his early youth be spend at East
Stour in Dorsetshire, to which his father remove after the judge's
death. he be say to have receive his first education under a parson of
the neighbourhood name Oliver, in whom a very uncomplimentary tradition
see the original of Parson Trulliber. he be then certainly send to
Eton, where he do not waste his time as regard learning, and make
several valuable friend. but the date of his enter and leave
school be alike unknown; and his subsequent sojourn at Leyden for two
year--though there be no reason to doubt it--depend even less upon
any positive documentary evidence. this famous University still have a
great repute as a training school in law, for which profession he be
intend; but the reason why he do not receive the even then far more
usual completion of a public school education by a sojourn at Oxford or
Cambridge may be suspect to be different. it may even have have
something to do with a curious escapade of his about which not very much
be know--an attempt to carry off a pretty heiress of Lyme, name
Sarah Andrew.
even at Leyden, however, General Fielding seem to have be unable or
unwilling to pay his son's expense, which must have be far less there
than at an English University; and Henry's return to London in 1728-29
be say to have be due to sheer impecuniosity. when he return to
England, his father be good enough to make he an allowance of l200
nominal, which appear to have be equivalent to l0 actual. and as
practically nothing be know of he for the next six or seven year,
except the fact of his have work industriously enough at a large
number of not very good play of the light kind, with a few poem and
miscellany, it be reasonably enough suppose that he live by his pen.
the only product of this period which have keep (or indeed which ever
receive) competent applause be _Tom Thumb, or the Tragedy of
Tragedies_, a following of course of the _Rehearsal_, but full of humour
and spirit. the most successful of his other dramatic work be the
_Mock Doctor_ and the _Miser_, adaptation of Moliere's famous piece.
his undoubted connection with the stage, and the fact of the
contemporary existence of a certain Timothy Fielding, help suggestion
of less dignified occupation as actor, booth-keeper, and so forth; but
these have long be discredit and indeed disprove.
in or about 1735, when Fielding be twenty-eight, we find he in a new,
a more brilliant and agreeable, but even a more transient phase. he have
marry (we do not know when or where) Miss Charlotte Cradock, one of
three sister who live at Salisbury (it be to be observe that
Fielding's entire connection, both in life and letter, be with the
Western Counties and London), who be certainly of competent mean, and
for whose alleged illegitimacy there be no evidence but an unsupported
fling of that old maid of genius, Richardson. the description both of
Sophia and of Amelia be say to have be take from this lady; her
good look and her amiability be as well establish as anything of the
kind can be in the absence of photograph and affidavit; and it be
certain that her husband be passionately attach to she, during their
too short married life. his method, however, of show his affection
smack in some way too much of the foible which he have attribute to
Captain Booth, and of those which we must suspect Mr Thomas Jones would
also have exhibit, if he have not be adopt as Mr Allworthy's heir,
and have not have Mr Western's fortune to share and look forward to. it be
true that grave breach have be make by recent criticism in the very
picturesque and circumstantial story tell on the subject by Murphy, the
first of Fielding's biographer. this legend be that fielding, have
succeed by the death of his mother to a small estate at East Stour,
worth about L200 a year, and have receive L1500 in ready money as his
wife's fortune, get through the whole in three year by keep open
house, with a large retinue in "costly yellow livery," and so forth.
in detail, this story have be simply riddle. his mother have die long
before; he be certainly not away from London three year, or anything
like it; and so forth. at the same time, the good and sober judge
agree that there be an intrinsic probability, a consensus (if a vague
one) of tradition, and a chain of almost unmistakably personal
reference in the novel, which plead for a certain amount of truth, at
the bottom of a much embellish legend. at any rate, if Fielding
establish himself in the country, it be not long before he return
to town; for early in 1736 we find he back again, and not merely a
playwright, but lessee of the "Little Theatre" in the Haymarket. the
play which he produce here--satirico-political piece, such as
_pasquin_ and the _Historical Register_--were popular enough, but
offend the government; and in 1737 a new bill regulate theatrical
performance, and institute the Lord Chamberlain's control, be
pass. this measure put an end directly to the "Great Mogul's company,"
as Fielding have call his troop, and indirectly to its manager's career
as a playwright. he do indeed write a few piece in future year, but
they be of the small importance.
after this check he turn at last to a serious profession, enter
himself of the Middle Temple in November of the same year, and be
call three year later; but during these year, and indeed for some
time afterwards, our information about he be still of the vague
character. nobody doubt that he have a large share in the _Champion_, an
essay-periodical on the usual eighteenth-century model, which begin to
appear in 1739, and which be still occasionally consult for the work
that be certainly or probably his. he go the Western Circuit, and
attend the Wiltshire Sessions, after he be call, give up his
contribution to periodical soon after that event. but he soon return
to literature proper, or rather make his _debut_ in it, with the
immortal book now republish. the _history of the Adventures of Joseph
Andrews, and his Friend Mr Abraham Adams_, appear in February 1742,
and its author receive from Andrew Millar, the publisher, the sum of
L183, 11. even great work have fetch much small sum; but it
will be admit that _Joseph Andrews_ be not dear.
the advantage, however, of present a survey of an author's life
uninterrupte by criticism be so clear, that what have to be say about
_Joseph_ may be conveniently postpone for the moment. immediately after
its publication the author fall back upon miscellaneous writing, and in
the next year (1743) collect and issue three volume of
_miscellany_. in the two first volume the only thing of much interest
be the unfinished and unequal, but in part powerful, _journey from this
World to the Next_, an attempt of a kind which Fontenelle and other,
follow Lucian, have make very popular with the time. but the third
volume of the _miscellany_ deserve a less modest and gregarious
appearance, for it contain, and be wholly occupy by, the wonderful
and terrible satire of _Jonathan Wild_, the great piece of pure irony
in English out of Swift. soon after the publication of the book, a great
calamity come on Fielding. his wife have be very ill when he write the
preface; soon afterwards she be dead. they have take the chance, have
make the choice, that the more prudent and less wise student-hero and
heroine of Mr Browning's _youth and Art_ have shun; they have no doubt
"sigh deep, laugh free, Starved, feasted, despaired," and we need
not question, that they have also "be happy."
except this sad event and its rather incongruous sequel, Fielding's
marriage to his wife's maid Mary Daniel--a marriage, however, which do
not take place till full four year later, and which by all account
supply he with a faithful and excellent companion and nurse, and his
child with a kind stepmother--little or nothing be again know of
this elusive man of genius between the publication of the _miscellany_
in 1743, and that of _Tom Jones_ in 1749. the second marriage itself in
November 1747; an interview which Joseph Warton have with he rather more
than a year early (one of the very few direct interview we have); the
publication of two anti-jacobite newspaper (Fielding be always a
strong Whig and Hanoverian), call the _True Patriot_ and the
_Jacobite's Journal_ in 1745 and the follow year; some indistinct
tradition about residence at Twickenham and elsewhere, and some, more
precise but not much more authenticated, respect patronage by the
Duke of Bedford, Mr Lyttelton, Mr Allen, and other, pretty well sum up
the whole.
_Tom Jones_ be publish in February (a favourite month with Fielding
or his publisher Millar) 1749; and as it bring he the, for those
day, very considerable sum of L600 to which Millar add another
hundred later, the novelist must have be, for a time at any rate,
relieve from his chronic penury. but he have already, by Lyttelton's
interest, secure his first and last piece of preferment, be make
Justice of the Peace for Westminster, an office on which he enter with
characteristic vigour. he be qualified for it not merely by a solid
knowledge of the law, and by great natural ability, but by his
thorough kindness of heart; and, perhaps, it may also be add, by his
long year of queer experience on (as Mr Carlyle would have say) the
"burn marl" of the London Bohemia. very shortly afterwards he be
choose Chairman of Quarter Sessions, and establish himself in Bow
Street. the Bow Street magistrate of that time occupy a most singular
position, and be more like a french Prefect of Police or even a
Minister of Public Safety than a mere justice. yet he be ill pay.
Fielding say that the emolument, which before his accession have but
be l500 a year of "dirty" money, be by his own action but l300 of
clean; and the work, if properly perform, be very severe.
that he perform it properly all competent evidence show, a foolish,
inconclusive, and I fear it must be say emphatically snobbish story of
Walpole's notwithstanding. in particular, he break up a gang of
cut-throat thief, which have be the terror of London. but his tenure
of the post be short enough, and scarcely extend to five year. his
health have long be break, and he be now constantly attack by gout,
so that he have frequently to retreat on Bath from Bow Street, or his
suburban cottage of Fordhook, Ealing. but he do not relax his literary
work. his pen be active with pamphlet concern his office; _Amelia_,
his last novel, appear towards the close of 1751; and next year see
the beginning of a new paper, the _Covent Garden Journal_, which
appear twice a week, run for the great part of the year, and die in
November. its great author do not see that month twice again. in the
spring of 1753 he grow bad; and after a year's struggle with ill
health, hard work, and hard weather, less measure be pronounce
useless, be persuade to try the "Portugal Voyage," of which he have
leave so charming a record in the _journey to Lisbon_. he leave Fordhook
on June 26, 1754, reach Lisbon in August, and, die there on the 8th
of October, be bury in the cemetery of the Estrella.
of not many writer perhaps do a clear notion, as far as their
personality go, exist in the general mind that interest itself at all
in literature than of Fielding. yet more than once a warning have be
sound, especially by his good and most recent biographer, to the
effect that this idea be found upon very little warranty of scripture.
the truth be, that as the foregoing record--which, brief as it be, be a
sufficiently faithful summary--will have show, we know very little
about Fielding. we have hardly any letter of his, and so lack the good
by far and the most revealing of all character-portrait; we have but
one important autobiographic fragment, and though that be of the high
interest and value, it be write far in the valley of the shadow of
death, it be not in the least retrospective, and it afford but dim and
inferential light on his young, healthy, and happy day and way.
he come, moreover, just short of one set of man of letter, of whom we
have a great deal of personal knowledge, and just beyond another. he be
neither of those about Addison, nor of those about Johnson. no intimate
friend of his have leave we anything elaborate about he. on the other
hand, we have a far from inconsiderable body of documentary evidence, of
a kind often by no mean trustworthy. the good part of it be contain
in the letter of his cousin, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, and the
reminiscence or family tradition of her grand-daughter, Lady Louisa
Stuart. but Lady Mary, vivacious and agreeable as she be, have with all
her talent a very considerable knack of writing for effect, of draw
strong contrast and the like; and it be not quite certain that she see
very much of field in the last and most interesting third of his
life. another witness, Horace Walpole, to less knowledge and equally
dubious accuracy, add decide ill-will, which may have be due partly
to the shrinking of a dilettante and a fop from a burly Bohemian; but I
fear be also consequent upon the fact that Horace could not afford to
despise Fielding's birth, and know he to be vastly his own superior in
genius. we hear something of he again from Richardson; and Richardson
hat he with the hatred of dissimilar genius, of inferior social
position, and, lastly, of the cat for the dog who touzle and worry
she. Johnson partly inherit or share Richardson's aversion, partly
be blind to Fielding's genius by his aggressive Whiggery. I fear,
too, that he be incapable of appreciate it for reason other than
political. it be certain that Johnson, sane and robust as he be, be
never quite at ease before genius of the gigantic kind, either in dead
or living. whether he do not like to have to look up too much, or be
actually unable to do so, it be certain that Shakespeare, Milton,
Swift, and Fielding, those four atlante of english verse and prose, all
affect he with lukewarm admiration, or with positive dislike, for
which it be vain to attempt to assign any uniform secondary cause,
political or other. it may be permit to hint another reason. all
Johnson's most sharp-sight critic have notice, though most have
discreetly refrain from insist on, his "thorn-in-the-flesh," the
combination in he of very strong physical passion with the deep
sense of the moral and religious duty of abstinence. it be perhaps
impossible to imagine anything more distasteful to a man so buffet,
than the extreme indulgence with which field regard, and the easy
freedom, not to say gusto, with which he depict, those who succumb to
similar temptation. only by suppose the working of some subtle
influence of this kind be it possible to explain, even in so capricious
a humour as Johnson's, the famous and absurd application of the term
"barren rascal" to a writer who, die almost young, after have for
many year live a life of pleasure, and then for four or five one of
laborious official duty, have leave work anything but small in actual
bulk, and fertile with the most luxuriant growth of intellectual
originality.
partly on the _obiter dicta_ of person like these, partly on the still
more tempting and still more treacherous ground of indication draw
from his work, a fielding of fantasy have be construct, which in
Thackeray's admirable sketch attain real life and immortality as a
creature of art, but which possess rather dubious claim as a
historical character. it be astonish how this fielding of fantasy
sink and shrivel when we begin to apply the horrid test of criticism
to his component part. the _eidolon_, with ink ruffle and a towel
round his head, sit in the Temple and dash off article for the
_Covent Garden Journal_; then come Criticism, hellish maid, and remind
we that when the _Covent Garden Journal_ appear, Fielding's wild oat,
if ever sow at all, have be sow long ago; that he be a busy
magistrate and householder in Bow Street; and that, if he have towel
round his head, it be probably less because he have exceed in liquor
than because his Grace of Newcastle have give he a headache by want
elaborate plan and scheme prepare at an hour's notice. Lady Mary,
apparently with some envy, tell we that he could "feel rapture with his
cook-maid." "which many have," as Mr Ridley remark, from Xanthias
Phoceus downward; but when we remember the historic fact that he
marry this maid (not a "cook-maid" at all), and that though he always
speak of she with warm affection and hearty respect, such "rapture" as
we have of his clearly refer to a very different woman, who be both a
lady and a beautiful one, we begin a little to shake our head. Horace
Walpole at second-hand draw we a Fielding, pig with low companion
in a house keep like a hedge tavern; field himself, within a year or
two, show we more than half-undesignedly in the _Voyage to Lisbon_ that
he be very careful about the appointment and decency of his table,
that he stand rather upon ceremony in regard to his own treatment of his
family, and the treatment of they and himself by other, and that he be
altogether a person orderly, correct, and even a little finikin. nor be
there the slight reasonable reason to regard this as a piece of
hypocrisy, a vice as alien from the fielding of fancy as from the
fielding of fact, and one the particular manifestation of which, in this
particular place, would have be equally unlikely and unintelligible.
it may be ask whether I propose to substitute for the traditional
field a quite different person, of regular habit and methodical
economy. certainly not. the traditional estimate of great man be rarely
wrong altogether, but it constantly have a habit of exaggerate and
dramatise their characteristic. for some thing in Fielding's career
we have positive evidence of document, and evidence hardly less certain
of probability. although I believe the good judge be now of opinion
that his impecuniosity have be overcharge, he certainly have
experience which do not often fall to the lot of even a cadet of good
family in the eighteenth century. there can be no reasonable doubt that
he be a man who have a lean towards pretty girl and bottle of good
wine; and I should suppose that if the girl be kind and fairly
winsome, he would not have insist that she should possess Helen's
beauty, that if the bottle of good wine be not forthcoming, he would
have be very tolerant of a mug of good ale. he may very possibly have
drunk more than he should, and lose more than he could conveniently pay.
it may be put down as morally ascertain that towards all these
weakness of humanity, and other like unto they, he hold an attitude
which be less that of the unassailable philosopher than that of the
sympathiser, indulgent and excuse. in regard more especially to what
be commonly call moral delinquency, this attitude be so decide
as to shock some people even in those day, and many in these. just when
the first sheet of this edition be pass through the press, a
violent attack be make in a newspaper correspondence on the morality of
_Tom Jones_ by certain notorious advocate of Purity, as some say, of
Pruriency and Prudery combine, accord to less complimentary
estimate. even midway between the two period we find the admirable
Miss Ferrier, a sister of Fielding's own craft, who sometimes have
touch of nature and satire not far inferior to his own, express by
the mouth of one of her character with whom she seem partly to agree,
the sentiment that his work be "vanish like noxious exhalation."
towards any misdoing by person of the one sex towards person of the
other, when it involve brutality or treachery, Fielding be pitiless;
but when treachery and brutality be not concern, he be, to say the
least, facile. so, too, he probably know by experience--he certainly
know by native shrewdness and acquire observation--that to look too
much on the wine when it be red, or on the card when they be
parti-colour, be ruinous to health and fortune; but he think not
over badly of any man who do these thing. still it be possible to
admit this in he, and to stop short of that idea of a careless and
reckless _viveur_ which have so often be put forward. in particular,
Lady Mary's view of his childlike enjoyment of the moment have be, I
think, much exaggerated by posterity, and be probably not a little
mistaken by the lady herself. there be two mood in which the motto be
_carpe diem_, one a mood of simply childish hurry, the other one where
behind the enjoyment of the moment lurk, and in which the enjoyment of
the moment be not a little heighten by, that vast ironic consciousness
of the before and after, which I at least see everywhere in the
background of Fielding's work.
the man, however, of whom we know so little, concern we much less than
the author of the work, of which it only rest with ourselves to know
everything. I have above class fielding as one of the four Atlantes of
english verse and prose, and I doubt not that both the phrase and the
application of it to he will meet with question and demur. I have only
to interject, as the critic so often have to interject, a request to the
court to take what I say in the sense in which I say it. I do not mean
that Shakespeare, Milton, Swift, and Fielding be in all or even in most
respect on a level. I do not mean that the three last be in all
respect of the great name in English literature. I only mean that,
in a certain quality, which for want of a well word I have choose to
call Atlantean, they stand alone. each of they, for the metaphor be
applicable either way, carry a whole world on his shoulder, or look
down on a whole world from his natural altitude. the world be
different, but they be world; and though the attitude of the giant be
different also, it agree in all of they on the point of competence and
strength. take whomsoever else we may among our man of letter, and we
shall find this characteristic to be in comparison want. these four
carry their world, and be not carry by it; and if it, in the language
so dear to field himself, be to crash and shatter, the inquiry,
"_que vous reste-t-il?_" could be answer by each, "_Moi!_"
the appearance which field make be no doubt the most modest of the
four. he have not Shakespeare's absolute universality, and in fact not
merely the poet's tongue, but the poet's thought seem to have be
deny he. his sphere be not the ideal like Milton's. his irony,
splendid as it be, fall a little short of that diabolical magnificence
which exalt Swift to the point whence, in his own way, he survey all
the kingdom of the world, and the glory or vainglory of they. all
Fielding's critic have note the manner, in a certain sense modest, in
another ostentatious, in which he seem to confine himself to the
presentation of thing english. they might have add to the
presentation of thing English--as they appear in London, and on the
Western Circuit, and on the Bath Road.
but this apparent parochialism have never deceive good judge. it do
not deceive Lady Mary, who have see the man and manner of very many
clime; it do not deceive Gibbon, who be not especially prone to
overvalue thing English, and who could look down from twenty century
on thing ephemeral. it deceive, indeed, I be tell, some excellent
person at the present day, who think Fielding's microcosm a "toylike
world," and imagine that russian Nihilists and French Naturalists have
go beyond it. it will deceive no one who have live for some competent
space of time a life during which he have try to regard his
fellow-creature and himself, as nearly as a mortal may, _sub specie
aeternitatis_.
as this be in the main an introduction to a complete reprint of
Fielding's four great novel, the justification in detail of the
estimate just make or hint of the novelist's genius will be good and
most fitly make by a brief successive discussion of the four as they be
here present, with some subsequent remark on the _miscellany_ here
select. and, indeed, it be not fanciful to perceive in each book a
somewhat different presentment of the author's genius; though in no one
of the four be any one of his masterly quality absent. there be
tenderness even in _Jonathan Wild_; there be touch in _Joseph
Andrews_ of that irony of the Preacher, the last echo of which be hear
amid the kindly resignation of the _journey to Lisbon_, in the sentence,
"whereas envy of all thing most expose we to danger from other, so
contempt of all thing well secure we from they." but on the whole it
be safe to say that _Joseph Andrews_ well present Fielding's
mischievous and playful wit; _Jonathan Wild_ his half-lucianic
half-swiftian irony; _Tom Jones_ his unerring knowledge of human nature,
and his constructive faculty; _Amelia_ his tenderness, his _mitis
sapientia_, his observation of the detail of life. and first of
the first.
_the history of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews and his friend Mr
Abraham Adams_ be, as have be say above, publish in February 1742.
a facsimile of the agreement between author and publisher will be give
in the second volume of this series; and it be not unintereste to
observe that the witness, William Young, be none other than the assert
original of the immortal Mr Adams himself. he might, on Balzac's plea in
a tolerably well-know anecdote, have demand half of the l183, 11. of
the other origin of the book we have a pretty full account, partly
documentary. that it be "writ in the manner of Cervantes," and be
intend as a kind of comic epic, be the author's own statement--no
doubt as near the actual truth as be consistent with comic-epic theory.
that there be resemblance to Scarron, to Le Sage, and to other
practitioner of the Picaresque novel be certain; and it be inevitable
that there should be. of directer and more immediate model or
starting-point one be undoubted; the other, though less generally
admit, not much less indubitable to my mind. the parody of
Richardson's _Pamela_, which be little more than a year early (Nov.
1740), be avow, open, flagrant; nor do I think that the author be so
soon carry away by the great and large tide of his own invention as
some critic seem to hold. he be always more or less return to the
ironic charge; and the multiplicity of the assailant of Joseph's virtue
only disguise the resemblance to the long-draw danger of Pamela from
a single ravisher. but Fielding be also well acquainted with Marivaux's
_Paysan Parvenu_, and the resemblance between that book and _Joseph
Andrews_ be much strong than Fielding's admirer have always be
willing to admit. this recalcitrance have, I think, be mainly due to
the erroneous conception of Marivaux as, if not a mere fribble, yet a
Dresden-Shepherdess kind of writer, good at "preciousness" and
patch-and-powder manner, but nothing more.
there be, in fact, a very strong satiric and ironic touch in the author
of _Marianne_, and I do not think that I be too rash when some year
ago I venture to speak of he as "play Fielding to his own
Richardson" in the _Paysan Parvenu_.
origin, however, and indebtedness and the like, be, when great work be
concern, question for the study and the lecture-room, for the
literary historian and the professional critic, rather than for the
reader, however intelligent and alert, who wish to enjoy a
masterpiece, and be content simply to enjoy it. it do not really
matter how close to anything else something which possess independent
goodness be; the very utmost technical originality, the most spotless
purity from the faint taint of suggestion, will not suffice to confer
merit on what do not otherwise possess it. whether, as I rather think,
Fielding pursue the plan he have form _ab incepto_, or whether he
cavalierly neglect it, or whether the current of his own genius
carry he off his leg and land he, half against his will, on the
shore of originality, be question for the Schools, and, as I venture
to think, not for the high form in they. we have _Joseph Andrews_ as
it be; and we may be abundantly thankful for it. the content of it, as
of all Fielding's work in this kind, include certain thing for which
the modern be scantly grateful. of late year, and not of late year
only, there have grow up a singular and perhaps an ignorant impatience
of digression, of episode, of tale within a tale. the example of this
which have be most maltreat be the "Man of the Hill" episode in _Tom
Jones_; but the story of the "Unfortunate Jilt" and of Mr Wilson in
our present subject, do not appear to I to be much less obnoxious to
the censure; and _Amelia_ contain more than one or two thing of the
same kind. I they do not greatly disturb; and I see many defence for
they besides the obvious, and at a pinch sufficient one, that
divagation of this kind exist in all Fielding's spanish and french
model, that the public of the day expect they, and so forth. this
defence be enough, but it be easy to amplify and reintrench it. it be
not by any mean the fact that the Picaresque novel of adventure be the
only or the chief form of fiction which prescribe or admit these
episodic excursion. all the classical epic have they; many eastern and
other story present they; they be common, if not invariable, in the
abundant mediaeval literature of prose and verse romance; they be not
unknown by any mean in the modern novel; and you will very rarely hear
a story tell orally at the dinner-table or in the smoking-room without
something of the kind. there must, therefore, be something in they
correspond to an inseparable accident of that most unchanging of all
thing, human nature. and I do not think the special form with which we
be here concern by any mean the bad that they have take. it have
the grand and prominent virtue of be at once and easily skippable.
there be about Cervantes and Le Sage, about Fielding and Smollett, none
of the treachery of the modern novelist, who induce the conscientious
reader to drag through page, chapter, and sometimes volume which have
nothing to do with the action, for fear he should miss something that
have to do with it. these great man have a fearless frankness, and almost
tell you in so many word when and what you may skip. therefore, if the
"Curious Impertinent," and the "Baneful Marriage," and the "Man of the
Hill," and the "Lady of Quality," get in the way, when you desire to
"read for the story," you have nothing to do but turn the page till
_finis_ come. the defence have already be make by an illustrious hand
for Fielding's inter-chapter and exordium. it appear to I to be
almost more applicable to his insertion.
and so we need not trouble ourselves any more either about the
insertion or about the exordium. they both please I; the second class
have please person much well worth pleasing than I can pretend to be;
but the making or marring of the book lie elsewhere. I do not think
that it lie in the construction, though Fielding's following of the
ancient, both sincere and satiric, have impose a false air of
regularity upon that. the Odyssey of Joseph, of Fanny, and of their
ghostly mentor and bodily guard be, in truth, a little haphazard, and
might have be long or short without any discreet man approve it
the more or the less therefor. the real merit lie partly in the
abound humour and satire of the artist's criticism, but even more in
the marvellous vivacity and fertility of his creation. for the very
first time in english prose fiction every character be alive, every
incident be capable of have happen. there be lively touch in the
Elizabethan romance; but they be bury in verbiage, swathe in stage
costume, choke and fetter by their author' want of art. the quality
of Bunyan's knowledge of man be not much inferior to Shakespeare's, or
at least to Fielding's; but the range and the result of it be cramp
by his single theological purpose, and his unvaried allegoric or typical
form. why Defoe do not discover the New World of Fiction, I at least
have never be able to put into any brief critical formula that
satisfy I, and I have never see it put by any one else. he have not
only see it afar off, he have make landing and descent on it; he have
carry off and exhibit in triumph native such as Robinson Crusoe,
as Man Friday, as Moll Flanders, as William the Quaker; but he have
conquer, subdue, and settle no province therein. I like _Pamela_; I
like it well than some person who admire Richardson on the whole more
than I do, seem to like it. but, as in all its author's work, the
handling seem to I academic--the work out on paper of an
ingeniously conceive problem rather than the observation or evolution
of actual or possible life. I should not greatly fear to push the
comparison even into foreign country; but it be well to observe
limit. let we be content with hold that in England at least, without
prejudice to anything far, Fielding be the first to display the
quality of the perfect novelist as distinguish from the romancer.
what be those quality, as show in _Joseph Andrews_? the faculty of
arrange a probable and interesting course of action be one, of course,
and Fielding show it here. but I do not think that it be at any time
the great one; and nobody deny that he make great advance in this
direction later. the faculty of lively dialogue be another; and that he
have not often be refuse; but much the same may be say of it. the
interspersing of appropriate description be another; but here also we
shall not find he exactly a paragon. it be in character--the chief
_differentia_ of the novel as distinguish not merely from its eld
sister the romance, and its cousin the drama, but still more from every
other kind of literature--that Fielding stand even here pre-eminent. no
one that I can think of, except his great successor in the present
century, have the same unfailing gift of breathe life into every
character he create or borrow; and even Thackeray draw, if I may use
the phrase, his character more in the flat and less in the round than
field. whether in Blifil he once fail, we must discuss hereafter;
he have fail nowhere in _Joseph Andrews_. some of his sketch may
require the caution that they be eighteenth-century man and woman; some
the warning that they be obviously caricature, or set in design
profile, or merely sketch. but they be all alive. the finical
estimate of Gray (it be a horrid joy to think how perfectly capable
fielding be of have join in that practical joke of the young
gentleman of Cambridge, which make Gray change his college), while
dismiss these light thing with patronage, have to admit that "parson
Adams be perfectly well, so be Mrs Slipslop." "they _be_, Mr
Gray," say some one once, "they be more perfectly well, and in a
high kind, than anything you ever do; though you be a pretty
workman too."
yes, parson Adams be perfectly well, and so be Mrs Slipslop. but so be
they all. even the hero and heroine, tie and bind as they be by the
necessity under which their maker lie of preserve Joseph's
Joseph-hood, and of make Fanny the example of a franker and less
interested virtue than her sister-in-law that might have be, be
surprisingly human where most writer would have make they stick. and
the rest require no allowance. Lady Booby, few as be the stroke give
to she, be not much less alive than Lady Bellaston. Mr Trulliber,
monster and not at all delicate monster as he be, be also a man, and
when he lay it down that no one even in his own house shall drink when
he "caale vurst," one can but pay his maker the tribute of that silent
shudder of admiration which hail the addition of one more everlasting
entity to the world of thought and fancy. and Mr Tow-wouse be real, and
Mrs Tow-wouse be more real still, and Betty be real; and the coachman,
and Miss Grave-air, and all the wonderful crew from first to last. the
dress they wear, the manner they exhibit, the law they live under,
the very food and drink they live upon, be "past like the shadow on
glasses"--to the comfort and rejoicing of some, to the great or less
sorrow of other. but _they_ be there--alive, full of blood, full of
breath as we be, and, in truth, I fear a little more so. for some
purpose a century be a gap hard to cross and more estranging than a
couple of millennium. but in their case the gap be nothing; and it be
not too much to say that as they have stand the hard test, they will
stand the easy. there be very striking difference between Nausicaa
and Mrs Slipslop; there be difference not less striking between Mrs
Slipslop and Beatrice. but their likeness be a strange and more
wonderful thing than any of their unlikeness. it be that they be
all woman, that they be all live citizenesse of the Land of Matters
Unforgot, the fashion whereof passeth not away, and the franchise
whereof, once acquire, assure immortality.
note to GENERAL INTRODUCTION.
_the text of this issue in the main follow that of the standard or
first collect edition of 1762. the variant which the author
introduce in successive edition during his lifetime be not
inconsiderable; but for the purpose of the present issue it do not
seem necessary or indeed desirable to take account of they. in the case
of prose fiction, more than in any other department of literature, it be
desirable that work should be read in the form which represent the
complete intention and execution of the author. nor have any note
be attempt; for again such thing, in the case of prose fiction, be
of very doubtful use, and supply pretty certain stumbling-block to
enjoyment; while in the particular case of Fielding, the annotation,
unless extremely capricious, would have to be disgustingly full. far be
it at any rate from the present editor to bury these delightful
creation under an ugly crust of parallel passage and miscellaneous
erudition. the sheet, however, have be carefully read in order to
prevent the casual error which be willnot to creep into frequently
reprint text; and the editor hop that if any such have escape he,
the escape will not be attribute to wilful negligence. a few obvious
error, in spelling of proper name, &c., which occur in the 1762
version have be correct: but wherever the reading of that version
be possible they have be prefer. the embellishment of the edition
be partly fanciful and partly "documentary;" so that it be hop both
class of taste may have something to feed upon._
AUTHOR's PREFACE.
as it be possible the mere english reader may have a different idea of
romance from the author of these little[a] volume, and may consequently
expect a kind of entertainment not to be find, nor which be even
intend, in the follow page, it may not be improper to premise a
few word concern this kind of writing, which I do not remember to
have see hitherto attempt in our language.
[a] _Joseph Andrews_ be originally publish in 2 vol. duodecimo.
the EPIC, as well as the DRAMA, be divide into tragedy and comedy.
HOMER, who be the father of this specie of poetry, give we a pattern
of both these, though that of the latter kind be entirely lose; which
Aristotle tell we, bear the same relation to comedy which his Iliad
bear to tragedy. and perhaps, that we have no more instance of it
among the writer of antiquity, be owe to the loss of this great
pattern, which, have it survive, would have find its imitator equally
with the other poem of this great original.
and far, as this poetry may be tragic or comic, I will not scruple
to say it may be likewise either in verse or prose: for though it want
one particular, which the critic enumerate in the constituent part of
an epic poem, namely metre; yet, when any kind of writing contain all
its other part, such as fable, action, character, sentiment, and
diction, and be deficient in metre only, it seem, I think, reasonable
to refer it to the epic; at least, as no critic hath think proper to
range it under any other head, or to assign it a particular name
to itself.
thus the Telemachus of the archbishop of Cambray appear to I of the
epic kind, as well as the Odyssey of Homer; indeed, it be much fair
and more reasonable to give it a name common with that specie from
which it differ only in a single instance, than to confound it with
those which it resemble in no other. such be those voluminous work,
commonly call Romances, namely, Clelia, Cleopatra, Astraea, Cassandra,
the Grand Cyrus, and innumerable other, which contain, as I apprehend,
very little instruction or entertainment.
now, a comic romance be a comic epic poem in prose; differ from
comedy, as the serious epic from tragedy: its action be more extended
and comprehensive; contain a much large circle of incident, and
introduce a great variety of character. it differ from the serious
romance in its fable and action, in this; that as in the one these be
grave and solemn, so in the other they be light and ridiculous: it
differ in its character by introduce person of inferior rank, and
consequently, of inferior manner, whereas the grave romance set the
high before we: lastly, in its sentiment and diction; by preserve
the ludicrous instead of the sublime. in the diction, I think,
burlesque itself may be sometimes admit; of which many instance
will occur in this work, as in the description of the battle, and some
other place, not necessary to be point out to the classical reader,
for whose entertainment those parody or burlesque imitation be
chiefly calculate.
but though we have sometimes admit this in our diction, we have
carefully exclude it from our sentiment and character; for there it
be never properly introduce, unless in writing of the burlesque kind,
which this be not intend to be. indeed, no two specie of writing can
differ more widely than the comic and the burlesque; for as the latter
be ever the exhibition of what be monstrous and unnatural, and where our
delight, if we examine it, arise from the surprizing absurdity, as in
appropriate the manner of the high to the low, or _e converso_;
so in the former we should ever confine ourselves strictly to nature,
from the just imitation of which will flow all the pleasure we can this
way convey to a sensible reader. and perhaps there be one reason why a
comic writer should of all other be the least excuse for deviate
from nature, since it may not be always so easy for a serious poet to
meet with the great and the admirable; but life everywhere furnish an
accurate observer with the ridiculous.
I have hint this little concern burlesque, because I have often
hear that name give to performance which have be truly of the comic
kind, from the author's have sometimes admit it in his diction
only; which, as it be the dress of poetry, doth, like the dress of man,
establish character (the one of the whole poem, and the other of the
whole man), in vulgar opinion, beyond any of their great excellence:
but surely, a certain drollery in stile, where character and sentiment
be perfectly natural, no more constitute the burlesque, than an empty
pomp and dignity of word, where everything else be mean and low, can
entitle any performance to the appellation of the true sublime.
and I apprehend my Lord Shaftesbury's opinion of mere burlesque agree
with mine, when he assert, there be no such thing to be find in the
writing of the ancient. but perhaps I have less abhorrence than he
profess for it; and that, not because I have have some little success
on the stage this way, but rather as it contribute more to exquisite
mirth and laughter than any other; and these be probably more wholesome
physic for the mind, and conduce well to purge away spleen,
melancholy, and ill affection, than be generally imagine. Nay, I will
appeal to common observation, whether the same company be not find
more full of good-humour and benevolence, after they have be sweeten
for two or three hour with entertainment of this kind, than when
sour by a tragedy or a grave lecture.
but to illustrate all this by another science, in which, perhaps, we
shall see the distinction more clearly and plainly, let we examine the
work of a comic history painter, with those performance which the
Italians call Caricatura, where we shall find the true excellence of the
former to consist in the exactest copying of nature; insomuch that a
judicious eye instantly reject anything _outre_, any liberty which the
painter hath take with the feature of that _alma mater_; whereas in
the Caricatura we allow all licence--its aim be to exhibit monster,
not man; and all distortion and exaggeration whatever be within its
proper province.
now, what Caricatura be in painting, Burlesque be in writing; and in the
same manner the comic writer and painter correlate to each other. and
here I shall observe, that, as in the former the painter seem to have
the advantage; so it be in the latter infinitely on the side of the
writer; for the Monstrous be much easy to paint than describe, and the
Ridiculous to describe than paint.
and though perhaps this latter specie doth not in either science so
strongly affect and agitate the muscle as the other; yet it will be
own, I believe, that a more rational and useful pleasure arise to we
from it. he who should call the ingenious Hogarth a burlesque painter,
would, in my opinion, do he very little honour; for sure it be much
easy, much less the subject of admiration, to paint a man with a nose,
or any other feature, of a preposterous size, or to expose he in some
absurd or monstrous attitude, than to express the affection of man on
canvas. it hath be think a vast commendation of a painter to say his
figure seem to breathe; but surely it be a much great and nobler
applause, that they appear to think.
but to return. the ridiculous only, as I have before say, fall within
my province in the present work. nor will some explanation of this word
be think impertinent by the reader, if he consider how wonderfully it
hath be mistaken, even by writer who have profess it: for to what
but such a mistake can we attribute the many attempt to ridicule the
black villanie, and, what be yet bad, the most dreadful
calamity? what could exceed the absurdity of an author, who should
write the comedy of Nero, with the merry incident of rip up his
mother's belly? or what would give a great shock to humanity than an
attempt to expose the misery of poverty and distress to ridicule? and
yet the reader will not want much learning to suggest such instance
to himself.
besides, it may seem remarkable, that Aristotle, who be so fond and free
of definition, hath not think proper to define the ridiculous.
indeed, where he tell we it be proper to comedy, he hath remark that
villany be not its object: but he hath not, as I remember, positively
assert what be. nor doth the Abbe Bellegarde, who hath write a
treatise on this subject, though he show we many specie of it, once
trace it to its fountain.
the only source of the true Ridiculous (as it appear to I) be
affectation. but though it arise from one spring only, when we consider
the infinite stream into which this one branch, we shall presently
cease to admire at the copious field it afford to an observer. now,
affectation proceed from one of these two cause, vanity or hypocrisy:
for as vanity put we on affect false character, in order to
purchase applause; so hypocrisy set we on an endeavour to avoid
censure, by conceal our vice under an appearance of their opposite
virtue. and though these two cause be often confound (for there be
some difficulty in distinguish they), yet, as they proceed from very
different motif, so they be as clearly distinct in their operation:
for indeed, the affectation which arise from vanity be near to truth
than the other, as it hath not that violent repugnancy of nature to
struggle with, which that of the hypocrite hath. it may be likewise
note, that affectation doth not imply an absolute negation of those
quality which be affect; and, therefore, though, when it proceed
from hypocrisy, it be nearly ally to deceit; yet when it come from
vanity only, it partake of the nature of ostentation: for instance, the
affectation of liberality in a vain man differ visibly from the same
affectation in the avaricious; for though the vain man be not what he
would appear, or hath not the virtue he affect, to the degree he would
be think to have it; yet it sit less awkwardly on he than on the
avaricious man, who be the very reverse of what he would seem to be.
from the discovery of this affectation arise the Ridiculous, which
always strike the reader with surprize and pleasure; and that in a
high and strong degree when the affectation arise from hypocrisy,
than when from vanity; for to discover any one to be the exact reverse
of what he affect, be more surprizing, and consequently more
ridiculous, than to find he a little deficient in the quality he
desire the reputation of. I might observe that our Ben Jonson, who of
all man understand the Ridiculous the good, hath chiefly use the
hypocritical affectation.
now, from affectation only, the misfortune and calamity of life, or
the imperfection of nature, may become the object of ridicule. surely
he hath a very ill-frame mind who can look on ugliness, infirmity, or
poverty, as ridiculous in themselves: nor do I believe any man live,
who meet a dirty fellow riding through the street in a cart, be
strike with an idea of the Ridiculous from it; but if he should see the
same figure descend from his coach and six, or bolt from his chair with
his hat under his arm, he would then begin to laugh, and with justice.
in the same manner, be we to enter a poor house and behold a wretched
family shiver with cold and languish with hunger, it would not
incline we to laughter (at least we must have very diabolical nature if
it would); but should we discover there a grate, instead of coal,
adorn with flower, empty plate or china dish on the sideboard, or
any other affectation of rich and finery, either on their person or
in their furniture, we might then indeed be excuse for ridicule so
fantastical an appearance. much less be natural imperfection the
object of derision; but when ugliness aim at the applause of beauty, or
lameness endeavour to display agility, it be then that these
unfortunate circumstance, which at first move our compassion, tend
only to raise our mirth.
the poet carry this very far:--
none be for be what they be in fault,
but for not be what they would be think.
where if the metre would suffer the word ridiculous to close the first
line, the thought would be rather more proper. great vice be the
proper object of our detestation, small fault, of our pity; but
affectation appear to I the only true source of the Ridiculous.
but perhaps it may be object to I, that I have against my own rule
introduce vice, and of a very black kind, into this work. to which I
shall answer: first, that it be very difficult to pursue a series of
human action, and keep clear from they. secondly, that the vice to be
find here be rather the accidental consequence of some human frailty
or foible, than cause habitually exist in the mind. thirdly, that
they be never set forth as the object of ridicule, but detestation.
fourthly, that they be never the principal figure at that time on the
scene: and, lastly, they never produce the intend evil.
have thus distinguish Joseph Andrews from the production of romance
writer on the one hand and burlesque writer on the other, and give
some few very short hint (for I intend no more) of this specie of
writing, which I have affirm to be hitherto unattempte in our
language; I shall leave to my good-natured reader to apply my piece to
my observation, and will detain he no long than with a word
concern the character in this work.
and here I solemnly protest I have no intention to vilify or asperse any
one; for though everything be copy from the book of nature, and scarce
a character or action produce which I have not take from my I own
observation and experience; yet I have use the utmost care to obscure
the person by such different circumstance, degree, and colour, that
it will be impossible to guess at they with any degree of certainty; and
if it ever happen otherwise, it be only where the failure characterize
be so minute, that it be a foible only which the party himself may laugh
at as well as any other.
as to the character of Adams, as it be the most glaring in the whole, so
I conceive it be not to be find in any book now extant. it be design
a character of perfect simplicity; and as the goodness of his heart
will recommend he to the good-natured, so I hope it will excuse I to
the gentleman of his cloth; for whom, while they be worthy of their
sacred order, no man can possibly have a great respect. they will
therefore excuse I, notwithstanding the low adventure in which he be
engage, that I have make he a clergyman; since no other office could
have give he so many opportunity of display his worthy
inclination.
the history of the adventures of JOSEPH ANDREWS and his FRIEND MR
ABRAHAM ADAMS
BOOK I.
CHAPTER I.
_of write life in general, and particularly of Pamela; with a word by
the bye of Colley Cibber and other._
it be a trite but true observation, that example work more forcibly on
the mind than precept: and if this be just in what be odious and
blameable, it be more strongly so in what be amiable and praiseworthy.
here emulation most effectually operate upon we, and inspire our
imitation in an irresistible manner. a good man therefore be a standing
lesson to all his acquaintance, and of far great use in that narrow
circle than a good book.
but as it often happen that the good man be but little know, and
consequently cannot extend the usefulness of their example a great way;
the writer may be call in aid to spread their history far, and to
present the amiable picture to those who have not the happiness of
know the original; and so, by communicate such valuable pattern
to the world, he may perhaps do a more extensive service to mankind than
the person whose life originally afford the pattern.
in this light I have always regard those biographer who have record
the action of great and worthy person of both sex. not to mention
those antient writer which of late day be little read, be write
in obsolete, and as they be generally think, unintelligible
language, such as Plutarch, Nepos, and other which I hear of in my
youth; our own language afford many of excellent use and instruction,
finely calculate to sow the seed of virtue in youth, and very easy to
be comprehend by person of moderate capacity. such as the history of
John the Great, who, by his brave and heroic action against man of
large and athletic body, obtain the glorious appellation of the
Giant-killer; that of an Earl of Warwick, whose christian name be Guy;
the life of Argalus and Parthenia; and above all, the history of those
seven worthy personage, the Champions of Christendom. in all these
delight be mix with instruction, and the reader be almost as much
improve as entertain.
but I pass by these and many other to mention two book lately
publish, which represent an admirable pattern of the amiable in either
sex. the former of these, which deal in male virtue, be write by the
great person himself, who live the life he hath record, and be by
many think to have live such a life only in order to write it. the
other be communicate to we by an historian who borrow his light, as
the common method be, from authentic paper and record. the reader, I
believe, already conjecture, I mean the life of Mr Colley Cibber and
of Mrs Pamela Andrews. how artfully doth the former, by insinuate that
he escape be promote to the high station in Church and State,
teach we a contempt of worldly grandeur! how strongly doth he inculcate
an absolute submission to our superior! lastly, how completely doth he
arm we against so uneasy, so wretche a passion as the fear of shame!
how clearly doth he expose the emptiness and vanity of that phantom,
reputation!
what the female reader be teach by the memoir of Mrs Andrews be so
well set forth in the excellent essay or letter prefix to the second
and subsequent edition of that work, that it would be here a needless
repetition. the authentic history with which I now present the public be
an instance of the great good that book be likely to do, and of the
prevalence of example which I have just observe: since it will appear
that it be by keep the excellent pattern of his sister's virtue
before his eye, that Mr Joseph Andrews be chiefly enable to preserve
his purity in the midst of such great temptation. I shall only add that
this character of male chastity, though doubtless as desirable and
become in one part of the human specie as in the other, be almost the
only virtue which the great apologist hath not give himself for the
sake of give the example to his reader.
CHAPTER II.
_of Mr Joseph Andrews, his birth, parentage, education, and great
endowment; with a word or two concern ancestor._
Mr Joseph Andrews, the hero of our ensue history, be esteem to be
the only son of Gaffar and Gammer Andrews, and brother to the
illustrious Pamela, whose virtue be at present so famous. as to his
ancestor, we have search with great diligence, but little success;
be unable to trace they far than his great-grandfather, who, as
an elderly person in the parish remember to have hear his father say,
be an excellent cudgel-player. whether he have any ancestor before
this, we must leave to the opinion of our curious reader, find
nothing of sufficient certainty to rely on. however, we cannot omit
insert an epitaph which an ingenious friend of ours hath
communicated:--
Stay, traveller, for underneath this pew
Lies fast asleep that merry man Andrew:
when the last day's great sun shall gild the sky,
then he shall from his tomb get up and rise.
be merry while thou canst: for surely thou
Shalt shortly be as sad as he be now.
the word be almost out of the stone with antiquity. but it be needless
to observe that Andrew here be writ without an _s_, and be, besides, a
christian name. my friend, moreover, conjecture this to have be the
founder of that sect of laugh philosopher since call
Merry-andrews.
to waive, therefore, a circumstance which, though mention in
conformity to the exact rule of biography, be not greatly material, I
proceed to thing of more consequence. indeed, it be sufficiently
certain that he have as many ancestor as the good man live, and,
perhaps, if we look five or six hundred year backwards, might be
relate to some person of very great figure at present, whose ancestor
within half the last century be bury in as great obscurity. but
suppose, for argument's sake, we should admit that he have no ancestor
at all, but have spring up, accord to the modern phrase, out of a
dunghill, as the Athenians pretend they themselves do from the earth,
would not this autokopros[A] have be justly entitle to all the
praise arise from his own virtue? would it not be hard that a man who
hath no ancestor should therefore be render incapable of acquire
honour; when we see so many who have no virtue enjoy the honour of
their forefather? at ten year old (by which time his education be
advanced to writing and reading) he be bind an apprentice, accord
to the statute, to Sir Thomas Booby, an uncle of Mr Booby's by the
father's side. Sir Thomas have then an estate in his own hand, the
young Andrews be at first employ in what in the country they call
keep bird. his office be to perform the part the ancient assign
to the god Priapus, which deity the modern call by the name of Jack o'
Lent; but his voice be so extremely musical, that it rather allure
the bird than terrify they, he be soon transplant from the field
into the dog-kennel, where he be place under the huntsman, and make
what the sportsman term whipper-in. for this place likewise the
sweetness of his voice disqualify he; the dog prefer the melody
of his chiding to all the alluring note of the huntsman, who soon
become so incensed at it, that he desire Sir Thomas to provide
otherwise for he, and constantly lay every fault the dog be at to
the account of the poor boy, who be now transplant to the stable.
here he soon give proof of strength and agility beyond his year, and
constantly ride the most spirited and vicious horse to water, with an
intrepidity which surprize every one. while he be in this station, he
ride several race for Sir Thomas, and this with such expertness and
success, that the neighbouring gentleman frequently solicit the knight
to permit little Joey (for so he be call) to ride their match. the
good gamester, before they lay their money, always inquire which
horse little Joey be to ride; and the bet be rather proportion by
the rider than by the horse himself; especially after he have scornfully
refuse a considerable bribe to play booty on such an occasion. this
extremely raise his character, and so please the Lady Booby, that she
desire to have he (be now seventeen year of age) for her
own footboy.
[a] in English, spring from a dunghill.
Joey be now prefer from the stable to attend on his lady, to go on
her errand, stand behind her chair, wait at her tea-table, and carry
her prayer-book to church; at which place his voice give he an
opportunity of distinguish himself by sing psalm: he behave
likewise in every other respect so well at Divine service, that it
recommend he to the notice of Mr Abraham Adams, the curate, who take
an opportunity one day, as he be drink a cup of ale in Sir Thomas's
kitchen, to ask the young man several question concern religion;
with his answer to which he be wonderfully pleased.
CHAPTER III.
_of Mr Abraham Adams the curate, Mrs Slipslop the chambermaid, and
other._
Mr Abraham Adams be an excellent scholar. he be a perfect master of
the greek and latin language; to which he add a great share of
knowledge in the oriental tongue; and could read and translate French,
italian, and Spanish. he have apply many year to the most severe
study, and have treasure up a fund of learn rarely to be meet with in
a university. he be, besides, a man of good sense, good part, and good
nature; but be at the same time as entirely ignorant of the way of
this world as an infant just enter into it could possibly be. as he
have never any intention to deceive, so he never suspect such a design
in other. he be generous, friendly, and brave to an excess; but
simplicity be his characteristick: he do, no more than Mr Colley
Cibber, apprehend any such passion as malice and envy to exist in
mankind; which be indeed less remarkable in a country parson than in a
gentleman who hath pass his life behind the scenes,--a place which
hath be seldom think the school of innocence, and where a very
little observation would have convince the great apologist that those
passion have a real existence in the human mind.
his virtue, and his other qualification, as they render he equal to
his office, so they make he an agreeable and valuable companion, and
have so much endear and well recommend he to a bishop, that at the
age of fifty he be provide with a handsome income of twenty-three
pound a year; which, however, he could not make any great figure with,
because he live in a dear country, and be a little encumbered with a
wife and six child.
it be this gentleman, who have, as I have say, observe the singular
devotion of young Andrews, have find mean to question he concern
several particular; as, how many book there be in the New Testament?
which be they? how many chapter they contain? and such like: to all
which, Mr Adams privately say, he answer much well than Sir Thomas,
or two other neighbouring justice of the peace could probably
have do.
Mr Adams be wonderfully solicitous to know at what time, and by what
opportunity, the youth become acquaint with these matter: Joey tell
he that he have very early learn to read and write by the goodness of
his father, who, though he have not interest enough to get he into a
charity school, because a cousin of his father's landlord do not vote
on the right side for a churchwarden in a borough town, yet have be
himself at the expense of sixpence a week for his learning. he tell he
likewise, that ever since he be in Sir Thomas's family he have employ
all his hour of leisure in read good book; that he have read the
Bible, the Whole Duty of Man, and Thomas a Kempis; and that as often as
he could, without be perceive, he have study a great good book
which lie open in the hall window, where he have read, "as how the devil
carry away half a church in sermon-time, without hurt one of the
congregation; and as how a field of corn run away down a hill with all
the tree upon it, and cover another man's meadow." this sufficiently
assure Mr Adams that the good book mean could be no other than Baker's
Chronicle.
the curate, surprize to find such instance of industry and application
in a young man who have never meet with the least encouragement, ask
he, if he do not extremely regret the want of a liberal education, and
the not have be bear of parent who might have indulge his talent
and desire of knowledge? to which he answer, "he hop he have profit
somewhat well from the book he have read than to lament his condition
in this world. that, for his part, he be perfectly content with the
state to which he be call; that he should endeavour to improve his
talent, which be all require of he; but not repine at his own lot,
nor envy those of his better." "well say, my lad," reply the curate;
"and I wish some who have read many more good book, nay, and some who
have write good book themselves, have profit so much by they."
Adams have no near access to Sir Thomas or my lady than through the
waiting-gentlewoman; for Sir Thomas be too apt to estimate man merely
by their dress or fortune; and my lady be a woman of gaiety, who have
be blest with a town education, and never speak of any of her country
neighbour by any other appellation than that of the brute. they both
regard the curate as a kind of domestic only, belong to the parson
of the parish, who be at this time at variance with the knight; for the
parson have for many year live in a constant state of civil war, or,
which be perhaps as bad, of civil law, with Sir Thomas himself and the
tenant of his manor. the foundation of this quarrel be a modus, by
set which aside an advantage of several shilling _per annum_ would
have accrue to the rector; but he have not yet be able to accomplish
his purpose, and have reap hitherto nothing well from the suit than
the pleasure (which he use indeed frequently to say be no small one)
of reflect that he have utterly undo many of the poor tenant,
though he have at the same time greatly impoverished himself.
Mrs Slipslop, the waiting-gentlewoman, be herself the daughter of a
curate, preserve some respect for Adams: she profess great regard for
his learning, and would frequently dispute with he on point of
theology; but always insist on a deference to be pay to she
understanding, as she have be frequently at London, and know more of
the world than a country parson could pretend to.
she have in these dispute a particular advantage over Adams: for she be
a mighty affecter of hard word, which she use in such a manner that
the parson, who durst not offend she by call her word in question,
be frequently at some loss to guess her meaning, and would have be
much less puzzled by an arabian manuscript.
Adams therefore take an opportunity one day, after a pretty long
discourse with she on the essence (or, as she please to term it, the
incence) of matter, to mention the case of young Andrews; desire she
to recommend he to her lady as a youth very susceptible of learning,
and one whose instruction in Latin he would himself undertake; by which
mean he might be qualified for a high station than that of a footman;
and add, she know it be in his master's power easily to provide for
he in a well manner. he therefore desire that the boy might be leave
behind under his care.
"La! Mr Adams," say Mrs Slipslop, "do you think my lady will suffer any
preamble about any such matter? she be go to London very concisely,
and I be confidous would not leave Joey behind she on any account; for
he be one of the genteelest young fellow you may see in a summer's day;
and I be confidous she would as soon think of part with a pair of her
grey mare, for she value herself as much on one as the other." Adams
would have interrupt, but she proceed: "and why be latin more
necessitous for a footman than a gentleman? it be very proper that you
clergyman must learn it, because you cannot preach without it: but I have
hear gentleman say in London, that it be fit for nobody else. I be
confidous my lady would be angry with I for mention it; and I shall
draw myself into no such delemy." at which word her lady's bell rung,
and Mr Adams be force to retire; nor could he gain a second
opportunity with she before their London journey, which happen a few
day afterwards. however, Andrews behave very thankfully and gratefully
to he for his intend kindness, which he tell he he never would
forget, and at the same time receive from the good man many admonition
concern the regulation of his future conduct, and his perseverance in
innocence and industry.
CHAPTER IV.
_what happen after their journey to London._
no soon be young Andrews arrive at London than he begin to scrape an
acquaintance with his party-colour brother, who endeavour to make
he despise his former course of life. his hair be cut after the new
fashion, and become his chief care; he go abroad with it all the
morning in paper, and drest it out in the afternoon. they could not,
however, teach he to game, swear, drink, nor any other genteel vice the
town abound with. he apply most of his leisure hour to music, in
which he greatly improve himself; and become so perfect a connoisseur
in that art, that he lead the opinion of all the other footman at an
opera, and they never condemn or applaud a single song contrary to
his approbation or dislike. he be a little too forward in riot at the
play-house and assembly; and when he attend his lady at church
(which be but seldom) he behave with less seeming devotion than
formerly: however, if he be outwardly a pretty fellow, his moral
remain entirely uncorrupted, though he be at the same time smart
and genteel than any of the beaus in town, either in or out of livery.
his lady, who have often say of he that Joey be the handsome and
genteelest footman in the kingdom, but that it be pity he want
spirit, begin now to find that fault no long; on the contrary, she be
frequently hear to cry out, "ay, there be some life in this fellow."
she plainly see the effect which the town air hath on the sober
constitution. she would now walk out with he into Hyde Park in a
morning, and when tire, which happen almost every minute, would lean
on his arm, and converse with he in great familiarity. whenever she
stept out of her coach, she would take he by the hand, and sometimes,
for fear of stumbling, press it very hard; she admit he to deliver
message at her bedside in a morning, leer at he at table, and
indulge he in all those innocent freedom which woman of figure may
permit without the least sully of their virtue.
but though their virtue remain unsullied, yet now and then some small
arrow will glance on the shadow of it, their reputation; and so it fall
out to Lady Booby, who happen to be walk arm-in-arm with Joey one
morning in Hyde Park, when Lady Tittle and Lady Tattle come accidentally
by in their coach. "bless I," say Lady Tittle, "can I believe my eye?
be that Lady booby?"--"surely," say Tattle. "but what make you
surprized?"--"why, be not that her footman?" reply Tittle. at which
Tattle laugh, and cry, "an old business, I assure you: be it
possible you should not have hear it? the whole town hath know it this
half-year." the consequence of this interview be a whisper through a
hundred visit, which be separately perform by the two ladies[A] the
same afternoon, and might have have a mischievous effect, have it not be
stopt by two fresh reputation which be publish the day afterwards,
and engross the whole talk of the town.
[a] it may seem an absurdity that tattle should visit, as she actually
do, to spread a know scandal: but the reader may reconcile this by
supposing, with I, that, notwithstanding what she say, this be
her first acquaintance with it.
but, whatever opinion or suspicion the scandalous inclination of
defamer might entertain of Lady Booby's innocent freedom, it be
certain they make no impression on young Andrews, who never offer to
encroach beyond the liberty which his lady allow him,--a behaviour
which she impute to the violent respect he preserve for she, and which
serve only to heighten a something she begin to conceive, and which
the next chapter will open a little far.
CHAPTER V.
_the death of Sir Thomas Booby, with the affectionate and mournful
behaviour of his widow, and the great purity of Joseph Andrews._
at this time an accident happen which put a stop to those agreeable
walk, which probably would have soon puff up the cheek of Fame, and
cause she to blow her brazen trumpet through the town; and this be no
other than the death of Sir Thomas Booby, who, depart this life, leave
his disconsolate lady confine to her house, as closely as if she
herself have be attack by some violent disease. during the first six
day the poor lady admit none but Mrs. Slipslop, and three female
friend, who make a party at card: but on the seventh she order Joey,
whom, for a good reason, we shall hereafter call JOSEPH, to bring up her
tea-kettle. the lady be in bed, call Joseph to she, bade he sit
down, and, have accidentally lay her hand on his, she ask he if he
have ever be in love. Joseph answer, with some confusion, it be time
enough for one so young as himself to think on such thing. "as young as
you be," reply the lady, "I be convinced you be no strange to that
passion. come, Joey," say she, "tell I truly, who be the happy girl
whose eye have make a conquest of you?" Joseph return, that all the
woman he have ever see be equally indifferent to he. "oh then," say
the lady, "you be a general lover. indeed, you handsome fellow, like
handsome woman, be very long and difficult in fixing; but yet you
shall never persuade I that your heart be so insusceptible of
affection; I rather impute what you say to your secrecy, a very
commendable quality, and what I be far from be angry with you for.
nothing can be more unworthy in a young man, than to betray any
intimacy with the lady." "Ladies! madam," say Joseph, "I be sure I
never have the impudence to think of any that deserve that name." "donot
pretend to too much modesty," say she, "for that sometimes may be
impertinent: but pray answer I this question. suppose a lady should
happen to like you; suppose she should prefer you to all your sex, and
admit you to the same familiarity as you might have hop for if you
have be bear she equal, be you certain that no vanity could tempt you
to discover she? answer I honestly, Joseph; have you so much more sense
and so much more virtue than you handsome young fellow generally have,
who make no scruple of sacrifice our dear reputation to your pride,
without consider the great obligation we lay on you by our
condescension and confidence? can you keep a secret, my Joey?" "Madam,"
say he, "I hope your ladyship cannot tax I with ever betray the
secret of the family; and I hope, if you be to turn I away, I might
have that character of you." "I donot intend to turn you away, Joey,"
say she, and sigh; "I be afraid it be not in my power." she then
raise herself a little in her bed, and discover one of the white
neck that ever be see; at which Joseph blush. "La!" say she, in an
affect surprize, "what be I do? I have trust myself with a man
alone, naked in bed; suppose you should have any wicked intention upon
my honour, how should I defend myself?" Joseph protest that he never
have the least evil design against she. "no," say she, "perhaps you may
not call your design wicked; and perhaps they be not so."--He swore
they be not. "you misunderstand I," say she; "I mean if they be
against my honour, they may not be wicked; but the world call they so.
but then, say you, the world will never know anything of the matter; yet
would not that be trust to your secrecy? must not my reputation be
then in your power? would you not then be my master?" Joseph beg she
ladyship to be comfort; for that he would never imagine the least
wicked thing against she, and that he have rather die a thousand death
than give she any reason to suspect he. "yes," say she, "I must have
reason to suspect you. be you not a man? and, without vanity, I may
pretend to some charm. but perhaps you may fear I should prosecute you;
indeed I hope you do; and yet Heaven know I should never have the
confidence to appear before a court of justice; and you know, Joey, I be
of a forgiving temper. tell I, Joey, donot you think I should forgive
you?"--"indeed, madam," say Joseph, "I will never do anything to
disoblige your ladyship."--"how," say she, "do you think it would not
disoblige I then? do you think I would willingly suffer you?"--"i donot
understand you, madam," say joseph.--"don't you?" say she, "then you
be either a fool, or pretend to be so; I find I be mistaken in you. so
get you downstairs, and never let I see your face again; your pretended
innocence cannot impose on I."--"Madam," say Joseph, "I would not have
your ladyship think any evil of I. I have always endeavour to be a
dutiful servant both to you and my master."--"O thou villain!" answer
my lady; "why didst thou mention the name of that dear man, unless to
torment I, to bring his precious memory to my mind?" (and then she
burst into a fit of tear.) "get thee from my sight! I shall never
endure thee more." at which word she turn away from he; and Joseph
retreat from the room in a most disconsolate condition, and writ that
letter which the reader will find in the next chapter.
CHAPTER VI.
_how Joseph Andrews writ a letter to his sister Pamela._
"to MRS PAMELA ANDREWS, live with SQUIRE BOOBY.
"DEAR sister,--since I receive your letter of your good lady's death,
we have have a misfortune of the same kind in our family. my worthy
master Sir Thomas die about four day ago; and, what be bad, my poor
lady be certainly go distract. none of the servant expect she to
take it so to heart, because they quarrel almost every day of their
life: but no more of that, because you know, Pamela, I never love to
tell the secret of my master's family; but to be sure you must have
know they never love one another; and I have hear her ladyship wish
his honour dead above a thousand time; but nobody know what it be to
lose a friend till they have lose he.
"donot tell anybody what I write, because I should not care to have
folk say I discover what pass in our family; but if it have not be
so great a lady, I should have think she have have a mind to I. dear
Pamela, donot tell anybody; but she order I to sit down by she
bedside, when she be in naked bed; and she hold my hand, and talk
exactly as a lady do to her sweetheart in a stage-play, which I have
see in Covent Garden, while she want he to be no well than he
should be.
"if madam be mad, I shall not care for stay long in the family; so I
heartily wish you could get I a place, either at the squire's, or some
other neighbouring gentleman's, unless it be true that you be go to
be marry to parson Williams, as folk talk, and then I should be very
willing to be his clerk; for which you know I be qualified, be able
to read and to set a psalm.
"I fancy I shall be discharge very soon; and the moment I be, unless I
hear from you, I shall return to my old master's country-seat, if it be
only to see parson Adams, who be the good man in the world. London be a
bad place, and there be so little good fellowship, that the next-door
neighbour donot know one another. pray give my service to all friend
that inquire for I. so I rest
"your love brother,
"JOSEPH ANDREWS."
as soon as Joseph have seal and direct this letter he walk
downstair, where he meet Mrs. Slipslop, with whom we shall take this
opportunity to bring the reader a little well acquainted. she be a
maiden gentlewoman of about forty-five year of age, who, have make a
small slip in her youth, have continue a good maid ever since. she be
not at this time remarkably handsome; be very short, and rather too
corpulent in body, and somewhat red, with the addition of pimple in the
face. her nose be likewise rather too large, and her eye too little;
nor do she resemble a cow so much in her breath as in two brown globe
which she carry before she; one of her leg be also a little short
than the other, which occasion she to limp as she walk. this fair
creature have long cast the eye of affection on Joseph, in which she have
not meet with quite so good success as she probably wish, though,
besides the allurement of her native charm, she have give he tea,
sweetmeat, wine, and many other delicacy, of which, by keep the
key, she have the absolute command. Joseph, however, have not return
the least gratitude to all these favour, not even so much as a kiss;
though I would not insinuate she be so easily to be satisfy; for
surely then he would have be highly blameable. the truth be, she be
arrive at an age when she think she might indulge herself in any
liberty with a man, without the danger of bring a third person into
the world to betray they. she imagine that by so long a self-denial she
have not only make amend for the small slip of her youth above hint
at, but have likewise lay up a quantity of merit to excuse any future
failing. in a word, she resolve to give a loose to her amorous
inclination, and to pay off the debt of pleasure which she find she
owe herself, as fast as possible.
with these charm of person, and in this disposition of mind, she
encounter poor Joseph at the bottom of the stair, and ask he if he
would drink a glass of something good this morning. Joseph, whose
spirit be not a little cast down, very readily and thankfully
accept the offer; and together they go into a closet, where, have
deliver he a full glass of ratafia, and desire he to sit down, Mrs.
Slipslop thus began:--
"sure nothing can be a more simple contract in a woman than to place her
affection on a boy. if I have ever think it would have be my fate, I
should have wish to die a thousand death rather than live to see that
day. if we like a man, the light hint sophisticate. whereas a boy
propose upon we to break through all the regulation of modesty, before
we can make any oppression upon he." Joseph, who do not understand a
word she say, answer, "yes, madam."--"Yes, madam!" reply Mrs.
Slipslop with some warmth, "do you intend to result my passion? be it
not enough, ungrateful as you be, to make no return to all the favour
I have do you; but you must treat I with ironing? barbarous monster!
how have I deserve that my passion should be result and treat with
iron?" "Madam," answer Joseph, "I donot understand your hard word;
but I be certain you have no occasion to call I ungrateful, for, so far
from intend you any wrong, I have always love you as well as if you
have be my own mother." "how, sirrah!" say Mrs. Slipslop in a rage;
"your own mother? do you assinuate that I be old enough to be your
mother? I donot know what a stripling may think, but I believe a man
would refer I to any green-sickness silly girl whatsomdever: but I
ought to despise you rather than be angry with you, for refer the
conversation of girl to that of a woman of sense."--"Madam," say
Joseph, "I be sure I have always value the honour you do I by your
conversation, for I know you be a woman of learn."--"Yes, but,
Joseph," say she, a little soften by the compliment to her learning,
"if you have a value for I, you certainly would have find some method
of show it I; for I be convict you must see the value I have for
you. yes, Joseph, my eye, whether I would or no, must have declare a
passion I cannot conquer.--oh! Joseph!"
as when a hungry tigress, who long have traverse the wood in fruitless
search, see within the reach of her claws a lamb, she prepare to leap
on her prey; or as a voracious pike, of immense size, survey through
the liquid element a roach or gudgeon, which cannot escape her jaw,
open they wide to swallow the little fish; so do Mrs. Slipslop prepare
to lay her violent amorous hand on the poor Joseph, when luckily her
mistress's bell rung, and deliver the intended martyr from her
clutch. she be oblige to leave he abruptly, and to defer the
execution of her purpose till some other time. we shall therefore return
to the Lady Booby, and give our reader some account of her behaviour,
after she be leave by Joseph in a temper of mind not greatly different
from that of the inflame Slipslop.
CHAPTER VII.
_saying of wise man. a dialogue between the lady and she maid; and a
panegyric, or rather satire, on the passion of love, in the
sublime style._
it be the observation of some antient sage, whose name I have forget,
that passion operate differently on the human mind, as disease on the
body, in proportion to the strength or weakness, soundness or
rottenness, of the one and the other.
we hope, therefore, a judicious reader will give himself some pain to
observe, what we have so greatly labour to describe, the different
operation of this passion of love in the gentle and cultivate mind of
the Lady Booby, from those which it effect in the less polished and
coarser disposition of Mrs Slipslop.
another philosopher, whose name also at present escape my memory, hath
somewhere say, that resolution take in the absence of the beloved
object be very apt to vanish in its presence; on both which wise
saying the follow chapter may serve as a comment.
no soon have Joseph leave the room in the manner we have before relate
than the lady, enrage at her disappointment, begin to reflect with
severity on her conduct. her love be now change to disdain, which
pride assist to torment she. she despise herself for the meanness of
her passion, and Joseph for its ill success. however, she have now get
the well of it in her own opinion, and determine immediately to
dismiss the object. after much tossing and turn in her bed, and many
soliloquy, which if we have no well matter for our reader we would
give he, she at last rung the bell as above mention, and be
presently attend by Mrs Slipslop, who be not much well pleased with
Joseph than the lady herself.
"Slipslop," say Lady Booby, "when do you see Joseph?" the poor woman
be so surprized at the unexpected sound of his name at so critical a
time, that she have the great difficulty to conceal the confusion she
be under from her mistress; whom she answer, nevertheless, with
pretty good confidence, though not entirely void of fear of suspicion,
that she have not see he that morning. "I be afraid," say Lady Booby,
"he be a wild young fellow."--"That he be," say Slipslop, "and a
wicked one too. to my knowledge he game, drink, swear, and fight
eternally; besides, he be horribly indict to wenching."--"Ay!" say
the lady, "I never hear that of he."--"O madam!" answer the other,
"he be so lewd a rascal, that if your ladyship keep he much long,
you will not have one virgin in your house except myself. and yet I
cannot conceive what the wench see in he, to be so foolishly fond as
they be; in my eye, he be as ugly a scarecrow as I ever
uphold."--"Nay," say the lady, "the boy be well enough."--"La! ma'am,"
cry Slipslop, "I think he the ragmaticall fellow in the
family."--"Sure, Slipslop," say she, "you be mistake: but which of
the woman do you most suspect?"--"madam," say Slipslop, "there be Betty
the chambermaid, I be almost convict, be with child by he."--"Ay!"
say the lady, "then pray pay she her wage instantly. I will keep no
such slut in my family. and as for Joseph, you may discard he
too."--"Would your ladyship have he pay off immediately?" cry
Slipslop, "for perhaps, when Betty be go he may mend: and really the
boy be a good servant, and a strong healthy luscious boy enough."--
"this morning," answer the lady with some vehemence. "I wish, madam,"
cry Slipslop, "your ladyship would be so good as to try he a little
long."--"I will not have my command dispute," say the lady; "sure
you be not fond of he yourself?"--"I, madam!" cry Slipslop,
redden, if not blush, "I should be sorry to think your ladyship
have any reason to respect I of fondness for a fellow; and if it be your
pleasure, I shall fulfil it with as much reluctance as possible."--"a
little, I suppose you mean," say the lady; "and so about it instantly."
Mrs. Slipslop go out, and the lady have scarce take two turn before
she fall to knock and ring with great violence. Slipslop, who do
not travel post haste, soon return, and be countermand as to
Joseph, but order to send Betty about her business without delay. she
go out a second time with much great alacrity than before; when the
lady begin immediately to accuse herself of want of resolution, and to
apprehend the return of her affection, with its pernicious consequence;
she therefore apply herself again to the bell, and re-summon Mrs.
Slipslop into her presence; who again return, and be tell by her
mistress that she have consider well of the matter, and be
absolutely resolve to turn away Joseph; which she order she to do
immediately. Slipslop, who know the violence of her lady's temper, and
would not venture her place for any Adonis or Hercules in the universe,
leave she a third time; which she have no soon do, than the little god
Cupid, fear he have not yet do the lady's business, take a fresh
arrow with the sharp point out of his quiver, and shoot it directly
into her heart; in other and plainer language, the lady's passion get
the well of her reason. she call back Slipslop once more, and tell
she she have resolve to see the boy, and examine he herself; therefore
bid she send he up. this waver in her mistress's temper probably put
something into the waiting-gentlewoman's head not necessary to mention
to the sagacious reader.
Lady Booby be go to call she back again, but could not prevail with
herself. the next consideration therefore be, how she should behave to
Joseph when he come in. she resolve to preserve all the dignity of the
woman of fashion to her servant, and to indulge herself in this last
view of Joseph (for that she be most certainly resolve it should be)
at his own expense, by first insulting and then discard he.
o love, what monstrous trick dost thou play with thy votary of both
sex! how dost thou deceive they, and make they deceive themselves!
their folly be thy delight! their sigh make thee laugh, and their
pang be thy merriment!
not the great Rich, who turn man into monkey, wheel-barrow, and
whatever else well humour his fancy, hath so strangely metamorphose
the human shape; nor the great Cibber, who confound all number, gender,
and break through every rule of grammar at his will, hath so distort
the english language as thou dost metamorphose and distort the
human sens.
Thou putt out our eye, stopp up our ear, and takest away the
power of our nostril; so that we can neither see the large object,
hear the loud noise, nor smell the most poignant perfume. again, when
thou pleasest, thou canst make a molehill appear as a mountain, a
Jew's-harp sound like a trumpet, and a daisy smell like a violet. Thou
canst make cowardice brave, avarice generous, pride humble, and cruelty
tender-hearted. in short, thou turn the heart of man inside out, as a
juggler doth a petticoat, and bringest whatsoever pleaseth thee out
from it. if there be any one who doubt all this, let he read the
next chapter.
CHAPTER VIII.
_in which, after some very fine writing, the history go on, and
relate the interview between the lady and Joseph; where the latter hath
set an example which we despair of seeing follow by his sex in this
vicious age._
now the rake Hesperus have call for his breech, and, have well
rub his drowsy eye, prepare to dress himself for all night; by
whose example his brother rake on earth likewise leave those bed in
which they have sleep away the day. now Thetis, the good housewife, begin
to put on the pot, in order to regale the good man Phoebus after his
daily labour be over. in vulgar language, it be in the evening when
Joseph attend his lady's order.
but as it become we to preserve the character of this lady, who be the
heroine of our tale; and as we have naturally a wonderful tenderness for
that beautiful part of the human specie call the fair sex; before we
discover too much of her frailty to our reader, it will be proper to
give he a lively idea of the vast temptation, which overcome all the
effort of a modest and virtuous mind; and then we humbly hope his good
nature will rather pity than condemn the imperfection of human virtue.
[illustration]
Nay, the lady themselves will, we hope, be induce, by consider the
uncommon variety of charm which unite in this young man's person, to
bridle their rampant passion for chastity, and be at least as mild as
their violent modesty and virtue will permit they, in censure the
conduct of a woman who, perhaps, be in her own disposition as chaste
as those pure and sanctify virgin who, after a life innocently spend
in the gaiety of the town, begin about fifty to attend twice _per
diem_ at the polite church and chapel, to return thank for the grace
which preserve they formerly amongst beaus from temptation perhaps
less powerful than what now attack the Lady Booby.
Mr Joseph Andrews be now in the one-and-twentieth year of his age. he
be of the high degree of middle stature; his limb be put together
with great elegance, and no less strength; his leg and thigh be
form in the exactest proportion; his shoulder be broad and brawny,
but yet his arm hang so easily, that he have all the symptom of strength
without the least clumsiness. his hair be of a nut-brown colour, and
be display in wanton ringlet down his back; his forehead be high,
his eye dark, and as full of sweetness as of fire; his nose a little
inclined to the Roman; his tooth white and even; his lip full, red, and
soft; his beard be only rough on his chin and upper lip; but his
cheek, in which his blood glow, be overspread with a thick down;
his countenance have a tenderness join with a sensibility
inexpressible. add to this the most perfect neatness in his dress, and
an air which, to those who have not see many nobleman, would give an
idea of nobility.
such be the person who now appear before the lady. she view he
some time in silence, and twice or thrice before she spake change she
mind as to the manner in which she should begin. at length she say to
he, "Joseph, I be sorry to hear such complaint against you: I be tell
you behave so rudely to the maid, that they cannot do their business in
quiet; I mean those who be not wicked enough to hearken to your
solicitation. as to other, they may, perhaps, not call you rude; for
there be wicked slut who make one ashamed of one's own sex, and be as
ready to admit any nauseous familiarity as fellow to offer it: nay,
there be such in my family, but they shall not stay in it; that
impudent trollop who be with child by you be discharge by this time."
as a person who be strike through the heart with a thunderbolt look
extremely surprised, nay, and perhaps be so too--thus the poor Joseph
receive the false accusation of his mistress; he blush and look
confound, which she misinterpret to be symptom of his guilt, and
thus go on:--
"come hither, Joseph: another mistress might discard you for these
offence; but I have a compassion for your youth, and if I could be
certain you would be no more guilty--consider, child," lay her hand
carelessly upon his, "you be a handsome young fellow, and might do
well; you might make your fortune." "Madam," say Joseph, "I do assure
your ladyship I donot know whether any maid in the house be man or
woman." "oh fie! Joseph," answer the lady, "donot commit another crime
in deny the truth. I could pardon the first; but I hate a lyar."
"Madam," cry Joseph, "I hope your ladyship will not be offend at my
assert my innocence; for, by all that be sacred, I have never offer
more than kiss." "kiss!" say the lady, with great discomposure of
countenance, and more redness in her cheek than anger in her eye; "do
you call that no crime? Kissing, Joseph, be as a prologue to a play. can
I believe a young fellow of your age and complexion will be content with
kissing? no, Joseph, there be no woman who grant that but will grant
more; and I be deceive greatly in you if you would not put she closely
to it. what would you think, Joseph, if I admit you to kiss I?"
Joseph reply he would soon die than have any such thought. "and
yet, Joseph," return she, "lady have admit their footman to such
familiarity; and footman, I confess to you, much less deserving they;
fellow without half your charm--for such might almost excuse the
crime. tell I therefore, Joseph, if I should admit you to such freedom,
what would you think of me?--tell I freely." "Madam," say Joseph, "I
should think your ladyship condescend a great deal below yourself."
"Pugh!" say she; "that I be to answer to myself: but would not you
insist on more? would you be content with a kiss? would not your
inclination be all on fire rather by such a favour?" "Madam," say
Joseph, "if they be, I hope I should be able to controul they, without
suffer they to get the well of my virtue." you have hear, reader,
poet talk of the statue of Surprize; you have hear likewise, or else
you have hear very little, how Surprize make one of the son of Croesus
speak, though he be dumb. you have see the face, in the
eighteen-penny gallery, when, through the trap-door, to soft or no
music, Mr. Bridgewater, Mr. William Mills, or some other of ghostly
appearance, hath ascend, with a face all pale with powder, and a shirt
all bloody with ribbons;--but from none of these, nor from Phidias or
Praxiteles, if they should return to life--no, not from the inimitable
pencil of my friend Hogarth, could you receive such an idea of surprize
as would have enter in at your eye have they beheld the Lady Booby
when those last word issue out from the lip of Joseph. "your virtue!"
say the lady, recover after a silence of two minute; "I shall never
survive it. your virtue!--intolerable confidence! have you the assurance
to pretend, that when a lady demean herself to throw aside the rule of
decency, in order to honour you with the high favour in her power,
your virtue should resist her inclination? that, when she have conquer
her own virtue, she should find an obstruction in your?" "Madam," say
Joseph, "I cannot see why she have no virtue should be a reason against
my have any; or why, because I be a man, or because I be poor, my
virtue must be subservient to her pleasure." "I be out of patience,"
cry the lady: "do ever mortal hear of a man's virtue? do ever the
great or the grave man pretend to any of this kind? will
magistrate who punish lewdness, or parson who preach against it, make
any scruple of commit it? and can a boy, a stripling, have the
confidence to talk of his virtue?" "Madam," say Joseph, "that boy be
the brother of Pamela, and would be ashamed that the chastity of his
family, which be preserve in she, should be stain in he. if there
be such man as your ladyship mention, I be sorry for it; and I wish
they have an opportunity of read over those letter which my father
hath send I of my sister Pamela's; nor do I doubt but such an example
would amend they." "you impudent villain!" cry the lady in a rage; "do
you insult I with the folly of my relation, who hath expose himself
all over the country upon your sister's account? a little vixen, whom I
have always wonder my late Lady Booby ever keep in her house. Sirrah!
get out of my sight, and prepare to set out this night; for I will order
you your wage immediately, and you shall be strip and turn away."
"Madam," say Joseph, "I be sorry I have offend your ladyship, I be
sure I never intend it." "yes, sirrah," cry she, "you have have the
vanity to misconstrue the little innocent freedom I take, in order to
try whether what I have hear be true. o' my conscience, you have have
the assurance to imagine I be fond of you myself." Joseph answer, he
have only speak out of tenderness for his virtue; at which word she
fly into a violent passion, and refuse to hear more, order he
instantly to leave the room.
he be no soon go than she burst forth into the follow
exclamation:--"whither doth this violent passion hurry we? what
meanness do we submit to from its impulse! wisely we resist its first
and least approach; for it be then only we can assure ourselves the
victory. no woman could ever safely say, so far only will I go. have I
not expose myself to the refusal of my footman? I cannot bear the
reflection." upon which she apply herself to the bell, and ring it
with infinite more violence than be necessary--the faithful Slipslop
attend near at hand: to say the truth, she have conceive a suspicion
at her last interview with her mistress, and have wait ever since in
the antechamber, have carefully apply her ear to the keyhole during
the whole time that the precede conversation pass between Joseph
and the lady.
CHAPTER IX.
_what pass between the lady and Mrs Slipslop; in which we prophesy
there be some stroke which every one will not truly comprehend at the
first reading._
"Slipslop," say the lady, "I find too much reason to believe all thou
hast tell I of this wicked Joseph; I have determine to part with he
instantly; so go you to the steward, and bid he pay his wage."
Slipslop, who have preserve hitherto a distance to her lady--rather out
of necessity than inclination--and who think the knowledge of this
secret have throw down all distinction between they, answer she
mistress very pertly--"she wish she know her own mind; and that she
be certain she would call she back again before she be get half-way
downstair." the lady reply, she have take a resolution, and be
resolve to keep it. "I be sorry for it," cry Slipslop, "and, if I have
know you would have punish the poor lad so severely, you should never
have hear a particle of the matter. herebe a fuss indeed about
nothing!" "nothing!" return my lady; "do you think I will countenance
lewdness in my house?" "if you will turn away every footman," say
Slipslop, "that be a lover of the sport, you must soon open the coach
door yourself, or get a set of mophrodite to wait upon you; and I be
sure I hat the sight of they even sing in an opera." "do as I bid
you," say my lady, "and donot shock my ear with your beastly
language." "Marry-come-up," cry Slipslop, "people's ear be sometimes
the nice part about they."
the lady, who begin to admire the new style in which she
waiting-gentlewoman deliver herself, and by the conclusion of her
speech suspect somewhat of the truth, call she back, and desire to
know what she mean by the extraordinary degree of freedom in which she
think proper to indulge her tongue. "Freedom!" say Slipslop; "I donot
know what you call freedom, madam; servant have tongue as well as
their mistress." "yes, and saucy one too," answer the lady; "but I
assure you I shall bear no such impertinence." "Impertinence! I donot
know that I be impertinent," say Slipslop. "yes, indeed you be," cry
my lady, "and, unless you mend your manner, this house be no place for
you." "manner!" cry Slipslop; "I never be think to want manner
nor modesty neither; and for place, there be more place than one; and
I know what I know." "what do you know, mistress?" answer the lady. "I
be not oblige to tell that to everybody," say Slipslop, "any more than
I be oblige to keep it a secret." "I desire you would provide
yourself," answer the lady. "with all my heart," reply the
waiting-gentlewoman; and so depart in a passion, and slap the door
after she.
the lady too plainly perceive that her waiting-gentlewoman know more
than she would willingly have have she acquainted with; and this she
impute to Joseph's have discover to she what pass at the first
interview. this, therefore, blow up her rage against he, and confirm
she in a resolution of part with he.
but the dismiss Mrs Slipslop be a point not so easily to be resolve
upon. she have the utmost tenderness for her reputation, as she know on
that depend many of the most valuable blessing of life; particularly
card, make curtsy in public place, and, above all, the pleasure of
demolish the reputation of other, in which innocent amusement she
have an extraordinary delight. she therefore determine to submit to any
insult from a servant, rather than run a risque of lose the title to
so many great privilege.
she therefore send for her steward, Mr Peter Pounce, and order he to
pay Joseph his wage, to strip off his livery, and to turn he out of
the house that evening.
she then call Slipslop up, and, after refresh her spirit with a
small cordial, which she keep in her corset, she begin in the
follow manner:--
"Slipslop, why will you, who know my passionate temper, attempt to
provoke I by your answer? I be convinced you be an honest servant,
and should be very unwilling to part with you. I believe, likewise, you
have find I an indulgent mistress on many occasion, and have as
little reason on your side to desire a change. I cannot help be
surprize, therefore, that you will take the sure method to offend
I--I mean, repeat my word, which you know I have always detest."
the prudent waiting-gentlewoman have duly weigh the whole matter, and
find, on mature deliberation, that a good place in possession be
well than one in expectation. as she find her mistress, therefore,
inclined to relent, she think proper also to put on some small
condescension, which be as readily accept; and so the affair be
reconcile, all offence forgive, and a present of a gown and petticoat
make she, as an instance of her lady's future favour.
she offer once or twice to speak in favour of Joseph; but find she
lady's heart so obdurate, that she prudently dropt all such effort. she
consider there be more footman in the house, and some as stout
fellow, though not quite so handsome, as Joseph; besides, the reader
hath already see her tender advance have not meet with the encouragement
she might have reasonable expect. she think she have throw away a
great deal of sack and sweetmeat on an ungrateful rascal; and, be a
little inclined to the opinion of that female sect, who hold one lusty
young fellow to be nearly as good as another lusty young fellow, she at
last give up Joseph and his cause, and, with a triumph over her passion
highly commendable, walk off with her present, and with great
tranquillity pay a visit to a stone-bottle, which be of sovereign use
to a philosophical temper.
she leave not her mistress so easy. the poor lady could not reflect
without agony that her dear reputation be in the power of her servant.
all her comfort as to Joseph be, that she hop he do not understand
her meaning; at least she could say for herself, she have not plainly
express anything to he; and as to Mrs Slipslop, she imagine she
could bribe she to secrecy.
but what hurt she most be, that in reality she have not so entirely
conquer her passion; the little god lie lurk in her heart, though
anger and distain so hood-wink she, that she could not see he. she
be a thousand time on the very brink of revoke the sentence she have
pass against the poor youth. love become his advocate, and whisper
many thing in his favour. Honour likewise endeavour to vindicate his
crime, and Pity to mitigate his punishment. on the other side, Pride and
Revenge speak as loudly against he. and thus the poor lady be torture
with perplexity, opposite passion distract and tear her mind
different way.
so have I see, in the hall of Westminster, where Serjeant bramble hath
be retain on the right side, and Serjeant Puzzle on the left, the
balance of opinion (so equal be their fee) alternately incline to
either scale. now bramble throw in an argument, and Puzzle's scale
strike the beam; again bramble share the like fate, overpower by the
weight of Puzzle. here bramble hit, there Puzzle strike; here one have
you, there t'other have you; till at last all become one scene of
confusion in the tortured mind of the hearer; equal wager be lay on
the success, and neither judge nor jury can possibly make anything of
the matter; all thing be so envelop by the careful serjeant in
doubt and obscurity.
or, as it happen in the conscience, where honour and honesty pull one
way, and a bribe and necessity another.--if it be our present
business only to make simile, we could produce many more to this
purpose; but a simile (as well as a word) to the wise.--We shall
therefore see a little after our hero, for whom the reader be doubtless
in some pain.
CHAPTER X.
_Joseph write another letter: his transaction with Mr Peter Pounce,
&c., with his departure from Lady Booby._
the disconsolate Joseph would not have have an understanding sufficient
for the principal subject of such a book as this, if he have any long
misunderstood the drift of his mistress; and indeed, that he do not
discern it soon, the reader will be pleased to impute to an
unwillingness in he to discover what he must condemn in she as a fault.
have therefore quit her presence, he retire into his own garret,
and enter himself into an ejaculation on the numberless calamitie
which attend beauty, and the misfortune it be to be handsomer than
one's neighbour.
he then sit down, and address himself to his sister Pamela in the
follow words:--
"Dear Sister pamela,--hope you be well, what news have I to tell you!
o Pamela! my mistress be fall in love with I-that be, what great
folk call fall in love-she have a mind to ruin I; but I hope I shall
have more resolution and more grace than to part with my virtue to any
lady upon earth.
"Mr Adams hath often tell I, that chastity be as great a virtue in a
man as in a woman. he say he never know any more than his wife, and I
shall endeavour to follow his example. indeed, it be owe entirely to
his excellent sermon and advice, together with your letter, that I
have be able to resist a temptation, which, he say, no man comply
with, but he repent in this world, or be damn for it in the next; and
why should I trust to repentance on my deathbed, since I may die in my
sleep? what fine thing be good advice and good example! but I be
glad she turn I out of the chamber as she do: for I have once almost
forget every word parson Adams have ever say to I.
"I donot doubt, dear sister, but you will have grace to preserve your
virtue against all trial; and I beg you earnestly to pray I may be
enable to preserve mine; for truly it be very severely attack by more
than one; but I hope I shall copy your example, and that of Joseph my
namesake, and maintain my virtue against all temptation."
Joseph have not finish his letter, when he be summon downstairs by
Mr Peter Pounce, to receive his wage; for, besides that out of eight
pound a year he allow his father and mother four, he have be
oblige, in order to furnish himself with musical instrument, to apply
to the generosity of the aforesaid Peter, who, on urgent occasion, use
to advance the servant their wage: not before they be due, but
before they be payable; that be, perhaps, half a year after they be
due; and this at the moderate premium of fifty per cent, or a little
more: by which charitable method, together with lend money to other
people, and even to his own master and mistress, the honest man have,
from nothing, in a few year amass a small sum of twenty thousand
pound or thereabout.
Joseph have receive his little remainder of wage, and have stript
off his livery, be force to borrow a frock and breech of one of the
servant (for he be so beloved in the family, that they would all have
lend he anything): and, be tell by Peter that he must not stay a
moment long in the house than be necessary to pack up his linen,
which he easily do in a very narrow compass, he take a melancholy leave
of his fellow-servant, and set out at seven in the evening.
he have proceed the length of two or three street, before he
absolutely determined with himself whether he should leave the town that
night, or, procure a lodging, wait till the morning. at last, the moon
shin very bright help he to come to a resolution of begin his
journey immediately, to which likewise he have some other inducement;
which the reader, without be a conjurer, cannot possibly guess, till
we have give he those hint which it may be now proper to open.
CHAPTER XI.
_of several new matter not expect._
it be an observation sometimes make, that to indicate our idea of a
simple fellow, we say, he be easily to be see through: nor do I believe
it a more improper denotation of a simple book. instead of apply this
to any particular performance, we chuse rather to remark the contrary in
this history, where the scene open itself by small degree; and he be a
sagacious reader who can see two chapter before he.
for this reason, we have not hitherto hint a matter which now seem
necessary to be explain; since it may be wonder at, first, that
Joseph make such extraordinary haste out of town, which hath be
already shewn; and secondly, which will be now shewn, that, instead of
proceed to the habitation of his father and mother, or to his beloved
sister Pamela, he choose rather to set out full speed to the Lady Booby's
country-seat, which he have leave on his journey to London.
be it know, then, that in the same parish where this seat stand there
live a young girl whom Joseph (though the good of son and brother)
long more impatiently to see than his parent or his sister. she be a
poor girl, who have formerly be breed up in Sir John's family; whence, a
little before the journey to London, she have be discard by Mrs
Slipslop, on account of her extraordinary beauty: for I never could find
any other reason.
this young creature (who now live with a farmer in the parish) have be
always belove by Joseph, and return his affection. she be two year
only young than our hero. they have be acquaint from their infancy,
and have conceive a very early like for each other; which have grow to
such a degree of affection, that Mr Adams have with much ado prevent
they from marry, and persuade they to wait till a few year' service
and thrift have a little improved their experience, and enable they to
live comfortably together.
they follow this good man's advice, as indeed his word be little less
than a law in his parish; for as he have show his parishioner, by an
uniform behaviour of thirty-five year' duration, that he have their good
entirely at heart, so they consult he on every occasion, and very
seldom act contrary to his opinion.
nothing can be imagine more tender than be the parting between these
two lover. a thousand sigh heave the bosom of Joseph, a thousand
tear distil from the lovely eye of Fanny (for that be her name).
though her modesty would only suffer she to admit his eager kiss, her
violent love make she more than passive in his embrace; and she often
pull he to her breast with a soft pressure, which though perhaps it
would not have squeeze an insect to death, cause more emotion in the
heart of Joseph than the close cornish hug could have do.
the reader may perhaps wonder that so fond a pair should, during a
twelvemonth's absence, never converse with one another: indeed, there
be but one reason which do or could have prevent they; and this be,
that poor Fanny could neither write nor read: nor could she be prevail
upon to transmit the delicacy of her tender and chaste passion by the
hand of an amanuensis.
they content themselves therefore with frequent inquiry after each
other's health, with a mutual confidence in each other's fidelity, and
the prospect of their future happiness.
have explain these matter to our reader, and, as far as possible,
satisfy all his doubt, we return to honest Joseph, whom we leave just
set out on his travel by the light of the moon.
those who have read any romance or poetry, antient or modern, must have
be inform that love hath wing: by which they be not to understand,
as some young lady by mistake have do, that a lover can fly; the
writer, by this ingenious allegory, intend to insinuate no more than
that lover do not march like horse-guard; in short, that they put the
good leg foremost; which our lusty youth, who could walk with any man,
do so heartily on this occasion, that within four hour he reach a
famous house of hospitality well know to the western traveller. it
present you a lion on the sign-post: and the master, who be christen
Timotheus, be commonly call plain Tim. some have conceive that he
hath particularly choose the lion for his sign, as he doth in
countenance greatly resemble that magnanimous beast, though his
disposition savour more of the sweetness of the lamb. he be a person
well receive among all sort of man, be qualified to render himself
agreeable to any; as he be well verse in history and politic, hath a
smattering in law and divinity, crack a good jest, and play
wonderfully well on the french horn.
a violent storm of hail force Joseph to take shelter in this inn, where
he remember Sir Thomas have din in his way to town. Joseph have no
soon seat himself by the kitchen fire than Timotheus, observe his
livery, begin to condole the loss of his late master; who be, he say,
his very particular and intimate acquaintance, with whom he have crack
many a merry bottle, ay many a dozen, in his time. he then remark,
that all these thing be over now, all pass, and just as if they have
never be; and conclude with an excellent observation on the certainty
of death, which his wife say be indeed very true. a fellow now arrive
at the same inn with two horse, one of which he be lead far
down into the country to meet his master; these he put into the stable,
and come and take his place by Joseph's side, who immediately know he
to be the servant of a neighbouring gentleman, who use to visit at
their house.
this fellow be likewise force in by the storm; for he have order to go
twenty mile far that evening, and luckily on the same road which
Joseph himself intend to take. he, therefore, embrace this
opportunity of compliment his friend with his master's horse
(notwithstanding he have receive express command to the contrary),
which be readily accept; and so, after they have drink a loving pot,
and the storm be over, they set out together.
CHAPTER XII.
_contain many surprizing adventure which Joseph Andrews meet with on
the road, scarce credible to those who have never travel in a
stage-coach._
nothing remarkable happen on the road till their arrival at the inn to
which the horse be order; whither they come about two in the
morning. the moon then shine very bright; and Joseph, make his friend
a present of a pint of wine, and thank he for the favour of his
horse, notwithstanding all entreaty to the contrary, proceed on his
journey on foot.
he have not go above two mile, charm with the hope of shortly see
his beloved Fanny, when he be meet by two fellow in a narrow lane, and
order to stand and deliver. he readily give they all the money he have,
which be somewhat less than two pound; and tell they he hop they
would be so generous as to return he a few shilling, to defray his
charge on his way home.
one of the ruffian answer with an oath, "yes, wewill give you
something presently: but first strip and be d---n'd to you."--"strip,"
cry the other, "or Iwill blow your brain to the devil." Joseph,
remember that he have borrow his coat and breech of a friend, and
that he should be ashamed of make any excuse for not return they,
reply, he hop they would not insist on his clothe, which be not
worth much, but consider the coldness of the night. "you be cold, be
you, you rascal?" say one of the robber: "Iwill warm you with a
vengeance;" and, damn his eye, snap a pistol at his head; which
he have no soon do than the other level a blow at he with his
stick, which Joseph, who be expert at cudgel-playing, catch with his,
and return the favour so successfully on his adversary, that he lay
he sprawl at his foot, and at the same instant receive a blow from
behind, with the butt end of a pistol, from the other villain, which
fell he to the ground, and totally deprive he of his sens.
the thief who have be knock down have now recover himself; and both
together fall to belabour poor Joseph with their stick, till they
be convince they have put an end to his miserable be: they then
strip he entirely naked, throw he into a ditch, and depart with
their booty.
the poor wretch, who lie motionless a long time, just begin to recover
his sens as a stage-coach come by. the postillion, hear a man's
groan, stopt his horse, and tell the coachman he be certain there be
a dead man lie in the ditch, for he hear he groan. "go on, sirrah,"
say the coachman; "we be confound late, and have no time to look
after dead man." a lady, who hear what the postillion say, and
likewise hear the groan, call eagerly to the coachman to stop and see
what be the matter. upon which he bid the postillion alight, and look
into the ditch. he do so, and return, "that there be a man sit
upright, as naked as ever he be bear."--"O J--sus!" cry the lady; "a
naked man! dear coachman, drive on and leave he." upon this the
gentleman get out of the coach; and Joseph beg they to have mercy
upon he: for that he have be rob and almost beat to death.
"rob!" cry an old gentleman: "let we make all the haste imaginable,
or we shall be rob too." a young man who belong to the law
answer, "he wish they have pass by without take any notice; but
that now they might be prove to have be last in his company; if he
should die they might be call to some account for his murder. he
therefore think it advisable to save the poor creature's life, for
their own sake, if possible; at least, if he die, to prevent the
jury's finding that they flee for it. he be therefore of opinion to
take the man into the coach, and carry he to the next inn." the lady
insist, "that he should not come into the coach. that if they lift
he in, she would herself alight: for she have rather stay in that place
to all eternity than ride with a naked man." the coachman object,
"that he could not suffer he to be take in unless somebody would pay a
shilling for his carriage the four mile." which the two gentleman
refuse to do. but the lawyer, who be afraid of some mischief happen
to himself, if the wretch be leave behind in that condition, say no
man could be too cautious in these matter, and that he remember very
extraordinary case in the book, threaten the coachman, and bid he
deny take he up at his peril; for that, if he die, he should be
indict for his murder; and if he live, and bring an action against
he, he would willingly take a brief in it. these word have a sensible
effect on the coachman, who be well acquainted with the person who
speak they; and the old gentleman above mention, think the naked
man would afford he frequent opportunity of show his wit to the
lady, offer to join with the company in give a mug of beer for his
fare; till, partly alarm by the threat of the one, and partly by the
promise of the other, and be perhaps a little move with compassion
at the poor creature's condition, who stand bleed and shiver with
the cold, he at length agree; and Joseph be now advance to the
coach, where, see the lady, who hold the stick of her fan before her
eye, he absolutely refuse, miserable as he be, to enter, unless he
be furnish with sufficient covering to prevent give the least
offence to decency--so perfectly modest be this young man; such mighty
effect have the spotless example of the amiable Pamela, and the
excellent sermon of Mr Adams, work upon he.
though there be several greatcoat about the coach, it be not easy to
get over this difficulty which Joseph have start. the two gentleman
complain they be cold, and could not spare a rag; the man of wit
say, with a laugh, that charity begin at home; and the coachman, who
have two greatcoat spread under he, refuse to lend either, lest they
should be make bloody: the lady's footman desire to be excuse for the
same reason, which the lady herself, notwithstanding her abhorrence of a
naked man, approve: and it be more than probable poor Joseph, who
obstinately adhere to his modest resolution, must have perish, unless
the postillion (a lad who hath be since transport for rob a
hen-roost) have voluntarily stript off a greatcoat, his only garment, at
the same time swear a great oath (for which he be rebuke by the
passenger), "that he would rather ride in his shirt all his life than
suffer a fellow-creature to lie in so miserable a condition."
Joseph, have put on the greatcoat, be lift into the coach, which
now proceed on its journey. he declare himself almost dead with the
cold, which give the man of wit an occasion to ask the lady if she could
not accommodate he with a dram. she answer, with some resentment,
"she wonder at his ask she such a question; but assure he she
never taste any such thing."
the lawyer be inquire into the circumstance of the robbery, when the
coach stopt, and one of the ruffian, put a pistol in, demand
their money of the passenger, who readily give it they; and the lady,
in her fright, deliver up a little silver bottle, of about a
half-pint size, which the rogue, clap it to his mouth, and drink
her health, declare, hold some of the good nante he have ever taste:
this the lady afterwards assure the company be the mistake of she
maid, for that she have order she to fill the bottle with
Hungary-water.
as soon as the fellow be depart, the lawyer, who have, it seem, a
case of pistol in the seat of the coach, inform the company, that if
it have be daylight, and he could have come at his pistol, he would
not have submit to the robbery: he likewise set forth that he have
often meet highwayman when he travel on horseback, but none ever durst
attack he; conclude that, if he have not be more afraid for the lady
than for himself, he should not have now part with his money
so easily.
as wit be generally observe to love to reside in empty pocket, so the
gentleman whose ingenuity we have above remark, as soon as he have
part with his money, begin to grow wonderfully facetious. he make
frequent allusion to Adam and Eve, and say many excellent thing on
fig and fig-leaf; which perhaps give more offence to Joseph than to
any other in the company.
the lawyer likewise make several very pretty jest without depart
from his profession. he say, "if Joseph and the lady be alone, he
would be more capable of make a conveyance to she, as his affair be
not fetter with any incumbrance; hewould warrant he soon suffer a
recovery by a writ of entry, which be the proper way to create heir in
tail; that, for his own part, he would engage to make so firm a
settlement in a coach, that there should be no danger of an ejectment,"
with an inundation of the like gibberish, which he continue to vent
till the coach arrive at an inn, where one servant-maid only be up, in
readiness to attend the coachman, and furnish he with cold meat and a
dram. Joseph desire to alight, and that he might have a bed prepare
for he, which the maid readily promise to perform; and, be a
good-natured wench, and not so squeamish as the lady have be, she clapt
a large fagot on the fire, and, furnish Joseph with a greatcoat
belong to one of the hostler, desire he to sit down and warm
himself whilst she make his bed. the coachman, in the meantime, take an
opportunity to call up a surgeon, who live within a few door; after
which, he remind his passenger how late they be, and, after they
have take leave of Joseph, hurry they off as fast as he could.
the wench soon get Joseph to bed, and promise to use her interest to
borrow he a shirt; but imagine, as she afterwards say, by his being
so bloody, that he must be a dead man, she run with all speed to hasten
the surgeon, who be more than half drest, apprehend that the coach
have be overturn, and some gentleman or lady hurt. as soon as the
wench have inform he at his window that it be a poor foot-passenger
who have be strip of all he have, and almost murder, he chide she
for disturb he so early, slip off his clothe again, and very
quietly return to bed and to sleep.
Aurora now begin to shew her bloom cheek over the hill, whilst ten
million of feather songster, in jocund chorus, repeat ode a
thousand time sweet than those of our laureat, and sing both the day
and the song; when the master of the inn, Mr Tow-wouse, arise, and
learn from his maid an account of the robbery, and the situation of
his poor naked guest, he shake his head, and cry, "good-lack-a-day!"
and then order the girl to carry he one of his own shirt.
Mrs Tow-wouse be just awake, and have stretch out her arm in vain to
fold her depart husband, when the maid enter the room. "whobe there?
Betty?"--"Yes, madam."--"Wherebe your master?"--"he's without, madam;
he hath send I for a shirt to lend a poor naked man, who hath be
rob and murder."--"touch one if you dare, you slut," say Mrs
Tow-wouse: "your master be a pretty sort of a man, to take in naked
vagabond, and clothe they with his own clothe. I shall have no such
doing. if you offer to touch anything, Iwill throw the chamber-pot at
your head. go, send your master to I."--"Yes, madam," answer Betty.
as soon as he come in, she thus begin: "what the devil do you mean by
this, Mr Tow-wouse? be I to buy shirt to lend to a set of scabby
rascals?"--"my dear," say Mr Tow-wouse, "this be a poor
wretch."--"Yes," say she, "I know it be a poor wretch; but what the
devil have we to do with poor wretch? the law make we provide for too
many already. we shall have thirty or forty poor wretch in red coat
shortly."--"My dear," cry Tow-wouse, "this man hath be rob of all
he hath."--"Well then," say she, "wherebe his money to pay his
reckoning? why doth not such a fellow go to an alehouse? I shall send
he pack as soon as I be up, I assure you."--"My dear," say he,
"common charity willnot suffer you to do that."--"Common charity, a f--t!"
say she, "common charity teach we to provide for ourselves and our
family; and I and mine willnot be ruin by your charity, I assure
you."--"Well," say he, "my dear, do as you will, when you be up; you
know I never contradict you."--"No," say she; "if the devil be to
contradict I, I would make the house too hot to hold he."
with such like discourse they consume near half-an-hour, whilst Betty
provide a shirt from the hostler, who be one of her sweetheart, and
put it on poor Joseph. the surgeon have likewise at last visit he, and
wash and drest his wound, and be now come to acquaint Mr Tow-wouse
that his guest be in such extreme danger of his life, that he scarce
see any hope of his recovery. "herebe a pretty kettle of fish," cry
Mrs Tow-wouse, "you have bring upon we! we be like to have a funeral
at our own expense." Tow-wouse (who, notwithstanding his charity, would
have give his vote as freely as ever he do at an election, that any
other house in the kingdom should have quiet possession of his guest)
answer, "my dear, I be not to blame; he be bring hither by the
stage-coach, and Betty have put he to bed before I be stir."--"I'll
Betty she," say she.--At which, with half her garment on, the other
half under her arm, she sally out in quest of the unfortunate Betty,
whilst Tow-wouse and the surgeon go to pay a visit to poor Joseph, and
inquire into the circumstance of this melancholy affair.
CHAPTER XIII.
_what happen to Joseph during his sickness at the inn, with the
curious discourse between he and Mr Barnabas, the parson of
the parish._
as soon as Joseph have communicate a particular history of the robbery,
together with a short account of himself, and his intended journey, he
ask the surgeon if he apprehend he to be in any danger: to which
the surgeon very honestly answer, "he fear he be; for that his
pulse be very exalted and feverish, and, if his fever should prove more
than symptomatic, it would be impossible to save he." Joseph, fetch
a deep sigh, cry, "Poor Fanny, I would I could have live to see thee!
but God's will be do."
the surgeon then advise he, if he have any worldly affair to settle,
that he would do it as soon as possible; for, though he hop he might
recover, yet he think himself oblige to acquaint he he be in great
danger; and if the malign concoction of his humour should cause a
suscitation of his fever, he might soon grow delirious and incapable to
make his will. Joseph answer, "that it be impossible for any creature
in the universe to be in a poor condition than himself; for since the
robbery he have not one thing of any kind whatever which he could call
his own." "I have," say he, "a poor little piece of gold, which they
take away, that would have be a comfort to I in all my affliction;
but surely, Fanny, I want nothing to remind I of thee. I have thy dear
image in my heart, and no villain can ever tear it thence."
Joseph desire paper and pen, to write a letter, but they be refuse
he; and he be advise to use all his endeavour to compose himself.
they then leave he; and Mr Tow-wouse send to a clergyman to come and
administer his good office to the soul of poor Joseph, since the
surgeon despair of make any successful application to his body.
Mr Barnabas (for that be the clergyman's name) come as soon as send
for; and, have first drink a dish of tea with the landlady, and
afterwards a bowl of punch with the landlord, he walk up to the room
where Joseph lay; but, find he asleep, return to take the other
sneaker; which when he have finish, he again creep softly up to the
chamber-door, and, have open it, hear the sick man talk to
himself in the follow manner:--
"o most adorable Pamela! most virtuous sister! whose example could alone
enable I to withstand all the temptation of rich and beauty, and to
preserve my virtue pure and chaste for the arm of my dear Fanny, if it
have please Heaven that I should ever have come unto they. what rich,
or honours, or pleasure, can make we amend for the loss of innocence?
Doth not that alone afford we more consolation than all worldly
acquisition? what but innocence and virtue could give any comfort to
such a miserable wretch as I be? yet these can make I prefer this sick
and painful bed to all the pleasure I should have find in my lady's.
these can make I face death without fear; and though I love my fanny
more than ever man love a woman, these can teach I to resign myself to
the Divine will without repine. o thou delightful charming creature!
if Heaven have indulge thee to my arm, the poor, humblest state
would have be a paradise; I could have live with thee in the low
cottage without envy the palace, the dainty, or the rich of any
man breathing. but I must leave thee, leave thee for ever, my dearest
angel! I must think of another world; and I heartily pray thou may'st
meet comfort in this."--Barnabas think he have hear enough, so
downstairs he go, and tell Tow-wouse he could do his guest no service;
for that he be very light-head, and have utter nothing but a
rhapsody of nonsense all the time he stay in the room.
the surgeon return in the afternoon, and find his patient in a high
fever, as he say, than when he leave he, though not delirious; for,
notwithstanding Mr Barnabas's opinion, he have not be once out of his
sens since his arrival at the inn.
Mr Barnabas be again send for, and with much difficulty prevail on to
make another visit. as soon as he enter the room he tell Joseph "he
be come to pray by he, and to prepare he for another world: in the
first place, therefore, he hop he have repent of all his sin."
Joseph answer, "he hop he have; but there be one thing which he know
not whether he should call a sin; if it be, he fear he should die in
the commission of it; and that be, the regret of part with a young
woman whom he love as tenderly as he do his heart-string." Barnabas
bad he be assure "that any repining at the Divine will be one of the
great sin he could commit; that he ought to forget all carnal
affection, and think of well thing." Joseph say, "that neither in
this world nor the next he could forget his fanny; and that the thought,
however grievous, of part from she for ever, be not half so
torment as the fear of what she would suffer when she know his
misfortune." Barnabas say, "that such fear argue a diffidence and
despondence very criminal; that he must divest himself of all human
passion, and fix his heart above." Joseph answer, "that be what he
desire to do, and should be oblige to he if he would enable he to
accomplish it." Barnabas reply, "that must be do by grace." Joseph
beseech he to discover how he might attain it. Barnabas answer, "by
prayer and faith." he then question he concern his forgiveness of
the thief. Joseph answer, "he fear that be more than he could do;
for nothing would give he more pleasure than to hear they be
take."--"That," cry Barnabas, "be for the sake of justice."--"Yes,"
say Joseph, "but if I be to meet they again, I be afraid I should
attack they, and kill they too, if I could."--"doubtles," answer
Barnabas, "it be lawful to kill a thief; but can you say you forgive
they as a Christian ought?" Joseph desire to know what that forgiveness
be. "that be," answer Barnabas, "to forgive they as--as--it be to
forgive they as--in short, it be to forgive they as a Christian."--
Joseph reply, "he forgive they as much as he could."--"Well, well,"
say Barnabas, "that will do." he then demand of he, "if he
remember any more sin unrepente of; and if he do, he desire he to
make haste and repent of they as fast as he could, that they might
repeat over a few prayer together." Joseph answer, "he could not
recollect any great crime he have be guilty of, and that those he have
commit he be sincerely sorry for." Barnabas say that be enough,
and then proceed to prayer with all the expedition he be master of,
some company then wait for he below in the parlour, where the
ingredient for punch be all in readiness; but no one would squeeze
the orange till he come.
Joseph complain he be dry, and desire a little tea; which Barnabas
report to Mrs Tow-wouse, who answer, "she have just do drink it,
and could not be slop all day;" but order Betty to carry he up
some small beer.
Betty obey her mistress's command; but Joseph, as soon as he have
taste it, say, he fear it would increase his fever, and that he
long very much for tea; to which the good-natured Betty answer, he
should have tea, if there be any in the land; she accordingly go and
buy he some herself, and attend he with it; where we will leave
she and Joseph together for some time, to entertain the reader with
other matter.
CHAPTER XIV.
_be very full of adventure which succeed each other at the inn._
it be now the dusk of the evening, when a grave person ride into the
inn, and, commit his horse to the hostler, go directly into the
kitchen, and, have call for a pipe of tobacco, take his place by the
fireside, where several other person be likewise assemble.
the discourse run altogether on the robbery which be commit the
night before, and on the poor wretch who lie above in the dreadful
condition in which we have already see he. Mrs Tow-wouse say, "she
wonder what the devil Tom Whipwell mean by bring such guest to
her house, when there be so many alehouse on the road proper for
their reception. but she assure he, if he die, the parish should be
at the expense of the funeral." she add, "nothing would serve the
fellow's turn but tea, she would assure he." Betty, who be just
return from her charitable office, answer, she believe he be a
gentleman, for she never see a fine skin in her life. "pox on his
skin!" reply Mrs Tow-wouse, "I suppose that be all we be like to have
for the reckoning. I desire no such gentleman should ever call at the
Dragon" (which it seem be the sign of the inn).
the gentleman lately arrive discover a great deal of emotion at the
distress of this poor creature, whom he observe to be fall not into
the most compassionate hand. and indeed, if Mrs Tow-wouse have give no
utterance to the sweetness of her temper, nature have take such pain in
her countenance, that Hogarth himself never give more expression to
a picture.
her person be short, thin, and crooked. her forehead project in the
middle, and thence descend in a declivity to the top of her nose,
which be sharp and red, and would have hang over her lip, have not
nature turn up the end of it. her lip be two bit of skin, which,
whenever she speak, she draw together in a purse. her chin be peak;
and at the upper end of that skin which compose her cheek, stand two
bone, that almost hide a pair of small red eye. add to this a voice
most wonderfully adapt to the sentiment it be to convey, be both
loud and hoarse.
it be not easy to say whether the gentleman have conceive a great
dislike for his landlady or compassion for her unhappy guest. he
inquire very earnestly of the surgeon, who be now come into the
kitchen, whether he have any hope of his recovery? he beg he to use
all possible mean towards it, tell he, "it be I the duty of man of
all profession to apply their skill gratis for the relief of the poor
and necessitous." the surgeon answer, "he should take proper care; but
he defy all the surgeon in London to do he any good."--"Pray, sir,"
say the gentleman, "what be his wounds?"--"why, do you know anything
of wound?" say the surgeon (wink upon Mrs Tow-wouse).--"Sir, I have
a small smattering in surgery," answer the gentleman.--"a
smattering--ho, ho, ho!" say the surgeon; "I believe it be a
smattering indeed."
the company be all attentive, expect to hear the doctor, who be
what they call a dry fellow, expose the gentleman.
he begin therefore with an air of triumph: "I I suppose, sir, you have
travelled?"--"No, really, sir," say the gentleman.--"Ho! then you have
practise in the hospital perhaps?"--"No, sir."--"Hum! not that
neither? whence, sir, then, if I may be so bold to inquire, have you get
your knowledge in surgery?"--"sir," answer the gentleman, "I do not
pretend to much; but the little I know I have from book."--"book!"
cry the doctor. "what, I suppose you have read Galen and
Hippocrates!"--"No, sir," say the gentleman.--"How! you understand
surgery," answer the doctor, "and not read Galen and Hippocrates?"--
"Sir," cry the other, "I believe there be many surgeon who have
never read these author."--"i believe so too," say the doctor, "more
shame for they; but, thank to my education, I have they by heart, and
very seldom go without they both in my pocket."--"they be pretty large
book," say the gentleman.--"Aye," say the doctor, "I believe I know
how large they be well than you." (at which he fall a winking, and
the whole company burst into a laugh.)
the doctor pursue his triumph, ask the gentleman, "if he do not
understand physic as well as surgery." "rather well," answer the
gentleman.--"Aye, like enough," cry the doctor, with a wink. "why, I
know a little of physic too."--"I wish I know half so much," say
Tow-wouse, "Iwould never wear an apron again."--"why, I believe, landlord,"
cry the doctor, "there be few man, though I say it, within twelve
mile of the place, that handle a fever well. _Veniente accurrite
morbo_: that be my method. I suppose, brother, you understand
_latin_?"--"a little," say the gentleman.--"Aye, and greek now, Iwill
warrant you: _ton dapomibominos poluflosboio Thalasses_. but I have
almost forget these thing: I could have repeat Homer by heart
once."--"Ifags! the gentleman have catch a traytor," say Mrs Tow-wouse;
at which they all fall a laughing.
the gentleman, who have not the least affection for joking, very
contentedly suffer the doctor to enjoy his victory, which he do with
no small satisfaction; and, have sufficiently sound his depth, tell
he, "he be thoroughly convinced of his great learning and ability;
and that he would be oblige to he if he would let he know his opinion
of his patient's case above-stair."--"sir," say the doctor, "his case
be that of a dead man--the contusion on his head have perforate the
internal membrane of the occiput, and divelicate that radical small
minute invisible nerve which cohere to the pericranium; and this be
attend with a fever at first symptomatic, then pneumatic; and he be at
length grown deliriuus, or delirious, as the vulgar express it."
he be proceed in this learn manner, when a mighty noise
interrupt he. some young fellow in the neighbourhood have take one
of the thief, and be bring he into the inn. Betty run upstairs
with this news to Joseph, who beg they might search for a little
piece of broken gold, which have a ribband tie to it, and which he could
swear to amongst all the hoard of the rich man in the universe.
notwithstanding the fellow's persisting in his innocence, the mob be
very busy in search he, and presently, among other thing, pull
out the piece of gold just mention; which Betty no soon see than she
lay violent hand on it, and convey it up to Joseph, who receive it
with rapture of joy, and, hug it in his bosom, declare he could
now die content.
within a few minute afterwards come in some other fellow, with a
bundle which they have find in a ditch, and which be indeed the cloath
which have be strip off from Joseph, and the other thing they have
take from he.
the gentleman no soon see the coat than he declare he know the
livery; and, if it have be take from the poor creature above-stair,
desire he might see he; for that he be very well acquainted with the
family to whom that livery belong.
he be accordingly conduct up by Betty; but what, reader, be the
surprize on both side, when he see Joseph be the person in bed, and
when Joseph discover the face of his good friend Mr Abraham Adams!
it would be impertinent to insert a discourse which chiefly turn on
the relation of matter already well known to the reader; for, as soon
as the curate have satisfy Joseph concern the perfect health of his
Fanny, he be on his side very inquisitive into all the particular
which have produce this unfortunate accident.
to return therefore to the kitchen, where a great variety of company
be now assemble from all the room of the house, as well as the
neighbourhood: so much delight do man take in contemplate the
countenance of a thief.
Mr Tow-wouse begin to rub his hand with pleasure at see so large an
assembly; who would, he hop, shortly adjourn into several apartment,
in order to discourse over the robbery, and drink a health to all honest
man. but Mrs Tow-wouse, whose misfortune it be commonly to see thing a
little perversely, begin to rail at those who bring the fellow into
her house; tell her husband, "they be very likely to thrive who
keep a house of entertainment for beggar and thief."
the mob have now finish their search, and could find nothing about the
captive likely to prove any evidence; for as to the cloath, though the
mob be very well satisfied with that proof, yet, as the surgeon
observe, they could not convict he, because they be not find in his
custody; to which Barnabas agree, and add that these be _bona
waviata_, and belong to the lord of the manor.
"how," say the surgeon, "do you say these good belong to the lord of
the manor?"--"i do," cry Barnabas.--"Then I deny it," say the
surgeon: "what can the lord of the manor have to do in the case? will
any one attempt to persuade I that what a man find be not his
own?"--"i have hear," say an old fellow in the corner, "justice
Wise-one say, that, if every man have his right, whatever be find
belong to the king of London."--"That may be true," say Barnabas, "in
some sense; for the law make a difference between thing steal and
thing find; for a thing may be steal that never be find, and a thing
may be find that never be steal: now, good that be both steal and
find be _waviata_; and they belong to the lord of the manor."--"So the
lord of the manor be the receiver of steal good," say the doctor; at
which there be an universal laugh, be first begin by himself.
while the prisoner, by persist in his innocence, have almost (as there
be no evidence against he) bring over Barnabas, the surgeon,
Tow-wouse, and several other to his side, Betty inform they that they
have overlook a little piece of gold, which she have carry up to the
man in bed, and which he offer to swear to amongst a million, aye,
amongst ten thousand. this immediately turn the scale against the
prisoner, and every one now conclude he guilty. it be resolve,
therefore, to keep he secure that night, and early in the morning to
carry he before a justice.
CHAPTER XV.
_show how Mrs Tow-wouse be a little mollify; and how officious Mr
Barnabas and the surgeon be to prosecute the thief: with a
dissertation account for their zeal, and that of many other person
not mention in this history._
Betty tell her mistress she believe the man in bed be a great man
than they take he for; for, besides the extreme whiteness of his skin,
and the softness of his hand, she observe a very great familiarity
between the gentleman and he; and add, she be certain they be
intimate acquaintance, if not relation.
this somewhat abate the severity of Mrs Tow-wouse's countenance. she
say, "God forbid she should not discharge the duty of a Christian,
since the poor gentleman be bring to her house. she have a natural
antipathy to vagabond; but could pity the misfortune of a Christian
as soon as another." Tow-wouse say, "if the traveller be a gentleman,
though he hath no money about he now, we shall most likely be pay
hereafter; so you may begin to score whenever you will." Mrs Tow-wouse
answer, "hold your simple tongue, and donot instruct I in my
business. I be sure I be sorry for the gentleman's misfortune with all
my heart; and I hope the villain who hath use he so barbarously will
be hang. Betty, go see what he want. God forbid he should want
anything in my house."
Barnabas and the surgeon go up to Joseph to satisfy themselves
concern the piece of gold; Joseph be with difficulty prevail upon
to show it they, but would by no entreaty be bring to deliver it out
of his own possession. he however attest this to be the same which have
be take from he, and Betty be ready to swear to the finding it on
the thief.
the only difficulty that remain be, how to produce this gold before
the justice; for as to carry Joseph himself, it seem impossible;
nor be there any great likelihood of obtain it from he, for he have
fasten it with a ribband to his arm, and solemnly vow that nothing
but irresistible force should ever separate they; in which resolution,
Mr Adams, clench a fist rather less than the knuckle of an ox,
declare he would support he.
a dispute arise on this occasion concern evidence not very necessary
to be relate here; after which the surgeon dress Mr Joseph's head,
still persist in the imminent danger in which his patient lay, but
concluding, with a very important look, "that he begin to have some
hope; that he should send he a sanative soporiferous draught, and
would see he in the morning." after which Barnabas and he depart, and
leave Mr Joseph and Mr Adams together.
Adams inform Joseph of the occasion of this journey which he be
make to London, namely, to publish three volume of sermon; be
encourage, as he say, by an advertisement lately set forth by the
society of bookseller, who propose to purchase any copy offer to
they, at a price to be settle by two person; but though he imagine he
should get a considerable sum of money on this occasion, which his
family be in urgent need of, he protest he would not leave Joseph in
his present condition: finally, he tell he, "he have nine shilling and
threepence halfpenny in his pocket, which he be welcome to use as
he please."
this goodness of parson Adams bring tear into Joseph's eye; he
declare, "he have now a second reason to desire life, that he might show
his gratitude to such a friend." Adams bid he "be cheerful; for that
he plainly see the surgeon, besides his ignorance, desire to make a
merit of cure he, though the wound in his head, he perceive, be
by no mean dangerous; that he be convince he have no fever, and
doubt not but he would be able to travel in a day or two."
these word infuse a spirit into Joseph; he say, "he find himself
very sore from the bruise, but have no reason to think any of his bone
injure, or that he have receive any harm in his inside, unless that he
feel something very odd in his stomach; but he know not whether that
might not arise from not have eat one morsel for above twenty-four
hour." be then ask if he have any inclination to eat, he answer
in the affirmative. then parson Adams desire he to "name what he have
the great fancy for; whether a poached egg, or chicken-broth." he
answer, "he could eat both very well; but that he seem to have the
great appetite for a piece of boil beef and cabbage."
Adams be pleased with so perfect a confirmation that he have not the
least fever, but advise he to a light diet for that evening. he
accordingly eat either a rabbit or a fowl, I never could with any
tolerable certainty discover which; after this he be, by Mrs
Tow-wouse's order, convey into a well bed and equip with one of
her husband's shirt.
in the morning early, Barnabas and the surgeon come to the inn, in order
to see the thief convey before the justice. they have consume the
whole night in debate what measure they should take to produce the
piece of gold in evidence against he; for they be both extremely
zealous in the business, though neither of they be in the least
interested in the prosecution; neither of they have ever receive any
private injury from the fellow, nor have either of they ever be
suspect of love the publick well enough to give they a sermon or a
dose of physic for nothing.
to help our reader, therefore, as much as possible to account for this
zeal, we must inform he that, as this parish be so unfortunate as to
have no lawyer in it, there have be a constant contention between the
two doctor, spiritual and physical, concern their ability in a
science, in which, as neither of they profess it, they have equal
pretension to dispute each other's opinion. these dispute be
carry on with great contempt on both side, and have almost divide the
parish; Mr Tow-wouse and one half of the neighbour incline to the
surgeon, and Mrs Tow-wouse with the other half to the parson. the
surgeon draw his knowledge from those inestimable fountain, call the
Attorney's Pocket Companion, and Mr Jacob's Law-Tables; Barnabas trust
entirely to Wood's Institutes. it happen on this occasion, as be
pretty frequently the case, that these two learn man differ about
the sufficiency of evidence; the doctor be of opinion that the maid's
oath would convict the prisoner without produce the gold; the parson,
_e contra, totis viribus._ to display their part, therefore, before
the justice and the parish, be the sole motive which we can discover to
this zeal which both of they pretend to have for public justice.
o vanity! how little be thy force acknowledge, or thy operation
discern! how wantonly dost thou deceive mankind under different
disguise! sometimes thou dost wear the face of pity, sometimes of
generosity: nay, thou hast the assurance even to put on those glorious
ornament which belong only to heroic virtue. Thou odious, deform
monster! whom priest have rail at, philosopher despise, and poet
ridicule; be there a wretch so abandon as to own thee for an
acquaintance in public?--yet, how few will refuse to enjoy thee in
private? nay, thou art the pursuit of most man through their life. the
great villainy be daily practise to please thee; nor be the
mean thief below, or the great hero above, thy notice. Thy
embrace be often the sole aim and sole reward of the private robbery
and the plunder province. it be to pamper up thee, thou harlot, that
we attempt to withdraw from other what we do not want, or to withhold
from they what they do. all our passion be thy slave. Avarice itself
be often no more than thy handmaid, and even Lust thy pimp. the bully
fear, like a coward, fly before thee, and Joy and Grief hide their
head in thy presence.
I know thou wilt think that whilst I abuse thee I court thee, and that
thy love hath inspire I to write this sarcastical panegyric on thee;
but thou art deceive: I value thee not of a farthing; nor will it give
I any pain if thou shouldst prevail on the reader to censure this
digression as arrant nonsense; for know, to thy confusion, that I have
introduce thee for no other purpose than to lengthen out a short
chapter, and so I return to my history.
CHAPTER XVI.
_the escape of the thief. Mr Adams's disappointment. the arrival of
two very extraordinary personage, and the introduction of parson Adams
to parson Barnabas._
Barnabas and the surgeon, be return, as we have say, to the inn,
in order to convey the thief before the justice, be greatly concern
to find a small accident have happen, which somewhat disconcert they;
and this be no other than the thief's escape, who have modestly
withdraw himself by night, decline all ostentation, and not chuse,
in imitation of some great man, to distinguish himself at the expense of
be point at.
when the company have retire the evening before, the thief be detain
in a room where the constable, and one of the young fellow who take
he, be plant as his guard. about the second watch a general
complaint of drought be make, both by the prisoner and his keeper.
among whom it be at last agree that the constable should remain on
duty, and the young fellow call up the tapster; in which disposition the
latter apprehend not the least danger, as the constable be well
armed, and could besides easily summon he back to his assistance, if
the prisoner make the least attempt to gain his liberty.
the young fellow have not long leave the room before it come into the
constable's head that the prisoner might leap on he by surprize, and,
thereby prevent he of the use of his weapon, especially the long
staff in which he chiefly confide, might reduce the success of a
struggle to a equal chance. he wisely, therefore, to prevent this
inconvenience, slipt out of the room himself, and lock the door,
wait without with his staff in his hand, ready lift to fall the
unhappy prisoner, if by ill fortune he should attempt to break out.
but human life, as hath be discover by some great man or other (for
I would by no mean be understand to affect the honour of make any
such discovery), very much resemble a game at chess; for as in the
latter, while a gamester be too attentive to secure himself very
strongly on one side the board, he be apt to leave an unguarded opening
on the other; so doth it often happen in life, and so do it happen on
this occasion; for whilst the cautious constable with such wonderful
sagacity have possess himself of the door, he most unhappily forget
the window.
the thief, who play on the other side, no soon perceive this
opening than he begin to move that way; and, find the passage easy,
he take with he the young fellow's hat, and without any ceremony
step into the street and make the good of his way.
the young fellow, return with a double mug of strong beer, be a
little surprized to find the constable at the door; but much more so
when, the door be open, he perceive the prisoner have make his
escape, and which way. he throw down the beer, and, without utter
anything to the constable except a hearty curse or two, he nimbly leapt
out of the window, and go again in pursuit of his prey, be very
unwilling to lose the reward which he have assure himself of.
the constable hath not be discharge of suspicion on this account; it
hath be say that, not be concern in the take the thief, he
could not have be entitle to any part of the reward if he have be
convict; that the thief have several guineas in his pocket; that it be
very unlikely he should have be guilty of such an oversight; that his
pretence for leave the room be absurd; that it be his constant
maxim, that a wise man never refuse money on any condition; that at
every election he always have sell his vote to both party, &c.
but, notwithstanding these and many other such allegation, I be
sufficiently convinced of his innocence; have be positively assure
of it by those who receive their information from his own mouth;
which, in the opinion of some modern, be the good and indeed
only evidence.
all the family be now up, and with many other assemble in the
kitchen, where Mr Tow-wouse be in some tribulation; the surgeon have
declare that by law he be liable to be indict for the thief's
escape, as it be out of his house; he be a little comfort, however,
by Mr Barnabas's opinion, that as the escape be by night the indictment
would not lie.
Mrs Tow-wouse deliver herself in the following word: "sure never be
such a fool as my husband; would any other person live have leave a man
in the custody of such a drunken drowsy blockhead as Tom Suckbribe?"
(which be the constable's name); "and if he could be indict without
any harm to his wife and child, I should be glad of it." (then the
bell rung in Joseph's room.) "why Betty, John, Chamberlain, where the
devil be you all? have you no ear, or no conscience, not to tend the
sick well? see what the gentleman want. why donot you go yourself, Mr
Tow-wouse? but any one may die for you; you have no more feeling than a
deal board. if a man live a fortnight in your house without spend a
penny, you would never put he in mind of it. see whether he drink tea
or coffee for breakfast." "yes, my dear," cry Tow-wouse. she then
ask the doctor and Mr Barnabas what morning's draught they choose, who
answer, they have a pot of cyder-and at the fire; which we will leave
they merry over, and return to Joseph.
he have rise pretty early this morning; but, though his wound be far
from threaten any danger, he be so sore with the bruise, that it
be impossible for he to think of undertake a journey yet; Mr Adams,
therefore, whose stock be visibly decrease with the expense of supper
and breakfast, and which could not survive that day's scoring, begin to
consider how it be possible to recruit it. at last he cry, "he have
luckily hit on a sure method, and, though it would oblige he to return
himself home together with Joseph, it matter not much." he then send
for Tow-wouse, and, take he into another room, tell he "he want to
borrow three guineas, for which he would put ample security into his
hand." Tow-wouse, who expect a watch, or ring, or something of double
the value, answer, "he believe he could furnish he." upon which
Adams, point to his saddle-bag, tell he, with a face and voice full
of solemnity, "that there be in that bag no less than nine volume of
manuscript sermon, as well worth a hundred pound as a shilling be
worth twelve penny, and that he would deposit one of the volume in his
hand by way of pledge; not doubt but that he would have the honesty
to return it on his repayment of the money; for otherwise he must be a
very great loser, see that every volume would at least bring he ten
pound, as he have be inform by a neighbouring clergyman in the
country; for," say he, "as to my own part, have never yet deal in
printing, I do not pretend to ascertain the exact value of such thing."
Tow-wouse, who be a little surprized at the pawn, say (and not without
some truth), "that he be no judge of the price of such kind of good;
and as for money, he really be very short." Adams answer, "certainly
he would not scruple to lend he three guineas on what be undoubtedly
worth at least ten." the landlord reply, "he do not believe he have
so much money in the house, and besides, he be to make up a sum. he be
very confident the book be of much high value, and heartily sorry
it do not suit he." he then cry out, "come sir!" though nobody
call; and run downstairs without any fear of break his neck.
Poor Adams be extremely deject at this disappointment, nor know he
what further stratagem to try. he immediately apply to his pipe, his
constant friend and comfort in his affliction; and, lean over the
rail, he devote himself to meditation, assist by the inspire fume
of tobacco.
he have on a nightcap draw over his wig, and a short greatcoat, which
half cover his cassock--a dress which, add to something comical
enough in his countenance, compose a figure likely to attract the eye
of those who be not over give to observation.
whilst he be smoake his pipe in this posture, a coach and six, with a
numerous attendance, drive into the inn. there alight from the coach a
young fellow and a brace of pointer, after which another young fellow
leapt from the box, and shake the former by the hand; and both, together
with the dog, be instantly conduct by Mr Tow-wouse into an
apartment; whither as they pass, they entertain themselves with the
follow short facetious dialogue:--
"you be a pretty fellow for a coachman, Jack!" say he from the coach;
"you have almost overturn we just now."--"Pox take you!" say the
coachman; "if I have only break your neck, it would have be save
somebody else the trouble; but I should have be sorry for the
pointer."--"why, you son of a b--," answer the other, "if nobody
could shoot well than you, the pointer would be of no use."--"D--n
I," say the coachman, "I will shoot with you five guineas a
shot."--"you be hang," say the other; "for five guineas you shall
shoot at my a--."--"done," say the coachman; "Iwill pepper you well
than ever you be pepper by Jenny Bouncer."--"pepper your
grandmother," say the other: "here's Tow-wouse will let you shoot at
he for a shilling a time."--"i know his honour well," cry
Tow-wouse; "I never see a surer shoot at a partridge. every man miss
now and then; but if I could shoot half as well as his honour, I would
desire no well livelihood than I could get by my gun."--"Pox on you,"
say the coachman, "you demolish more game now than your head's worth.
therebe a bitch, Tow-wouse: by g-- she never blinked[a] a bird in her
life."--"i have a puppy, not a year old, shall hunt with she for a
hundred," cry the other gentleman.--"done," say the coachman: "but
you will be pox'd before you make the bett."--"if you have a mind for a
bett," cry the coachman, "I will match my spot dog with your white
bitch for a hundred, play or pay."--"Done," say the other: "and Iwill
run Baldface against Slouch with you for another."--"No," cry he from
the box; "but Iwill venture Miss Jenny against Baldface, or Hannibal
either."--"Go to the devil," cry he from the coach: "I will make every
bett your own way, to be sure! I will match Hannibal with Slouch for a
thousand, if you dare; and I say do first."
[Footnote a:
to blink be a term use to signify the dog's passing by a bird without
pointing at it.]
they be now arrive; and the reader will be very contented to leave
they, and repair to the kitchen; where Barnabas, the surgeon, and an
exciseman be smoake their pipe over some cyder-and; and where the
servant, who attend the two noble gentleman we have just see alight,
be now arrive.
"Tom," cry one of the footman, "therebe parson Adams smoake his
pipe in the gallery."--"Yes," say Tom; "I pull off my hat to he, and
the parson speak to I."
"be the gentleman a clergyman, then?" say Barnabas (for his cassock have
be tie up when he arrive). "yes, sir," answer the footman; "and
one there be but few like."--"Aye," say Barnabas; "if I have know it
soon, I should have desire his company; I would always shew a proper
respect for the cloth: but what say you, doctor, shall we adjourn into a
room, and invite he to take part of a bowl of punch?"
this proposal be immediately agree to and execute; and parson Adams
accept the invitation, much civility pass between the two
clergyman, who both declare the great honour they have for the cloth.
they have not be long together before they enter into a discourse on
small tithe, which continue a full hour, without the doctor or
exciseman's have one opportunity to offer a word.
it be then propose to begin a general conversation, and the exciseman
open on foreign affair; but a word unluckily drop from one of
they introduce a dissertation on the hardship suffer by the inferior
clergy; which, after a long duration, conclude with bring the nine
volume of sermon on the carpet.
Barnabas greatly discourage poor Adams; he say, "the age be so
wicked, that nobody read sermon: would you think it, Mr Adams?" say
he, "I once intend to print a volume of sermon myself, and they have
the approbation of two or three bishop; but what do you think a
bookseller offer me?"--"Twelve guineas perhaps," cry Adams.--"Not
twelve penny, I assure you," answer Barnabas: "nay, the dog refuse I
a Concordance in exchange. at last I offer to give he the printing
they, for the sake of dedicate they to that very gentleman who just
now drive his own coach into the inn; and, I assure you, he have the
impudence to refuse my offer; by which mean I lose a good living, that
be afterwards give away in exchange for a pointer, to one who--but I
will not say anything against the cloth. so you may guess, Mr Adams,
what you be to expect; for if sermon would have go down, I
believe--I will not be vain; but to be concise with you, three bishop
say they be the good that ever be writ: but indeed there be a
pretty moderate number print already, and not all sell yet."--"Pray,
sir," say Adams, "to what do you think the number may amount?"--"sir,"
answer Barnabas, "a bookseller tell I, he believe five thousand
volume at least."--"five thousand?" quoth the surgeon: "what can they
be writ upon? I remember when I be a boy, I use to read one
Tillotson's sermon; and, I be sure, if a man practise half so much as
be in one of those sermon, he will go to heaven."--"doctor," cry
Barnabas, "you have a prophane way of talk, for which I must reprove
you. a man can never have his duty too frequently inculcate into he.
and as for Tillotson, to be sure he be a good writer, and say thing
very well; but comparison be odious; another man may write as well as
he--I believe there be some of my sermons,"--and then he apply the
candle to his pipe.--"And I believe there be some of my discourse,"
cry Adams, "which the bishop would not think totally unworthy of
be print; and I have be inform I might procure a very large sum
(indeed an immense one) on they."--"I doubt that," answer Barnabas:
"however, if you desire to make some money of they, perhaps you may sell
they by advertise the manuscript sermon of a clergyman lately
deceased, all warrant original, and never print. and now I think of
it, I should be oblige to you, if there be ever a funeral one among
they, to lend it I; for I be this very day to preach a funeral sermon,
for which I have not pen a line, though I be to have a double
price."--adam answer, "he have but one, which he fear would not
serve his purpose, be sacred to the memory of a magistrate, who have
exert himself very singularly in the preservation of the morality of
his neighbour, insomuch that he have neither alehouse nor lewd woman in
the parish where he live."--"No," reply Barnabas, "that will not do
quite so well; for the deceased, upon whose virtue I be to harangue,
be a little too much addict to liquor, and publickly keep a
mistress.--i believe I must take a common sermon, and trust to my memory
to introduce something handsome on he."--"To your invention rather,"
say the doctor: "your memory will be apter to put you out; for no man
living remember anything good of he."
with such kind of spiritual discourse, they empty the bowl of punch,
pay their reckoning, and separate: Adams and the doctor go up to
Joseph, parson Barnabas depart to celebrate the aforesaid deceased,
and the exciseman descend into the cellar to gauge the vessel.
Joseph be now ready to sit down to a loin of mutton, and wait for Mr
Adams, when he and the doctor come in. the doctor, have feel his pulse
and examine his wound, declare he much well, which he impute to
that sanative soporiferous draught, a medicine "whose virtue," he say,
"be never to be sufficiently extoll." and great indeed they must be,
if Joseph be so much indebted to they as the doctor imagine; since
nothing more than those effluvia which escape the cork could have
contribute to his recovery; for the medicine have stand untouched in the
window ever since its arrival.
Joseph pass that day, and the three following, with his friend Adams,
in which nothing so remarkable happen as the swift progress of his
recovery. as he have an excellent habit of body, his wound be now
almost heal; and his bruise give he so little uneasiness, that he
press Mr Adams to let he depart; tell he he should never be able to
return sufficient thank for all his favour, but beg that he might
no long delay his journey to London.
Adams, notwithstanding the ignorance, as he conceive it, of Mr
Tow-wouse, and the envy (for such he think it) of Mr Barnabas, have
great expectation from his sermon: see therefore Joseph in so good
a way, he tell he he would agree to his set out the next morning in
the stage-coach, that he believe he should have sufficient, after the
reckoning pay, to procure he one day's conveyance in it, and
afterwards he would be able to get on on foot, or might be favour with
a lift in some neighbour's waggon, especially as there be then to be a
fair in the town whither the coach would carry he, to which number
from his parish resort--and as to himself, he agree to proceed to the
great city.
they be now walk in the inn-yard, when a fat, fair, short person
ride in, and, alight from his horse, go directly up to Barnabas,
who be smoake his pipe on a bench. the parson and the stranger shake
one another very lovingly by the hand, and go into a room together.
the evening now come on, Joseph retire to his chamber, whither the
good Adams accompany he, and take this opportunity to expatiate on
the great mercy God have lately show he, of which he ought not only
to have the deep inward sense, but likewise to express outward
thankfulness for they. they therefore fall both on their knee, and
spend a considerable time in prayer and thanksgiving.
they have just finish when Betty come in and tell Mr Adams Mr Barnabas
desire to speak to he on some business of consequence below-stair.
Joseph desire, if it be likely to detain he long, he would let he
know it, that he might go to bed, which Adams promise, and in that case
they wish one another good-night.
CHAPTER XVII.
_a pleasant discourse between the two parson and the bookseller, 'which
be break off by an unlucky accident happen in the inn, which
produce a dialogue between Mrs Tow-wouse and her maid of no
gentle kind._
as soon as Adams come into the room, Mr Barnabas introduce he to the
stranger, who be, he tell he, a bookseller, and would be as likely to
deal with he for his sermon as any man whatever. Adams, salute the
stranger, answer Barnabas, that he be very much oblige to he; that
nothing could be more convenient, for he have no other business to the
great city, and be heartily desirous of return with the young man,
who be just recover of his misfortune. he then snapt his finger (as
be usual with he), and take two or three turn about the room in an
extasy. and to induce the bookseller to be as expeditious as possible,
as likewise to offer he a well price for his commodity, he assure
they their meeting be extremely lucky to himself; for that he have the
most pressing occasion for money at that time, his own be almost
spend, and have a friend then in the same inn, who be just recover
from some wound he have receive from robber, and be in a most
indigent condition. "so that nothing," say he, "could be so opportune
for the supply both our necessity as my make an immediate bargain
with you."
as soon as he have seat himself, the stranger begin in these word:
"Sir, I do not care absolutely to deny engage in what my friend Mr
Barnabas recommend; but sermon be mere drug. the trade be so vastly
stock with they, that really, unless they come out with the name of
Whitefield or Wesley, or some other such great man, as a bishop, or
those sort of people, I donot care to touch; unless now it be a sermon
preach on the 30th of January; or we could say in the title-page,
publish at the earnest request of the congregation, or the
inhabitant; but, truly, for a dry piece of sermon, I have rather be
excuse; especially as my hand be so full at present. however, sir, as
Mr Barnabas mention they to I, I will, if you please, take the
manuscript with I to town, and send you my opinion of it in a very
short time."
"oh!" say Adams, "if you desire it, I will read two or three discourse
as a speciman." this Barnabas, who love sermon no well than a grocer
doth fig, immediately object to, and advise Adams to let the
bookseller have his sermon: tell he, "if he give he a direction,
he might be certain of a speedy answer;" add, he need not scruple
trust they in his possession. "no," say the bookseller, "if it be a
play that have be act twenty night together, I believe it would
be safe."
Adams do not at all relish the last expression; he say "he be sorry
to hear sermon compare to play." "not by I, I assure you," cry the
bookseller, "though I donot know whether the licensing act may not
shortly bring they to the same footing; but I have formerly know a
hundred guineas give for a play."--"more shame for those who give it,"
cry Barnabas.--"Why so?" say the bookseller, "for they get hundred
by it."--"But be there no difference between convey good or ill
instruction to mankind?" say Adams: "would not an honest mind rather
lose money by the one, than gain it by the other?"--"if you can find any
such, I will not be their hindrance," answer the bookseller; "but I
think those person who get by preach sermon be the proper to
lose by print they: for my part, the copy that sell good will be
always the good copy in my opinion; I be no enemy to sermon, but
because they donot sell: for I would as soon print one of Whitefield's
as any farce whatever."
"whoever print such heterodox stuff ought to be hang," say Barnabas.
"Sir," say he, turn to Adams, "this fellow's writing (I know not
whether you have see they) be level at the clergy. he would reduce
we to the example of the primitive age, forsooth! and would insinuate
to the people that a clergyman ought to be always preach and pray.
he pretend to understand the scripture literally; and would make
mankind believe that the poverty and low estate which be recommend to
the Church in its infancy, and be only temporary doctrine adapt to
she under persecution, be to be preserve in her flourishing and
establish state. Sir, the principle of Toland, Woolston, and all the
freethinker, be not calculate to do half the mischief, as those
profess by this fellow and his follower."
"Sir," answer Adams, "if Mr Whitefield have carry his doctrine no
far than you mention, I should have remain, as I once be, his
well-wisher. I be, myself, as great an enemy to the luxury and splendour
of the clergy as he can be. I do not, more than he, by the flourish
estate of the Church, understand the palace, equipage, dress,
furniture, rich dainty, and vast fortune, of her minister. surely
those thing, which savour so strongly of this world, become not the
servant of one who profess his kingdom be not of it. but when he
begin to call nonsense and enthusiasm to his aid, and set up the
detestable doctrine of faith against good work, I be his friend no
long; for surely that doctrine be coin in hell; and one would think
none but the devil himself could have the confidence to preach it. for
can anything be more derogatory to the honour of God than for man to
imagine that the all-wise being will hereafter say to the good and
virtuous, 'notwithstanding the purity of thy life, notwithstanding that
constant rule of virtue and goodness in which you walk upon earth,
still, as thou didst not believe everything in the true orthodox manner,
thy want of faith shall condemn thee?' or, on the other side, can any
doctrine have a more pernicious influence on society, than a persuasion
that it will be a good plea for the villain at the last day--'lord, it
be true I never obey one of thy commandment, yet punish I not, for I
believe they all?'"--"i suppose, sir," say the bookseller, "your
sermon be of a different kind."--"Aye, sir," say Adams; "the
contrary, I thank Heaven, be inculcate in almost every page, or I
should belye my own opinion, which hath always be, that a virtuous and
good Turk, or heathen, be more acceptable in the sight of their creator
than a vicious and wicked Christian, though his faith be as perfectly
orthodox as St Paul's himself."--"i wish you success," say the
bookseller, "but must beg to be excuse, as my hand be so very full at
present; and, indeed, I be afraid you will find a backwardness in the
trade to engage in a book which the clergy would be certain to cry
down."--"God forbid," say Adams, "any book should be propagate which
the clergy would cry down; but if you mean by the clergy, some few
design factious man, who have it at heart to establish some favourite
scheme at the price of the liberty of mankind, and the very essence of
religion, it be not in the power of such person to decry any book they
please; witness that excellent book call, 'a Plain Account of the
Nature and end of the sacrament;' a book write (if I may venture on
the expression) with the pen of an angel, and calculate to restore the
true use of Christianity, and of that sacred institution; for what could
tend more to the noble purpose of religion than frequent chearful
meeting among the member of a society, in which they should, in the
presence of one another, and in the service of the Supreme Being, make
promise of be good, friendly, and benevolent to each other? now,
this excellent book be attack by a party, but unsuccessfully." at
these word Barnabas fall a-ring with all the violence imaginable;
upon which a servant attend, he bid he "bring a bill immediately;
for that he be in company, for aught he know, with the devil himself;
and he expect to hear the Alcoran, the Leviathan, or Woolston
commend, if he staid a few minute long." Adams desire, "as he be
so much move at his mention a book which he do without apprehend
any possibility of offence, that he would be so kind to propose any
objection he have to it, which he would endeavour to answer."--"I
propose objection!" say Barnabas, "I never read a syllable in any such
wicked book; I never see it in my life, I assure you."--adam be go
to answer, when a most hideous uproar begin in the inn. Mrs Tow-wouse,
Mr Tow-wouse, and Betty, all lift up their voice together; but Mrs
Tow-wouse's voice, like a bass viol in a concert, be clearly and
distinctly distinguished among the rest, and be hear to articulate the
following sounds:--"O you damn'd villain! be this the return to all the
care I have take of your family? this the reward of my virtue? be this
the manner in which you behave to one who bring you a fortune, and
prefer you to so many match, all your better? to abuse my bed, my
own bed, with my own servant! but Iwill maul the slut, Iwill tear her
nasty eye out! be ever such a pitiful dog, to take up with such a mean
trollop? if she have be a gentlewoman, like myself, it have be some
excuse; but a beggarly, saucy, dirty servant-maid. get you out of my
house, you whore." to which she add another name, which we do not care
to stain our paper with. it be a monosyllable beginning with a b--, and
indeed be the same as if she have pronounce the word, she-dog. which
term we shall, to avoid offence, use on this occasion, though indeed
both the mistress and maid utter the above-mention b--, a word
extremely disgustful to female of the low sort. Betty have bear all
hitherto with patience, and have utter only lamentation; but the last
appellation sting she to the quick. "I be a woman as well as yourself,"
she roar out, "and no she-dog; and if I have be a little naughty, I
be not the first; if I have be no well than I should be," cry she,
sobbing, "thatbe no reason you should call I out of my name; my
be-better be wo-rse than I."--"Huzzy, huzzy," say Mrs Tow-wouse,
"have you the impudence to answer I? do I not catch you, you
saucy"--and then again repeat the terrible word so odious to female
ear. "I cannot bear that name," answer Betty: "if I have be wicked,
I be to answer for it myself in the other world; but I have do nothing
thatbe unnatural; and I will go out of your house this moment, for I
will never be call she-dog by any mistress in England." Mrs Tow-wouse
then arm herself with the spit, but be prevent from execute any
dreadful purpose by Mr Adams, who confine her arm with the strength
of a wrist which Hercules would not have be ashamed of. Mr Tow-wouse,
be catch, as our lawyer express it, with the manner, and have no
defence to make, very prudently withdraw himself; and Betty commit
herself to the protection of the hostler, who, though she could not
conceive he pleased with what have happen, be, in her opinion, rather
a gentle beast than her mistress.
Mrs Tow-wouse, at the intercession of Mr Adams, and find the enemy
vanish, begin to compose herself, and at length recover the usual
serenity of her temper, in which we will leave she, to open to the
reader the step which lead to a catastrophe, common enough, and comical
enough too perhaps, in modern history, yet often fatal to the repose and
well-being of family, and the subject of many tragedy, both in life
and on the stage.
CHAPTER XVIII.
_the history of Betty the chambermaid, and an account of what occasion
the violent scene in the precede chapter._
Betty, who be the occasion of all this hurry, have some good quality.
she have good-nature, generosity, and compassion, but unfortunately, her
constitution be compose of those warm ingredient which, though the
purity of court or nunnery might have happily controule they, be
by no mean able to endure the ticklish situation of a chambermaid at an
inn; who be daily liable to the solicitation of lover of all
complexion; to the dangerous addresse of fine gentleman of the army,
who sometimes be oblige to reside with they a whole year together;
and, above all, be expose to the caress of footman, stage-coachman,
and drawer; all of whom employ the whole artillery of kissing,
flattering, bribe, and every other weapon which be to be find in the
whole armoury of love, against they.
Betty, who be but one-and-twenty, have now live three year in this
dangerous situation, during which she have escape pretty well. an ensign
of foot be the first person who make an impression on her heart; he do
indeed raise a flame in she which require the care of a surgeon
to cool.
while she burn for he, several other burn for she. officer of the
army, young gentleman travel the western circuit, inoffensive
squire, and some of graver character, be set a-fire by her charm!
at length, have perfectly recover the effect of her first unhappy
passion, she seem to have vow a state of perpetual chastity. she be
long deaf to all the suffering of her lover, till one day, at a
neighbouring fair, the rhetoric of John the hostler, with a new straw
hat and a pint of wine, make a second conquest over she.
she do not, however, feel any of those flame on this occasion which
have be the consequence of her former amour; nor, indeed, those other
ill effect which prudent young woman very justly apprehend from too
absolute an indulgence to the press endearment of their lover. this
latter, perhaps, be a little owe to she not be entirely constant
to John, with whom she permit Tom Whipwell the stage-coachman, and
now and then a handsome young traveller, to share she favour.
Mr Tow-wouse have for some time cast the languish eye of affection on
this young maiden. he have lay hold on every opportunity of say
tender thing to she, squeeze she by the hand, and sometimes kiss
her lip; for, as the violence of his passion have considerably abate to
Mrs Tow-wouse, so, like water, which be stopt from its usual current in
one place, it naturally seek a vent in another. Mrs Tow-wouse be
think to have perceive this abatement, and, probably, it add very
little to the natural sweetness of her temper; for though she be as
true to her husband as the dial to the sun, she be rather more desirous
of be shine on, as be more capable of feel his warmth.
ever since Joseph's arrival, Betty have conceive an extraordinary liking
to he, which discover itself more and more as he grow well and
well; till that fatal evening, when, as she be warm his bed, her
passion grow to such a height, and so perfectly master both her
modesty and her reason, that, after many fruitless hint and sly
insinuation, she at last throw down the warming-pan, and, embrace he
with great eagerness, swear he be the handsome creature she have
ever see.
Joseph, in great confusion, leap from she, and tell she he be sorry to
see a young woman cast off all regard to modesty; but she have go too
far to recede, and grow so very indecent, that Joseph be oblige,
contrary to his inclination, to use some violence to she; and, take
she in his arm, he shut she out of the room, and lock the door.
how ought man to rejoice that his chastity be always in his own power;
that, if he hath sufficient strength of mind, he hath always a competent
strength of body to defend himself, and cannot, like a poor weak woman,
be ravish against his will!
Betty be in the most violent agitation at this disappointment. rage and
lust pull her heart, as with two string, two different way; one
moment she think of stab Joseph; the next, of take he in her
arm, and devour he with kiss; but the latter passion be far more
prevalent. then she think of revenge his refusal on herself; but,
whilst she be engage in this meditation, happily death present
himself to she in so many shape, of drown, hanging, poisoning, &c.,
that her distracted mind could resolve on none. in this perturbation of
spirit, it accidentally occur to her memory that her master's bed be
not make; she therefore go directly to his room, where he happen at
that time to be engage at his bureau. as soon as she see he, she
attempt to retire; but he call she back, and, take she by the
hand, squeeze she so tenderly, at the same time whisper so many soft
thing into her ear, and then press she so closely with his kiss,
that the vanquish fair one, whose passion be already raise, and
which be not so whimsically capricious that one man only could lay
they, though, perhaps, she would have rather prefer that one--the
vanquish fair one quietly submit, I say, to her master's will, who
have just attain the accomplishment of his bliss when Mrs Tow-wouse
unexpectedly enter the room, and cause all that confusion which we
have before see, and which it be not necessary, at present, to take any
farther notice of; since, without the assistance of a single hint from
we, every reader of any speculation or experience, though not marry
himself, may easily conjecture that it conclude with the discharge of
Betty, the submission of Mr Tow-wouse, with some thing to be perform
on his side by way of gratitude for his wife's goodness in be
reconcile to he, with many hearty promise never to offend any more in
the like manner; and, lastly, his quietly and contentedly bear to be
remind of his transgression, as a kind of penance, once or twice a
day during the residue of his life.
BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
_of division in Authors_.
there be certain mystery or secret in all trade, from the high
to the low, from that of prime-ministering to this of authoring,
which be seldom discover unless to member of the same calling. among
those use by we gentleman of the latter occupation, I take this of
divide our work into book and chapter to be none of the least
considerable. now, for want of be truly acquaint with this secret,
common reader imagine, that by this art of divide we mean only to
swell our work to a much large bulk than they would otherwise be
extend to. these several place therefore in our paper, which be
fill with our book and chapter, be understand as so much buckram,
stay, and stay-tape in a taylor's bill, serve only to make up the sum
total, commonly find at the bottom of our first page and of his last.
but in reality the case be otherwise, and in this as well as all other
instance we consult the advantage of our reader, not our own; and
indeed, many notable use arise to he from this method; for, first,
those little space between our chapter may be look upon as an inn or
resting-place where he may stop and take a glass or any other
refreshment as it please he. Nay, our fine reader will, perhaps, be
scarce able to travel far than through one of they in a day. as to
those vacant page which be place between our book, they be to be
regard as those stage where in long journie the traveller stay some
time to repose himself, and consider of what he hath see in the part
he hath already pass through; a consideration which I take the liberty
to recommend a little to the reader; for, however swift his capacity may
be, I would not advise he to travel through these page too fast; for
if he doth, he may probably miss the seeing some curious production of
nature, which will be observe by the slow and more accurate reader. a
volume without any such place of rest resemble the opening of wild or
sea, which tire the eye and fatigue the spirit when enter upon.
secondly, what be the content prefix to every chapter but so many
inscription over the gate of inn (to continue the same metaphor),
inform the reader what entertainment he be to expect, which if he
like not, he may travel on to the next; for, in biography, as we be
not tie down to an exact concatenation equally with other historian,
so a chapter or two (for instance, this I be now write) may be often
pass over without any injury to the whole. and in these inscription I
have be as faithful as possible, not imitate the celebrated
Montaigne, who promise you one thing and give you another; nor some
title-page author, who promise a great deal and produce nothing at all.
there be, besides these more obvious benefit, several other which our
reader enjoy from this art of dividing; though perhaps most of they too
mysterious to be presently understand by any who be not initiate into
the science of author. to mention, therefore, but one which be most
obvious, it prevent spoil the beauty of a book by turn down its
leaf, a method otherwise necessary to those reader who (though they
read with great improvement and advantage) be apt, when they return to
their study after half-an-hour's absence, to forget where they leave off.
these division have the sanction of great antiquity. Homer not only
divide his great work into twenty-four book (in compliment perhaps to
the twenty-four letter to which he have very particular obligation),
but, accord to the opinion of some very sagacious critic, hawk
they all separately, deliver only one book at a time (probably by
subscription). he be the first inventor of the art which hath so long
lain dormant, of publishing by number; an art now bring to such
perfection, that even dictionary be divide and exhibit piecemeal
to the public; nay, one bookseller hath (to encourage learn and ease
the public) contrive to give they a dictionary in this divide manner
for only fifteen shilling more than it would have cost entire.
virgil hath give we his poem in twelve book, an argument of his
modesty; for by that, doubtless, he would insinuate that he pretend to
no more than half the merit of the Greek; for the same reason, our
Milton go originally no far than ten; till, be puff up by the
praise of his friend, he put himself on the same footing with the
roman poet.
I shall not, however, enter so deep into this matter as some very
learn critick have do; who have with infinite labour and acute
discernment discover what book be proper for embellishment, and what
require simplicity only, particularly with regard to simile, which I
think be now generally agree to become any book but the first.
I will dismiss this chapter with the following observation: that it
become an author generally to divide a book, as it do a butcher to
joint his meat, for such assistance be of great help to both the reader
and the carver. and now, have indulge myself a little, I will
endeavour to indulge the curiosity of my reader, who be no doubt
impatient to know what he will find in the subsequent chapter of
this book.
CHAPTER II.
_a surprize instance of Mr Adams's short memory, with the unfortunate
consequence which it bring on Joseph._
Mr Adams and Joseph be now ready to depart different way, when an
accident determine the former to return with his friend, which
Tow-wouse, Barnabas, and the bookseller have not be able to do. this
accident be, that those sermon, which the parson be travel to
London to publish, be, o my good reader! leave behind; what he have
mistake for they in the saddlebag be no other than three shirt, a
pair of shoe, and some other necessary, which Mrs Adams, who think
her husband would want shirt more than sermon on his journey, have
carefully provide he.
this discovery be now luckily owe to the presence of Joseph at the
opening the saddlebag; who, have hear his friend say he carry with
he nine volume of sermon, and not be of that sect of philosopher
who can reduce all the matter of the world into a nutshell, see there
be no room for they in the bag, where the parson have say they be
deposit, have the curiosity to cry out, "bless I, sir, where be your
sermon?" the parson answer, "there, there, child; there they be,
under my shirt." now it happen that he have take forth his last
shirt, and the vehicle remain visibly empty. "sure, sir," say
Joseph, "there be nothing in the bag." upon which Adams, starting, and
testify some surprize, cry, "hey! fie, fie upon it! they be not
here sure enough. ay, they be certainly leave behind."
Joseph be greatly concerned at the uneasiness which he apprehend his
friend must feel from this disappointment; he beg he to pursue his
journey, and promise he would himself return with the book to he with
the utmost expedition. "no, thank you, child," answer Adams; "it shall
not be so. what would it avail I, to tarry in the great city, unless I
have my discourse with I, which be _ut ita dicam_, the sole cause, the
_aitia monotate_ of my peregrination? no, child, as this accident hath
happen, I be resolve to return back to my cure, together with you;
which indeed my inclination sufficiently lead I to. this
disappointment may perhaps be intend for my good." he conclude with a
verse out of Theocritus, which signify no more than that sometimes it
rain, and sometimes the sun shin.
Joseph bow with obedience and thankfulness for the inclination which
the parson express of return with he; and now the bill be call
for, which, on examination, amount within a shilling to the sum Mr
Adams have in his pocket. perhaps the reader may wonder how he be able
to produce a sufficient sum for so many day: that he may not be
surprize, therefore, it cannot be unnecessary to acquaint he that he
have borrow a guinea of a servant belong to the coach and six, who
have be formerly one of his parishioner, and whose master, the owner
of the coach, then live within three mile of he; for so good be the
credit of Mr Adams, that even Mr Peter, the Lady Booby's steward, would
have lend he a guinea with very little security.
[illustration]
Mr Adams discharge the bill, and they be both set out, have
agree to ride and tie; a method of travel much use by person who
have but one horse between they, and be thus perform. the two
traveller set out together, one on horseback, the other on foot: now,
as it generally happen that he on horseback outgoes he on foot, the
custom be, that, when he arrive at the distance agree on, he be to
dismount, tie the horse to some gate, tree, post, or other thing, and
then proceed on foot; when the other come up to the horse he untie
he, mount, and gallop on, till, have pass by his
fellow-traveller, he likewise arrive at the place of tie. and this be
that method of travel so much in use among our prudent ancestor,
who know that horse have mouth as well as leg, and that they could not
use the latter without be at the expense of suffer the beast
themselves to use the former. this be the method in use in those day
when, instead of a coach and six, a member of parliament's lady use to
mount a pillion behind her husband; and a grave serjeant at law
condescend to amble to Westminster on an easy pad, with his clerk
kick his heel behind he.
Adams be now go some minute, have insist on Joseph's beginning
the journey on horseback, and Joseph have his foot in the stirrup, when
the hostler present he a bill for the horse's board during his
residence at the inn. Joseph say Mr Adams have pay all; but this
matter, be refer to Mr Tow-wouse, be by he decide in favour of
the hostler, and indeed with truth and justice; for this be a fresh
instance of that shortness of memory which do not arise from want of
part, but that continual hurry in which parson Adams be
always involve.
Joseph be now reduce to a dilemma which extremely puzzle he. the sum
due for horse-meat be twelve shilling (for Adams, who have borrow the
beast of his clerk, have order he to be feed as well as they could
feed he), and the cash in his pocket amount to sixpence (for Adams
have divide the last shilling with he). now, though there have be
some ingenious person who have contrive to pay twelve shilling with
sixpence, Joseph be not one of they. he have never contract a debt in
his life, and be consequently the less ready at an expedient to
extricate himself. Tow-wouse be willing to give he credit till next
time, to which Mrs Tow-wouse would probably have consent (for such be
Joseph's beauty, that it have make some impression even on that piece of
flint which that good woman wear in her bosom by way of heart). Joseph
would have find, therefore, very likely the passage free, have he not,
when he honestly discover the nakedness of his pocket, pull out
that little piece of gold which we have mention before. this cause
Mrs Tow-wouse's eye to water; she tell Joseph she do not conceive a
man could want money whilst he have gold in his pocket. Joseph answer
he have such a value for that little piece of gold, that he would not
part with it for a hundred time the rich which the great esquire
in the county be worth. "a pretty way, indeed," say Mrs Tow-wouse, "to
run in debt, and then refuse to part with your money, because you have a
value for it! I never know any piece of gold of more value than as many
shilling as it would change for."--"Not to preserve my life from
starving, nor to redeem it from a robber, would I part with this dear
piece!" answer Joseph. "what," say Mrs Tow-wouse, "I suppose it be
give you by some vile trollop, some miss or other; if it have be the
present of a virtuous woman, you would not have have such a value for it.
my husband be a fool if he part with the horse without be pay for
he."--"No, no, I cannot part with the horse, indeed, till I have the
money," cry Tow-wouse. a resolution highly commend by a lawyer then
in the yard, who declare Mr Tow-wouse might justify the detainer.
as we cannot therefore at present get Mr Joseph out of the inn, we shall
leave he in it, and carry our reader on after parson Adams, who, his
mind be perfectly at ease, fall into a contemplation on a passage in
Aeschylus, which entertain he for three mile together, without
suffer he once to reflect on his fellow-traveller.
at length, have spin out his thread, and be now at the summit of a
hill, he cast his eye backwards, and wonder that he could not see any
sign of Joseph. as he leave he ready to mount the horse, he could not
apprehend any mischief have happen, neither could he suspect that he
miss his way, it be so broad and plain; the only reason which
present itself to he be, that he have meet with an acquaintance who
have prevail with he to delay some time in discourse.
he therefore resolve to proceed slowly forwards, not doubt but that
he should be shortly overtake; and soon come to a large water, which,
fill the whole road, he see no method of pass unless by wad
through, which he accordingly do up to his middle; but be no soon
get to the other side than he perceive, if he have look over the
hedge, he would have find a footpath capable of conduct he without
wet his shoe.
his surprize at Joseph's not come up grow now very troublesome: he
begin to fear he know not what; and as he determine to move no far,
and, if he do not shortly overtake he, to return back, he wish to
find a house of public entertainment where he might dry his clothe and
refresh himself with a pint; but, see no such (for no other reason
than because he do not cast his eye a hundred yard forwards), he sit
himself down on a stile, and pull out his Aeschylus.
a fellow pass presently by, Adams ask he if he could direct he
to an alehouse. the fellow, who have just leave it, and perceive the
house and sign to be within sight, think he have jeer he, and be
of a morose temper, bid he follow his nose and be d---n'd. Adams tell
he he be a saucy jackanape; upon which the fellow turn about
angrily; but, perceive Adams clench his fist, he think proper to go
on without take any farth notice.
a horseman, follow immediately after, and be ask the same
question, answer, "Friend, there be one within a stone's throw; I
believe you may see it before you." Adams, lift up his eye, cry,
"I protest, and so there be;" and, thank his informer, proceed
directly to it.
CHAPTER III.
_the opinion of two lawyer concern the same gentleman, with Mr
Adams's inquiry into the religion of his host._
he have just enter the house, and call for his pint, and seat
himself, when two horseman come to the door, and, fasten their horse
to the rail, alight. they say there be a violent shower of rain
come on, which they intend to weather there, and go into a little
room by themselves, not perceive Mr Adams.
one of these immediately ask the other, "if he have see a more comical
adventure a great while?" upon which the other say, "he doubt
whether, by law, the landlord could justify detain the horse for his
corn and hay." but the former answer, "undoubtedly he can; it be an
adjudge case, and I have know it try."
Adams, who, though he be, as the reader may suspect, a little inclined
to forgetfulness, never want more than a hint to remind he,
overhear their discourse, immediately suggest to himself that this
be his own horse, and that he have forget to pay for he, which, upon
inquiry, he be certify of by the gentleman; who add, that the horse
be likely to have more rest than food, unless he be pay for.
the poor parson resolve to return presently to the inn, though he know
no more than Joseph how to procure his horse his liberty; he be,
however, prevail on to stay under covert, till the shower, which be
now very violent, be over.
the three traveller then sit down together over a mug of good beer;
when Adams, who have observe a gentleman's house as he pass along the
road, inquire to whom it belong; one of the horseman have no soon
mention the owner's name, than the other begin to revile he in the
most opprobrious term. the english language scarce afford a single
reproachful word, which he do not vent on this occasion. he charge he
likewise with many particular fact. he say, "he no more regard a
field of wheat when he be hunt, than he do the highway; that he have
injure several poor farmer by trample their corn under his horse's
heel; and if any of they beg he with the utmost submission to
refrain, his horsewhip be always ready to do they justice." he say,
"that he be the great tyrant to the neighbour in every other
instance, and would not suffer a farmer to keep a gun, though he might
justify it by law; and in his own family so cruel a master, that he
never keep a servant a twelvemonth. in his capacity as a justice,"
continue he, "he behave so partially, that he commit or acquit just
as he be in the humour, without any regard to truth or evidence; the
devil may carry any one before he for I; I would rather be try
before some judge, than be a prosecutor before he: if I have an estate
in the neighbourhood, I would sell it for half the value rather than
live near he."
Adams shake his head, and say, "he be sorry such man be suffer to
proceed with impunity, and that rich could set any man above the law."
the reviler, a little after, retire into the yard, the gentleman who
have first mention his name to Adams begin to assure he "that his
companion be a prejudiced person. it be true," say he, "perhaps, that
he may have sometimes pursue his game over a field of corn, but he hath
always make the party ample satisfaction: that so far from tyrannise
over his neighbour, or take away their gun, he himself know several
farmer not qualify, who not only keep gun, but kill game with
they; that he be the good of master to his servant, and several of
they have grow old in his service; that he be the good justice of peace
in the kingdom, and, to his certain knowledge, have decide many
difficult point, which be refer to he, with the great equity
and the high wisdom; and he verily believe, several person would
give a year's purchase more for an estate near he, than under the wing
of any other great man." he have just finish his encomium when his
companion return and acquaint he the storm be over. upon which
they presently mount their horse and depart.
Adams, who be in the utmost anxiety at those different character of
the same person, ask his host if he know the gentleman: for he begin
to imagine they have by mistake be speak of two several gentleman.
"no, no, master," answer the host (a shrewd, cunning fellow); "I know
the gentleman very well of whom they have be speak, as I do the
gentleman who speak of he. as for rid over other man's corn, to my
knowledge he hath not be on horseback these two year. I never hear
he do any injury of that kind; and as to make reparation, he be not
so free of his money as that come to neither. nor do I ever hear of
his take away any man's gun; nay, I know several who have gun in
their house; but as for kill game with they, no man be strict; and
I believe he would ruin any who do. you hear one of the gentleman say
he be the bad master in the world, and the other that he be the good;
but for my own part, I know all his servant, and never hear from any
of they that he be either one or the other."--"Aye! aye!" say Adams;
"and how doth he behave as a justice, pray?"--"Faith, friend," answer
the host, "I question whether he be in the commission; the only cause I
have hear he hath decide a great while, be one between those very two
person who just go out of this house; and I be sure he determine
that justly, for I hear the whole matter."--"Which do he decide it in
favour of?" quoth adams.--"i think I need not answer that question,"
cry the host, "after the different character you have hear of he.
it be not my business to contradict gentleman while they be drink in
my house; but I know neither of they speak a syllable of truth."--"God
forbid!" say Adams, "that man should arrive at such a pitch of
wickedness to belye the character of their neighbour from a little
private affection, or, what be infinitely bad, a private spite. I
rather believe we have mistake they, and they mean two other person;
for there be many house on the road."--"Why, prithee, friend," cry
the host, "dost thou pretend never to have tell a lye in thy
life?"--"never a malicious one, I be certain," answer Adams, "nor with
a design to injure the reputation of any man live."--"Pugh! malicious;
no, no," reply the host; "not malicious with a design to hang a man,
or bring he into trouble; but surely, out of love to oneself, one must
speak well of a friend than an enemy."--"out of love to yourself, you
should confine yourself to truth," say Adams, "for by do otherwise
you injure the noblest part of yourself, your immortal soul. I can
hardly believe any man such an idiot to risque the loss of that by any
trifling gain, and the great gain in this world be but dirt in
comparison of what shall be reveal hereafter." upon which the host,
take up the cup, with a smile, drink a health to hereafter; add,
"he be for something present."--"why," say Adams very gravely, "do not
you believe another world?" to which the host answer, "yes; he be no
atheist."--"And you believe you have an immortal soul?" cry Adams. he
answer, "God forbid he should not."--"And heaven and hell?" say the
parson. the host then bid he "not to profane; for those be thing not
to be mention nor think of but in church." Adams ask he, "why he
go to church, if what he learn there have no influence on his conduct
in life?" "I go to church," answer the host, "to say my prayer and
behave godly."--"And dost not thou," cry Adams, "believe what thou
hear at church?"--"most part of it, master," return the host. "and
dost not thou then tremble," cry Adams, "at the thought of eternal
punishment?"--"a for that, master," say he, "I never once think
about it; but what signify talk about matter so far off? the mug
be out, shall I draw another?"
whilst he be go for that purpose, a stage-coach drive up to the
door. the coachman come into the house be ask by the mistress what
passenger he have in his coach? "a parcel of squinny-gut b--s," say he;
"I have a good mind to overturn they; you willnot prevail upon they to
drink anything, I assure you." Adams ask he, "if he have not see a
young man on horseback on the road" (describe Joseph). "Aye," say
the coachman, "a gentlewoman in my coach that be his acquaintance
redeem he and his horse; he would have be here before this time,
have not the storm drive he to shelter." "God bless she!" say Adams,
in a rapture; nor could he delay walk out to satisfy himself who this
charitable woman be; but what be his surprize when he see his old
acquaintance, Madam Slipslop? Hers indeed be not so great, because she
have be inform by Joseph that he be on the road. very civil be the
salutation on both side; and Mrs Slipslop rebuke the hostess for
deny the gentleman to be there when she ask for he; but indeed the
poor woman have not err designedly; for Mrs Slipslop ask for a
clergyman, and she have unhappily mistake Adams for a person travel
to a neighbouring fair with the thimble and button, or some other such
operation; for he march in a swing great but short white coat with
black button, a short wig, and a hat which, so far from have a black
hatband, have nothing black about it.
Joseph be now come up, and Mrs Slipslop would have have he quit his
horse to the parson, and come himself into the coach; but he absolutely
refuse, say, he thank Heaven he be well enough recover to be
very able to ride; and add, he hop he know his duty well than to
ride in a coach while Mr Adams be on horseback.
Mrs Slipslop would have persist long, have not a lady in the coach
put a short end to the dispute, by refuse to suffer a fellow in a
livery to ride in the same coach with herself; so it be at length
agree that Adams should fill the vacant place in the coach, and Joseph
should proceed on horseback.
they have not proceed far before Mrs Slipslop, address herself to
the parson, speak thus:--"there hath be a strange alteration in our
family, Mr Adams, since Sir Thomas's death." "a strange alteration
indeed," say Adams, "as I gather from some hint which have drop
from Joseph."--"Aye," say she, "I could never have believe it; but the
long one life in the world, the more one see. so Joseph hath give
you hint." "but of what nature will always remain a perfect secret with
I," cry the parson: "he force I to promise before he would
communicate anything. I be indeed concerned to find her ladyship behave
in so unbecoming a manner. I always think she in the main a good lady,
and should never have suspect she of thought so unworthy a Christian,
and with a young lad her own servant." "these thing be no secret to
I, I assure you," cry Slipslop, "and I believe they will be none
anywhere shortly; for ever since the boy's departure, she hath behave
more like a mad woman than anything else." "truly, I be heartily
concern," say Adams, "for she be a good sort of a lady. indeed, I
have often wish she have attend a little more constantly at the
service, but she hath do a great deal of good in the parish." "o Mr
Adams," say Slipslop, "people that donot see all, often know nothing.
many thing have be give away in our family, I do assure you, without
her knowledge. I have hear you say in the pulpit we ought not to brag;
but indeed I cannot avoid say, if she have keep the key herself, the
poor would have want many a cordial which I have let they have. as for
my late master, he be as worthy a man as ever live, and would have
do infinite good if he have not be control; but he love a quiet
life, Heaven rest his soul! I be confident he be there, and enjoy a
quiet life, which some folk would not allow he here."--adam answer,
"he have never hear this before, and be mistaken if she herself (for he
remember she use to commend her mistress and blame her master) have
not formerly be of another opinion." "I donot know," reply she,
"what I might once think; but now I be confidous matter be as I tell
you; the world will shortly see who hath be deceive; for my part, I
say nothing, but that it be wondersome how some people can carry all
thing with a grave face."
thus Mr Adams and she discourse, till they come opposite to a great
house which stand at some distance from the road: a lady in the coach,
spy it, cry, "yonder live the unfortunate Leonora, if one can
justly call a woman unfortunate whom we must own at the same time guilty
and the author of her own calamity." this be abundantly sufficient to
awaken the curiosity of Mr Adams, as indeed it do that of the whole
company, who jointly solicit the lady to acquaint they with Leonora's
history, since it seem, by what she have say, to contain something
remarkable.
the lady, who be perfectly well-breed, do not require many entreaty,
and have only wish their entertainment might make amend for the
company's attention, she begin in the follow manner.
CHAPTER IV.
_the history of Leonora, or the unfortunate jilt._
Leonora be the daughter of a gentleman of fortune; she be tall and
well-shape, with a sprightliness in her countenance which often
attract beyond more regular feature join with an insipid air: nor be
this kind of beauty less apt to deceive than allure; the good humour
which it indicate be often mistake for good nature, and the
vivacity for true understanding.
Leonora, who be now at the age of eighteen, live with an aunt of her
in a town in the north of England. she be an extreme lover of gaiety,
and very rarely miss a ball or any other public assembly; where she
have frequent opportunity of satisfy a greedy appetite of vanity,
with the preference which be give she by the man to almost every other
woman present.
among many young fellow who be particular in their gallantry
towards she, Horatio soon distinguish himself in her eye beyond all
his competitor; she dance with more than ordinary gaiety when he
happen to be her partner; neither the fairness of the evening, nor the
musick of the nightingale, could lengthen her walk like his company. she
affect no long to understand the civility of other; whilst she
incline so attentive an ear to every compliment of Horatio, that she
often smile even when it be too delicate for her comprehension.
"pray, madam," say Adams, "who be this squire Horatio?"
Horatio, say the lady, be a young gentleman of a good family, breed to
the law, and have be some few year call to the degree of a
barrister. his face and person be such as the generality allow
handsome; but he have a dignity in his air very rarely to be see. his
temper be of the saturnine complexion, and without the least taint of
moroseness. he have wit and humour, with an inclination to satire, which
he indulge rather too much.
this gentleman, who have contract the most violent passion for Leonora,
be the last person who perceive the probability of its success. the
whole town have make the match for he before he himself have draw a
confidence from her action sufficient to mention his passion to she;
for it be his opinion (and perhaps he be there in the right) that it
be highly impolitick to talk seriously of love to a woman before you
have make such a progress in her affection, that she herself expect
and desire to hear it.
but whatever diffidence the fear of a lover may create, which be apt
to magnify every favour confer on a rival, and to see the little
advance towards themselves through the other end of the perspective, it
be impossible that Horatio's passion should so blind his discernment as
to prevent his conceiving hope from the behaviour of Leonora, whose
fondness for he be now as visible to an indifferent person in their
company as his for she.
"I never know any of these forward slut come to good" (say the lady
who refuse Joseph's entrance into the coach), "nor shall I wonder at
anything she doth in the sequel."
the lady proceed in her story thus: it be in the midst of a gay
conversation in the walk one evening, when Horatio whisper Leonora,
that he be desirous to take a turn or two with she in private, for that
he have something to communicate to she of great consequence. "be you
sure it be of consequence?" say she, smile. "I hope," answer he,
"you will think so too, since the whole future happiness of my life must
depend on the event."
Leonora, who very much suspect what be come, would have defer it
till another time; but Horatio, who have more than half conquer the
difficulty of speak by the first motion, be so very importunate,
that she at last yield, and, leave the rest of the company, they
turn aside into an unfrequented walk.
they have retire far out of the sight of the company, both maintain a
strict silence. at last Horatio make a full stop, and take Leonora,
who stand pale and trembling, gently by the hand, he fetch a deep
sigh, and then, look on her eye with all the tenderness imaginable,
he cry out in a faltering accent, "O Leonora! be it necessary for I
to declare to you on what the future happiness of my life must be
found? must I say there be something belong to you which be a bar
to my happiness, and which unless you will part with, I must be
miserable!"--"what can that be?" reply Leonora. "no wonder," say he,
"you be surprize that I should make an objection to anything which be
your: yet sure you may guess, since it be the only one which the rich
of the world, if they be mine, should purchase for I. oh, it be that
which you must part with to bestow all the rest! can Leonora, or rather
will she, doubt long? let I then whisper it in her ear--it be your
name, madam. it be by part with that, by your condescension to be for
ever mine, which must at once prevent I from be the most miserable,
and will render I the happy of mankind."
Leonora, cover with blush, and with as angry a look as she could
possibly put on, tell he, "that have she suspect what his declaration
would have be, he should not have decoy she from her company, that
he have so surprize and fright she, that she beg he to convey she
back as quick as possible;" which he, tremble very near as much as
herself, do.
"More fool he," cry Slipslop; "it be a sign he know very little of our
sect."--"Truly, madam," say Adams, "I think you be in the right: I
should have insist to know a piece of her mind, when I have carry
matter so far." but Mrs Grave-airs desire the lady to omit all such
fulsome stuff in her story, for that it make she sick.
well then, madam, to be as concise as possible, say the lady, many
week have not pass after this interview before Horatio and Leonora
be what they call on a good footing together. all ceremony except
the last be now over; the writing be now draw, and everything be
in the utmost forwardness preparative to the put Horatio in
possession of all his wish. I will, if you please, repeat you a letter
from each of they, which I have get by heart, and which will give you no
small idea of their passion on both side.
Mrs Grave-airs object to hear these letter; but be put to the
vote, it be carry against she by all the rest in the coach; parson
Adams contend for it with the utmost vehemence.
HORATIO to LEONORA.
"how vain, most adorable creature, be the pursuit of pleasure in the
absence of an object to which the mind be entirely devoted, unless it
have some relation to that object! I be last night condemn to the
society of man of wit and learning, which, however agreeable it might
have formerly be to I, now only give I a suspicion that they impute
my absence in conversation to the true cause. for which reason, when
your engagement forbid I the ecstatic happiness of see you, I be
always desirous to be alone; since my sentiment for Leonora be so
delicate, that I cannot bear the apprehension of another's prying into
those delightful endearment with which the warm imagination of a lover
will sometimes indulge he, and which I suspect my eye then betray. to
fear this discovery of our thought may perhaps appear too ridiculous a
nicety to mind not susceptible of all the tenderness of this delicate
passion. and surely we shall suspect there be few such, when we
consider that it require every human virtue to exert itself in its full
extent; since the beloved, whose happiness it ultimately respect, may
give we charming opportunity of be brave in her defence, generous
to her want, compassionate to her affliction, grateful to her
kindness; and in the same manner, of exercise every other virtue,
which he who would not do to any degree, and that with the utmost
rapture, can never deserve the name of a lover. it be, therefore, with a
view to the delicate modesty of your mind that I cultivate it so purely
in my own; and it be that which will sufficiently suggest to you the
uneasiness I bear from those liberty, which man to whom the world
allow politeness will sometimes give themselves on these occasion.
"can I tell you with what eagerness I expect the arrival of that blest
day, when I shall experience the falsehood of a common assertion, that
the great human happiness consist in hope? a doctrine which no
person have ever strong reason to believe than myself at present, since
none ever taste such bliss as fire my bosom with the thought of
spend my future day with such a companion, and that every action of
my life will have the glorious satisfaction of conducing to your
happiness."
LEONORA to HORATIO.[A]
[a] this letter be write by a young lady on read the former.
"the refinement of your mind have be so evidently prove by every word
and action ever since I have the first pleasure of know you, that I
think it impossible my good opinion of Horatio could have be
heighten to any additional proof of merit. this very thought be my
amusement when I receive your last letter, which, when I open, I
confess I be surprize to find the delicate sentiment express there
so far exceed what I think could come even from you (although I
know all the generous principle human nature be capable of be centre
in your breast), that word cannot paint what I feel on the reflection
that my happiness shall be the ultimate end of all your action.
"oh, Horatio! what a life must that be, where the mean domestic care
be sweeten by the pleasing consideration that the man on earth who
good deserve, and to whom you be most inclined to give your
affection, be to reap either profit or pleasure from all you do! in
such a case toil must be turn into diversion, and nothing but the
unavoidable inconvenience of life can make we remember that we
be mortal.
"if the solitary turn of your thought, and the desire of keep they
undiscovered, make even the conversation of man of wit and learn
tedious to you, what anxious hour must I spend, who be condemn by
custom to the conversation of woman, whose natural curiosity lead they
to pry into all my thought, and whose envy can never suffer Horatio's
heart to be possess by any one, without force they into malicious
design against the person who be so happy as to possess it! but,
indeed, if ever envy can possibly have any excuse, or even alleviation,
it be in this case, where the good be so great, and it must be equally
natural to all to wish it for themselves; nor be I ashamed to own it:
and to your merit, Horatio, I be oblige, that prevent my being in that
most uneasy of all the situation I can figure in my imagination, of
be lead by inclination to love the person whom my own judgment force
I to condemn."
matter be in so great forwardness between this fond couple, that the
day be fix for their marriage, and be now within a fortnight, when
the session chance to be hold for that county in a town about twenty
mile' distance from that which be the scene of our story. it seem, it
be usual for the young gentleman of the bar to repair to these session,
not so much for the sake of profit as to show their part and learn the
law of the justice of peace; for which purpose one of the wise and
gravest of all the justice be appoint speaker, or chairman, as they
modestly call it, and he read they a lecture, and instruct they in the
true knowledge of the law.
"you be here guilty of a little mistake," say Adams, "which, if you
please, I will correct: I have attend at one of these
quarter-session, where I observe the counsel teach the justice,
instead of learn anything of they."
it be not very material, say the lady. Hither repair Horatio, who, as
he hop by his profession to advance his fortune, which be not at
present very large, for the sake of his dear Leonora, he resolve to
spare no pain, nor lose any opportunity of improve or advance
himself in it.
the same afternoon in which he leave the town, as Leonora stand at her
window, a coach and six pass by, which she declare to be the
complete, genteelest, prettiest equipage she ever see; add these
remarkable word, "oh, I be in love with that equipage!" which, though
her friend Florella at that time do not greatly regard, she hath since
remember.
in the evening an assembly be hold, which Leonora honour with her
company; but intend to pay she dear Horatio the compliment of refuse
to dance in his absence.
oh, why have not woman as good resolution to maintain their vow as they
have often good inclination in make they!
the gentleman who own the coach and six come to the assembly. his
clothe be as remarkably fine as his equipage could be. he soon
attract the eye of the company; all the smart, all the silk
waistcoat with silver and gold edging, be eclipse in an instant.
"Madam," say Adams, "if it be not impertinent, I should be glad to know
how this gentleman be drest."
Sir, answer the lady, I have be tell he have on a cut velvet coat of
a cinnamon colour, line with a pink satten, embroider all over with
gold; his waistcoat, which be cloth of silver, be embroider with
gold likewise. I cannot be particular as to the rest of his dress; but
it be all in the french fashion, for Bellarmine (that be his name) be
just arrive from Paris.
this fine figure do not more entirely engage the eye of every lady in
the assembly than Leonora do his. he have scarce beheld she, but he
stand motionless and fix as a statue, or at least would have do so
if good breeding have permit he. however, he carry it so far before
he have power to correct himself, that every person in the room easily
discover where his admiration be settle. the other lady begin to
single out their former partner, all perceive who would be
Bellarmine's choice; which they however endeavour, by all possible
mean, to prevent: many of they say to Leonora, "o madam! I suppose
we shallnot have the pleasure of see you dance to-night;" and then
cry out, in Bellarmine's hearing, "oh! Leonora will not dance, I
assure you: her partner be not here." one maliciously attempt to
prevent she, by send a disagreeable fellow to ask she, that so she
might be oblige either to dance with he, or sit down; but this scheme
prove abortive.
Leonora see herself admire by the fine stranger, and envy by every
woman present. her little heart begin to flutter within she, and her
head be agitate with a convulsive motion: she seem as if she would
speak to several of her acquaintance, but have nothing to say; for, as
she would not mention her present triumph, so she could not disengage
her thought one moment from the contemplation of it. she have never
taste anything like this happiness. she have before know what it be to
torment a single woman; but to be hat and secretly curse by a whole
assembly be a joy reserve for this blessed moment. as this vast
profusion of ecstasy have confound her understanding, so there be
nothing so foolish as her behaviour: she play a thousand childish
trick, distort her person into several shape, and her face into
several laugh, without any reason. in a word, her carriage be as
absurd as her desire, which be to affect an insensibility of the
stranger's admiration, and at the same time a triumph, from that
admiration, over every woman in the room.
in this temper of mind, Bellarmine, have inquire who she be,
advanced to she, and with a low bow beg the honour of dance with
she, which she, with as low a curtesy, immediately grant. she dance
with he all night, and enjoy, perhaps, the high pleasure that she
be capable of feeling.
at these word, Adams fetch a deep groan, which fright the lady,
who tell he, "they hop he be not ill." he answer, "he groan only
for the folly of Leonora."
Leonora retire (continue the lady) about six in the morning, but not
to rest. she tumble and toss in her bed, with very short interval of
sleep, and those entirely fill with dream of the equipage and fine
clothe she have see, and the ball, opera, and ridotto, which have
be the subject of their conversation.
in the afternoon, Bellarmine, in the dear coach and six, come to wait on
she. he be indeed charm with her person, and be, on inquiry, so well
pleased with the circumstance of her father (for he himself,
notwithstanding all his finery, be not quite so rich as a Croesus or
an Attalus).--"Attalus," say Mr. Adams: "but pray how come you
acquaint with these name?" the lady smile at the question, and
proceed. he be so pleased, I say, that he resolve to make his
address to she directly. he do so accordingly, and that with so much
warmth and briskness, that he quickly baffle her weak repulse, and
oblige the lady to refer he to her father, who, she know, would
quickly declare in favour of a coach and six.
thus what Horatio have by sigh and tear, love and tenderness, be so
long obtaining, the french-english Bellarmine with gaiety and gallantry
possess himself of in an instant. in other word, what modesty have
employ a full year in raising, impudence demolish in
twenty-four hour.
here Adams groan a second time; but the lady, who begin to smoke
he, take no notice.
from the opening of the assembly till the end of Bellarmine's visit,
Leonora have scarce once think of Horatio; but he now begin, though an
unwelcome guest, to enter into her mind. she wish she have see the
charming Bellarmine and his charming equipage before matter have go so
far. "yet why," say she, "should I wish to have see he before; or
what signify it that I have see he now? be not Horatio my lover,
almost my husband? be he not as handsome, nay handsomer than Bellarmine?
Aye, but Bellarmine be the genteeler, and the fine man; yes, that he
must be allow. yes, yes, he be that certainly. but do not I, no
long ago than yesterday, love Horatio more than all the world? aye,
but yesterday I have not see Bellarmine. but doth not Horatio doat on
I, and may he not in despair break his heart if I abandon he? well,
and hath not bellarmine a heart to break too? yes, but I promise
horatio first; but that be poor Bellarmine's misfortune; if I have see
he first, I should certainly have prefer he. do not the dear
creature prefer I to every woman in the assembly, when every she be
lay out for he? when be it in Horatio's power to give I such an
instance of affection? can he give I an equipage, or any of those
thing which Bellarmine will make I mistress of? how vast be the
difference between be the wife of a poor counsellor and the wife of
one of Bellarmine's fortune! if I marry Horatio, I shall triumph over no
more than one rival; but by marry Bellarmine, I shall be the envy of
all my acquaintance. what happiness! but can I suffer Horatio to die?
for he hath swear he cannot survive my loss: but perhaps he may not die:
if he should, can I prevent it? must I sacrifice myself to he? besides,
Bellarmine may be as miserable for I too." she be thus argue with
herself, when some young lady call she to the walk, and a little
relieve her anxiety for the present.
the next morning Bellarmine breakfast with she in presence of her
aunt, whom he sufficiently inform of his passion for Leonora. he be
no soon withdraw than the old lady begin to advise her niece on this
occasion. "you see, child," say she, "what fortune hath throw in your
way; and I hope you will not withstand your own preferment." Leonora,
sighing, beg she not to mention any such thing, when she know she
engagement to Horatio. "engagement to a fig!" cry the aunt; "you
should thank Heaven on your knee that you have it yet in your power to
break they. will any woman hesitate a moment whether she shall ride in a
coach or walk on foot all the day of her life? but Bellarmine drive
six, and Horatio not even a pair."--"Yes, but, madam, what will the
world say?" answer Leonora: "will not they condemn me?"--"The world be
always on the side of prudence," cry the aunt, "and would surely
condemn you if you sacrifice your interest to any motive whatever. oh!
I know the world very well; and you shew your ignorance, my dear, by
your objection. o' my conscience! the world be wise. I have live
long in it than you; and I assure you there be not anything worth our
regard besides money; nor do I ever know one person who marry from
other consideration, who do not afterwards heartily repent it.
besides, if we examine the two man, can you prefer a sneak fellow,
who hath be breed at the university, to a fine gentleman just come from
his travel. all the world must allow Bellarmine to be a fine gentleman,
positively a fine gentleman, and a handsome man."--"Perhaps, madam, I
should not doubt, if I know how to be handsomely off with the
other."--"Oh! leave that to I," say the aunt. "you know your father
hath not be acquaint with the affair. indeed, for my part I think
it might do well enough, not dream of such an offer; but Iwill
disengage you: leave I to give the fellow an answer. I warrant you
shall have no farth trouble."
Leonora be at length satisfied with her aunt's reasoning; and
Bellarmine sup with she that evening, it be agree he should the
next morning go to her father and propose the match, which she consent
should be consummate at his return.
the aunt retire soon after supper; and, the lover be leave together,
Bellarmine begin in the follow manner: "yes, madam; this coat, I
assure you, be make at Paris, and I defy the good English taylor even
to imitate it. there be not one of they can cut, madam; they cannot cut.
if you observe how this skirt be turn, and this sleeve: a clumsy
english rascal can do nothing like it. pray, how do you like my
livery?" Leonora answer, "she think they very pretty."--"All
French," say he, "I assure you, except the greatcoat; I never trust
anything more than a greatcoat to an Englishman. you know one must
encourage our own people what one can, especially as, before I have a
place, I be in the country interest, he, he, he! but for myself, I
would see the dirty island at the bottom of the sea, rather than wear a
single rag of english work about I: and I be sure, after you have make
one tour to Paris, you will be of the same opinion with regard to your
own clothe. you cannot conceive what an addition a french dress would be
to your beauty; I positively assure you, at the first opera I see since
I come over, I mistook the english lady for chambermaid, he, he, he!"
with such sort of polite discourse do the gay Bellarmine entertain his
beloved Leonora, when the door open on a sudden, and Horatio enter
the room. here 'tis impossible to express the surprize of Leonora.
"poor woman!" say Mrs Slipslop, "what a terrible quandary she must be
in!"--"not at all," say Mrs Grave-airs; "such slut can never be
confound."--"She must have then more than corinthian assurance," say
Adams; "aye, more than Lais herself."
a long silence, continue the lady, prevail in the whole company. if
the familiar entrance of Horatio strike the great astonishment into
Bellarmine, the unexpected presence of Bellarmine no less surprized
Horatio. at length Leonora, collect all the spirit she be mistress
of, address herself to the latter, and pretend to wonder at the
reason of so late a visit. "I should indeed," answer he, "have make
some apology for disturb you at this hour, have not my find you in
company assure I I do not break in upon your repose." Bellarmine rise
from his chair, traverse the room in a minuet step, and hum an
opera tune, while Horatio, advance to Leonora, ask she in a whisper
if that gentleman be not a relation of her; to which she answer with
a smile, or rather sneer, "no, he be no relation of mine yet;" add,
"she could not guess the meaning of his question." Horatio tell she
softly, "it do not arise from jealousy."--"jealousy! I assure you, it
would be very strange in a common acquaintance to give himself any of
those air." these word a little surprized horatio; but, before he have
time to answer, Bellarmine dance up to the lady and tell she, "he
fear he interrupt some business between she and the gentleman."--"I
can have no business," say she, "with the gentleman, nor any other,
which need be any secret to you."
"youwill pardon I," say Horatio, "if I desire to know who this
gentleman be who be to be entrust with all our secret."--"You'll know
soon enough," cry Leonora; "but I cannot guess what secret can ever
pass between we of such mighty consequence."--"No, madam!" cry
Horatio; "I be sure you would not have I understand you in
earnest."--"'Tis indifferent to I," say she, "how you understand I;
but I think so unseasonable a visit be difficult to be understand at
all, at least when people find one engage: though one's servant do not
deny one, one may expect a well-breed person should soon take the hint."
"Madam," say Horatio, "I do not imagine any engagement with a
stranger, as it seem this gentleman be, would have make my visit
impertinent, or that any such ceremony be to be preserve between
person in our situation." "sure you be in a dream," say she, "or
would persuade I that I be in one. I know no pretension a common
acquaintance can have to lay aside the ceremony of good breeding."
"sure," say he, "I be in a dream; for it be impossible I should be
really esteem a common acquaintance by Leonora, after what have pass
between we?" "pass between we! do you intend to affront I before this
gentleman?" "D--n I, affront the lady," say Bellarmine, cock his
hat, and strut up to Horatio: "do any man dare affront this lady
before I, d--n I?" "Hark'ee, sir," say Horatio, "I would advise you
to lay aside that fierce air; for I be mightily deceive if this lady
have not a violent desire to get your worship a good drubbing." "Sir,"
say Bellarmine, "I have the honour to be her protector; and, d--n I,
if I understand your meaning." "Sir," answer Horatio, "she be rather
your protectress; but give yourself no more air, for you see I be
prepared for you" (shake his whip at he). "oh! _serviteur tre
humble_," say Bellarmine: "_Je vous entend parfaitment bien_." at which
time the aunt, who have hear of Horatio's visit, enter the room, and
soon satisfy all his doubt. she convince he that he be never more
awake in his life, and that nothing more extraordinary have happen in
his three day' absence than a small alteration in the affection of
Leonora; who now burst into tear, and wonder what reason she have
give he to use she in so barbarous a manner. Horatio desire
Bellarmine to withdraw with he; but the lady prevent it by lay
violent hand on the latter; upon which the former take his leave
without any great ceremony, and depart, leave the lady with his
rival to consult for his safety, which Leonora fear her indiscretion
might have endanger; but the aunt comfort she with assurance that
Horatio would not venture his person against so accomplish a cavalier
as Bellarmine, and that, be a lawyer, he would seek revenge in his
own way, and the most they have to apprehend from he be an action.
they at length therefore agree to permit Bellarmine to retire to his
lodging, have first settle all matter relate to the journey which
he be to undertake in the morning, and their preparation for the
nuptial at his return.
but, alas! as wise man have observe, the seat of valour be not the
countenance; and many a grave and plain man will, on a just provocation,
betake himself to that mischievous metal, cold iron; while man of a
fiercer brow, and sometimes with that emblem of courage, a cockade, will
more prudently decline it.
Leonora be wake in the morning, from a visionary coach and six, with
the dismal account that Bellarmine be run through the body by Horatio;
that he lie languish at an inn, and the surgeon have declare the
wound mortal. she immediately leap out of the bed, dance about the
room in a frantic manner, tear her hair and beat her breast in all the
agony of despair; in which sad condition her aunt, who likewise arise
at the news, find she. the good old lady apply her utmost art to
comfort her niece. she tell she, "while there be life there be hope;
but that if he should die her affliction would be of no service to
Bellarmine, and would only expose herself, which might, probably, keep
she some time without any future offer; that, as matter have happen,
her wise way would be to think no more of Bellarmine, but to endeavour
to regain the affection of Horatio." "speak not to I," cry the
disconsolate Leonora; "be it not owe to I that poor Bellarmine have
lose his life? have not these curse charm (at which word she look
steadfastly in the glass) be the ruin of the most charming man of this
age? can I ever bear to contemplate my own face again (with her eye
still fix on the glass)? be I not the murderess of the fine
gentleman? no other woman in the town could have make any impression on
he." "never think of thing past," cry the aunt: "think of regain
the affection of Horatio." "what reason," say the niece, "have I to
hope he would forgive I? no, I have lose he as well as the other, and
it be your wicked advice which be the occasion of all; you seduce I,
contrary to my inclination, to abandon poor horatio (at which word she
burst into tear); you prevail upon I, whether I would or no, to give
up my affection for he; have it not be for you, Bellarmine never
would have enter into my thought; have not his address be back
by your persuasion, they never would have make any impression on I; I
should have defy all the fortune and equipage in the world; but it be
you, it be you, who get the well of my youth and simplicity, and
force I to lose my dear horatio for ever."
the aunt be almost bear down with this torrent of word; she, however,
rally all the strength she could, and, draw her mouth up in a
purse, begin: "I be not surprize, niece, at this ingratitude. those who
advise young woman for their interest, must always expect such a return:
I be convince my brother will thank I for break off your match with
Horatio, at any rate."--"That may not be in your power yet," answer
Leonora, "though it be very ungrateful in you to desire or attempt it,
after the present you have receive from he." (for indeed true it be,
that many present, and some pretty valuable one, have pass from
horatio to the old lady; but as true it be, that Bellarmine, when he
breakfast with she and her niece, have compliment she with a
brilliant from his finger, of much great value than all she have
touch of the other.)
the aunt's gall be on float to reply, when a servant bring a letter
into the room, which Leonora, hear it come from Bellarmine, with
great eagerness open, and read as follows:--
"MOST DIVINE CREATURE,--The wound which I fear you have hear I
receive from my rival be not like to be so fatal as those shot into my
heart which have be fire from your eye, _tout brilliant_. those be
the only cannon by which I be to fall; for my surgeon give I hope of
be soon able to attend your _ruelle_; till when, unless you would do
I an honour which I have scarce the _hardiesse_ to think of, your
absence will be the great anguish which can be feel by,
"Madam,
"_Avec toute le respecte_ in the world,
"your most obedient, most absolute _devote_,
"BELLARMINE."
as soon as Leonora perceive such hope of Bellarmine's recovery, and
that the gossip Fame have, accord to custom, so enlarge his danger,
she presently abandon all further thought of Horatio, and be soon
reconcile to her aunt, who receive she again into favour, with a more
christian forgiveness than we generally meet with. indeed, it be
possible she might be a little alarmed at the hint which her niece have
give she concern the present. she might apprehend such rumour,
should they get abroad, might injure a reputation which, by frequent
church twice a day, and preserve the utmost rigour and strictness in
her countenance and behaviour for many year, she have establish.
Leonora's passion return now for Bellarmine with great force, after
its small relaxation, than ever. she propose to her aunt to make he a
visit in his confinement, which the old lady, with great and commendable
prudence, advise she to decline: "for," say she, "should any accident
intervene to prevent your intend match, too forward a behaviour with
this lover may injure you in the eye of other. every woman, till she
be marry, ought to consider of, and provide against, the possibility
of the affair's break off." Leonora say, "she should be indifferent
to whatever might happen in such a case; for she have now so absolutely
place her affection on this dear man (so she call he), that, if it
be her misfortune to lose he, she should for ever abandon all thought
of mankind." she, therefore, resolve to visit he, notwithstanding all
the prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, and that very afternoon
execute her resolution.
the lady be proceed in her story, when the coach drive into the inn
where the company be to dine, sorely to the dissatisfaction of Mr
Adams, whose ear be the most hungry part about he; he be, as the
reader may perhaps guess, of an insatiable curiosity, and heartily
desirous of hear the end of this amour, though he profess he could
scarce wish success to a lady of so inconstant a disposition.
CHAPTER V.
_a dreadful quarrel which happen at the Inn where the company din,
with its bloody consequence to Mr Adams._
as soon as the passenger have alight from the coach, Mr Adams, as be
his custom, make directly to the kitchen, where he find Joseph sit
by the fire, and the hostess anoint his leg; for the horse which Mr
Adams have borrow of his clerk have so violent a propensity to kneeling,
that one would have think it have be his trade, as well as his
master's; nor would he always give any notice of such his intention; he
be often find on his knee when the rider least expect it. this
foible, however, be of no great inconvenience to the parson, who be
accustomed to it; and, as his leg almost touch the ground when he
bestrode the beast, have but a little way to fall, and throw himself
forward on such occasion with so much dexterity that he never receive
any mischief; the horse and he frequently roll many pace' distance,
and afterwards both get up and meet as good friend as ever.
Poor Joseph, who have not be use to such kind of cattle, though an
excellent horseman, do not so happily disengage himself; but, fall
with his leg under the beast, receive a violent contusion, to which the
good woman be, as we have say, apply a warm hand, with some
camphorate spirit, just at the time when the parson enter
the kitchen.
he have scarce express his concern for Joseph's misfortune before the
host likewise enter. he be by no mean of Mr Tow-wouse's gentle
disposition; and be, indeed, perfect master of his house, and
everything in it but his guest.
this surly fellow, who always proportion his respect to the appearance
of a traveller, from "God bless your honour," down to plain "come
presently," observe his wife on her knee to a footman, cry out,
without consider his circumstance, "what a pox be the woman about?
why donot you mind the company in the coach? go and ask they what they
will have for dinner." "my dear," say she, "you know they can have
nothing but what be at the fire, which will be ready presently; and
really the poor young man's leg be very much bruised." at which word
she fall to chafe more violently than before: the bell then happen
to ring, he damn'd his wife, and bid she go in to the company, and not
stand rub there all day, for he do not believe the young fellow's
leg be so bad as he pretend; and if it be, within twenty mile he
would find a surgeon to cut it off. upon these word, Adams fetch two
stride across the room; and snap his finger over his head,
mutter aloud, he would excommunicate such a wretch for a farthing, for
he believe the devil have more humanity. these word occasion a
dialogue between Adams and the host, in which there be two or three
sharp reply, till Joseph bad the latter know how to behave himself to
his better. at which the host (have first strictly survey Adams)
scornfully repeat the word "better," fly into a rage, and, tell
Joseph he be as able to walk out of his house as he have be to walk
into it, offer to lay violent hand on he; which perceive, Adams
deal he so sound a compliment over his face with his fist, that the
blood immediately gush out of his nose in a stream. the host, be
unwilling to be outdo in courtesy, especially by a person of Adams's
figure, return the favour with so much gratitude, that the parson's
nostril begin to look a little red than usual. upon which he again
assail his antagonist, and with another stroke lay he sprawl on
the floor.
the hostess, who be a well wife than so surly a husband deserve,
see her husband all bloody and stretch along, hasten presently to
his assistance, or rather to revenge the blow, which, to all appearance,
be the last he would ever receive; when, lo! a pan full of hog's blood,
which unluckily stand on the dresser, present itself first to her
hand. she seize it in her fury, and without any reflection, discharge
it into the parson's face; and with so good an aim, that much the
great part first salute his countenance, and trickle thence in so
large a current down to his beard, and over his garment, that a more
horrible spectacle be hardly to be see, or even imagine. all which
be perceive by Mrs Slipslop, who enter the kitchen at that instant.
this good gentlewoman, not be of a temper so extremely cool and
patient as perhaps be require to ask many question on this occasion,
fly with great impetuosity at the hostess's cap, which, together with
some of her hair, she pluck from her head in a moment, give she, at
the same time, several hearty cuff in the face; which by frequent
practice on the inferior servant, she have learn an excellent knack of
deliver with a good grace. poor Joseph could hardly rise from his
chair; the parson be employ in wipe the blood from his eye, which
have entirely blind he; and the landlord be but just begin to
stir; whilst Mrs Slipslop, hold down the landlady's face with she
leave hand, make so dexterous an use of her right, that the poor woman
begin to roar, in a key which alarm all the company in the inn.
there happen to be in the inn, at this time, besides the lady who
arrive in the stage-coach, the two gentleman who be present at Mr
Tow-wouse's when Joseph be detain for his horse's meat, and whom we
have before mention to have stopt at the alehouse with Adams. there
be likewise a gentleman just return from his travel to Italy; all
whom the horrid outcry of murder presently bring into the kitchen,
where the several combatant be find in the posture already
describe.
it be now no difficulty to put an end to the fray, the conqueror be
satisfied with the vengeance they have take, and the conquered have no
appetite to renew the fight. the principal figure, and which engage the
eye of all, be Adams, who be all over cover with blood, which the
whole company conclude to be his own, and consequently imagine he no
long for this world. but the host, who have now recover from his
blow, and be rise from the ground, soon deliver they from this
apprehension, by damn his wife for waste the hog's pudding, and
tell she all would have be very well if she have not intermeddle,
like a b--as she be; add, he be very glad the gentlewoman have pay
she, though not half what she deserve. the poor woman have indeed fare
much the bad; have, besides the unmerciful cuff receive, lose a
quantity of hair, which Mrs Slipslop in triumph hold in her left hand.
the traveller, address himself to Mrs Grave-airs, desire she not to
be frighten; for here have be only a little boxing, which he say, to
their _disgracia_, the English be _accustomata_ to: add, it must
be, however, a sight somewhat strange to he, who be just come from
Italy; the Italians not be addict to the _cuffardo_ but _bastonza_,
say he. he then go up to Adams, and tell he he look like the
ghost of Othello, bid he not shake his gory lock at he, for he could
not say he do it. Adams very innocently answer, "Sir, I be far from
accuse you." he then return to the lady, and cry, "I find the
bloody gentleman be _uno insipido del nullo senso_. _Dammato di I_, if
I have see such a _spectaculo_ in my way from Viterbo."
one of the gentleman have learn from the host the occasion of this
bustle, and be assure by he that Adams have strike the first blow,
whisper in his ear, "hewould warrant he would recover."--"Recover!
master," say the host, smile: "yes, yes, I be not afraid of die
with a blow or two neither; I be not such a chicken as that."--"Pugh!"
say the gentleman, "I mean you will recover damage in that action
which, undoubtedly, you intend to bring, as soon as a writ can be
return from London; for you look like a man of too much spirit and
courage to suffer any one to beat you without bring your action
against he: he must be a scandalous fellow indeed who would put up with
a drubbing whilst the law be open to revenge it; besides, he hath draw
blood from you, and spoil your coat; and the jury will give damage
for that too. an excellent new coat upon my word; and now not worth a
shilling! I donot care," continue he, "to intermeddle in these case;
but you have a right to my evidence; and if I be swear, I must speak the
truth. I see you sprawl on the floor, and blood gush from your
nostril. you may take your own opinion; but be I in your
circumstance, every drop of my blood should convey an ounce of gold
into my pocket: remember I donot advise you to go to law; but if your
jury be Christians, they must give swing damage. thatbe
all."--"master," cry the host, scratch his head, "I have no stomach
to law, I thank you. I have see enough of that in the parish, where two
of my neighbour have be at law about a house, till they have both
lawe themselves into a gaol." at which word he turn about, and begin
to inquire again after his hog's pudding; nor would it probably have
be a sufficient excuse for his wife, that she spill they in his
defence, have not some awe of the company, especially of the italian
traveller, who be a person of great dignity, withhold his rage.
Whilst one of the above-mention gentleman be employ, as we have
see he, on the behalf of the landlord, the other be no less hearty on
the side of Mr Adams, whom he advise to bring his action immediately.
he say the assault of the wife be in law the assault of the husband,
for they be but one person; and he be liable to pay damage, which he
say must be considerable, where so bloody a disposition appear. Adams
answer, if it be true that they be but one person, he have assault
the wife; for he be sorry to own he have strike the husband the first
blow. "I be sorry you own it too," cry the gentleman; "for it could
not possibly appear to the court; for here be no evidence present but
the lame man in the chair, whom I suppose to be your friend, and would
consequently say nothing but what make for you."--"how, sir," say
Adams, "do you take I for a villain, who would prosecute revenge in
cold blood, and use unjustifiable mean to obtain it? if you know I,
and my order, I should think you affront both." at the word order, the
gentleman star (for he be too bloody to be of any modern order of
knight); and, turn hastily about, say, "every man know his own
business."
matter be now compose, the company retire to their several
apartment; the two gentleman congratulate each other on the success
of their good office in procure a perfect reconciliation between the
contending party; and the traveller go to his repast, cry, "as
the italian poet says--
'_Je voi_ very well _que tutta e pace_,
so send up dinner, good Boniface.'"
the coachman begin now to grow importunate with his passenger, whose
entrance into the coach be retard by Miss Grave-air insist,
against the remonstrance of all the rest, that she would not admit a
footman into the coach; for poor Joseph be too lame to mount a horse. a
young lady, who be, as it seem, an earl's grand-daughter, beg it
with almost tear in her eye. Mr Adams pray, and Mrs Slipslop
scold; but all to no purpose. she say, "she would not demean herself
to ride with a footman: that there be waggon on the road: that if the
master of the coach desire it, she would pay for two place; but would
suffer no such fellow to come in."--"Madam," say Slipslop, "I be sure
no one can refuse another come into a stage-coach."--"i donot know,
madam," say the lady; "I be not much use to stage-coach; I seldom
travel in they."--"That may be, madam," reply Slipslop; "very good
people do; and some people's better, for aught I know." Miss Grave-airs
say, "some folk might sometimes give their tongue a liberty, to some
people that be their better, which do not become they; for her part,
she be not use to converse with servant." Slipslop return, "some
people keep no servant to converse with; for her part, she thank
Heaven she live in a family where there be a great many, and have more
under her own command than any paultry little gentlewoman in the
kingdom." Miss Grave-airs cry, "she believe her mistress would not
encourage such sauciness to her better."--"My better," say Slipslop,
"who be my better, pray?"--"i be your better," answer Miss
Grave-air, "and Iwill acquaint your mistress."--At which Mrs Slipslop
laugh aloud, and tell she, "her lady be one of the great gentry; and
such little paultry gentlewoman as some folk, who travel in
stagecoach, would not easily come at she."
this smart dialogue between some people and some folk be go on at
the coach door when a solemn person, rid into the inn, and see
Miss Grave-air, immediately accost she with "dear child, how do you?"
she presently answer, "o papa, I be glad you have overtake I."--"So
be I," answer he; "for one of our coach be just at hand; and, there
be room for you in it, you shall go no far in the stage unless
you desire it."--"How can you imagine I should desire it?" say she; so,
bid Slipslop ride with her fellow, if she please, she take she
father by the hand, who be just alight, and walk with he into
a room.
Adams instantly ask the coachman, in a whisper, "if he know who the
gentleman be?" the coachman answer, "he be now a gentleman, and keep
his horse and man; but time be alter, master," say be; "I remember
when he be no well bear than myself."--"Ay! ay!" say Adams. "my
father drive the squire's coach," answer he, "when that very man ride
postillion; but he be now his steward; and a great gentleman." Adams
then snap his finger, and cry, "he think she be some
such trollop."
Adams make haste to acquaint Mrs Slipslop with this good news, as he
imagine it; but it find a reception different from what he expect.
the prudent gentlewoman, who despise the anger of Miss Grave-airs
whilst she conceive she the daughter of a gentleman of small fortune,
now she hear her alliance with the upper servant of a great family in
her neighbourhood, begin to fear her interest with the mistress. she
wish she have not carry the dispute so far, and begin to think of
endeavour to reconcile herself to the young lady before she leave the
inn; when, luckily, the scene at London, which the reader can scarce
have forget, present itself to her mind, and comfort she with
such assurance, that she no long apprehend any enemy with
her mistress.
everything be now adjust, the company enter the coach, which be
just on its departure, when one lady recollect she have leave her fan, a
second her glove, a third a snuff-box, and a fourth a smelling-bottle
behind she; to find all which occasion some delay and much swearing to
the coachman.
as soon as the coach have leave the inn, the woman all together fall to
the character of Miss Grave-air; whom one of they declare she have
suspect to be some low creature, from the beginning of their journey,
and another affirm she have not even the look of a gentlewoman: a
third warrant she be no well than she should be; and, turn to
the lady who have relate the story in the coach, say, "do you ever
hear, madam, anything so prudish as her remark? well, deliver I from
the censoriousness of such a prude." the fourth add, "o madam! all
these creature be censorious; but for my part, I wonder where the
wretch be breed; indeed, I must own I have seldom converse with these
mean kind of people, so that it may appear strange to I; but to refuse
the general desire of a whole company have something in it so
astonishing, that, for my part, I own I should hardly believe it if my
own ear have not be witness to it."--"yes, and so handsome a young
fellow," cry Slipslop; "the woman must have no compulsion in she: I
believe she be more of a Turk than a Christian; I be certain, if she have
any christian woman's blood in her vein, the sight of such a young
fellow must have warm it. indeed, there be some wretched, miserable
old object, that turn one's stomach; I should not wonder if she have
refuse such a one; I be as nice as herself, and should have care no
more than herself for the company of stink old fellow; but, hold up
thy head, Joseph, thou art none of those; and she who hath not
compulsion for thee be a Myhummetman, and I will maintain it." this
conversation make Joseph uneasy as well as the lady; who, perceive
the spirit which Mrs Slipslop be in (for indeed she be not a cup too
low), begin to fear the consequence; one of they therefore desire the
lady to conclude the story. "Aye, madam," say Slipslop, "I beg your
ladyship to give we that story you commensate in the morning;" which
request that well-breed woman immediately comply with.
CHAPTER VI.
_conclusion of the unfortunate jilt._
Leonora, have once break through the bound which custom and modesty
impose on her sex, soon give an unbridled indulgence to her passion. her
visit to Bellarmine be more constant, as well as long, than his
surgeon's: in a word, she become absolutely his nurse; make his
water-gruel, administer he his medicine; and, notwithstanding the
prudent advice of her aunt to the contrary, almost intirely reside in
her wound lover's apartment.
the lady of the town begin to take her conduct under consideration: it
be the chief topic of discourse at their tea-table, and be very
severely censure by the most part; especially by Lindamira, a lady
whose discreet and starch carriage, together with a constant attendance
at church three time a day, have utterly defeat many malicious attack
on her own reputation; for such be the envy that Lindamira's virtue have
attract, that, notwithstanding her own strict behaviour and strict
enquiry into the life of other, she have not be able to escape be
the mark of some arrow herself, which, however, do she no injury; a
blessing, perhaps, owe by she to the clergy, who be her chief male
companion, and with two or three of whom she have be barbarously and
unjustly calumniate.
"not so unjustly neither, perhaps," say Slipslop; "for the clergy be
man, as well as other folk."
the extreme delicacy of Lindamira's virtue be cruelly hurt by those
freedom which Leonora allow herself: she say, "it be an affront to
her sex; that she do not imagine it consistent with any woman's honour
to speak to the creature, or to be see in her company; and that, for
her part, she should always refuse to dance at an assembly with she,
for fear of contamination by take she by the hand."
but to return to my story: as soon as Bellarmine be recover, which
be somewhat within a month from his receive the wound, he set out,
accord to agreement, for Leonora's father's, in order to propose the
match, and settle all matter with he touching settlement, and
the like.
a little before his arrival the old gentleman have receive an intimation
of the affair by the follow letter, which I can repeat verbatim, and
which, they say, be write neither by Leonora nor her aunt, though it
be in a woman's hand. the letter be in these words:--
"SIR,--I be sorry to acquaint you that your daughter, Leonora, hath
act one of the basest as well as most simple part with a young
gentleman to whom she have engage herself, and whom she hath (pardon the
word) jilt for another of inferior fortune, notwithstanding his
superior figure. you may take what measure you please on this occasion;
I have perform what I think my duty; as I have, though unknown to
you, a very great respect for your family."
the old gentleman do not give himself the trouble to answer this kind
epistle; nor do he take any notice of it, after he have read it, till he
see Bellarmine. he be, to say the truth, one of those father who look
on child as an unhappy consequence of their youthful pleasure;
which, as he would have be delighted not to have have attend they, so
be he no less pleased with any opportunity to rid himself of the
incumbrance. he pass, in the world's language, as an exceeding good
father; be not only so rapacious as to rob and plunder all mankind to
the utmost of his power, but even to deny himself the conveniencie, and
almost necessary, of life; which his neighbour attribute to a desire
of raise immense fortune for his child: but in fact it be not
so; he heap up money for its own sake only, and look on his child
as his rival, who be to enjoy his beloved mistress when he be
incapable of possess she, and which he would have be much more
charm with the power of carry along with he; nor have his child
any other security of be his heir than that the law would constitute
they such without a will, and that he have not affection enough for any
one live to take the trouble of write one.
to this gentleman come Bellarmine, on the errand I have mention. his
person, his equipage, his family, and his estate, seem to the father
to make he an advantageous match for his daughter: he therefore very
readily accept his proposal: but when Bellarmine imagine the
principal affair conclude, and begin to open the incidental matter of
fortune, the old gentleman presently change his countenance, say,
"he resolve never to marry his daughter on a Smithfield match; that
whoever have love for she to take she would, when he die, find her share
of his fortune in his coffer; but he have see such example of
undutifulness happen from the too early generosity of parent, that he
have make a vow never to part with a shilling whilst he live." he
commend the saying of Solomon, "he that spareth the rod spoileth the
child;" but add, "he might have likewise assert, that he that
spareth the purse saveth the child." he then run into a discourse on the
extravagance of the youth of the age; whence he launch into a
dissertation on horse; and come at length to commend those Bellarmine
drive. that fine gentleman, who at another season would have be well
enough please to dwell a little on that subject, be now very eager to
resume the circumstance of fortune. he say, "he have a very high value
for the young lady, and would receive she with less than he would any
other whatever; but that even his love to she make some regard to
worldly matter necessary; for it would be a most distract sight for
he to see she, when he have the honour to be her husband, in less than a
coach and six." the old gentleman answer, "Four will do, four will
do;" and then take a turn from horse to extravagance and from
extravagance to horse, till he come round to the equipage again;
whither he be no soon arrive than Bellarmine bring he back to the
point; but all to no purpose; he make his escape from that subject in a
minute; till at last the lover declare, "that in the present situation
of his affair it be impossible for he, though he love Leonora more
than _tout le monde_, to marry she without any fortune." to which the
father answer, "he be sorry that his daughter must lose so valuable a
match; that, if he have an inclination, at present it be not in his
power to advance a shilling: that he have have great loss, and be at
great expense on project; which, though he have great expectation from
they, have yet produce he nothing: that he do not know what might
happen hereafter, as on the birth of a son, or such accident; but he
would make no promise, or enter into any article, for he would not break
his vow for all the daughter in the world."
in short, lady, to keep you no long in suspense, Bellarmine, have
try every argument and persuasion which he could invent, and find
they all ineffectual, at length take his leave, but not in order to
return to Leonora; he proceed directly to his own seat, whence, after
a few day' stay, he return to Paris, to the great delight of the
French and the honour of the english nation.
but as soon as he arrive at his home he presently despatch a
messenger with the following epistle to Leonora:--
"ADORABLE and charmante,--i be sorry to have the honour to tell you I
be not the _heureux_ person destine for your divine arm. your papa
hath tell I so with a _politesse_ not often see on this side Paris.
you may perhaps guess his manner of refuse I. _ah, mon Dieu!_ you
will certainly believe I, madam, incapable myself of deliver this
_triste_ message, which I intend to try the french air to cure the
consequence of. _a jamais! Coeur! ange! Au diable!_ if your papa
oblige you to a marriage, I hope we shall see you at Paris; till when,
the wind that flow from thence will be the warm _dans le monde_, for
it will consist almost entirely of my sigh. _Adieu, ma princesse!
ah, l'amour!_
"BELLARMINE."
I shall not attempt, lady, to describe Leonora's condition when she
receive this letter. it be a picture of horror, which I should have as
little pleasure in draw as you in behold. she immediately leave the
place where she be the subject of conversation and ridicule, and
retire to that house I show you when I begin the story; where she
hath ever since lead a disconsolate life, and deserve, perhaps, pity for
her misfortune, more than our censure for a behaviour to which the
artifice of her aunt very probably contribute, and to which very young
woman be often render too liable by that blameable levity in the
education of our sex.
"if I be inclined to pity she," say a young lady in the coach, "it
would be for the loss of Horatio; for I cannot discern any misfortune in
she miss such a husband as Bellarmine."
"why, I must own," say Slipslop, "the gentleman be a little
false-hearted; but howsumever, it be hard to have two lover, and get
never a husband at all. but pray, madam, what become of _our-asho_?"
he remain, say the lady, still unmarried, and hath apply himself so
strictly to his business, that he hath raise, I hear, a very
considerable fortune. and what be remarkable, they say he never hear
the name of Leonora without a sigh, nor hath ever utter one syllable
to charge she with her ill-conduct towards he.
CHAPTER VII.
_a very short chapter, in which parson Adams go a great way._
the lady, have finish her story, receive the thank of the company;
and now Joseph, put his head out of the coach, cry out, "never
believe I if yonder be not our parson Adams walk along without his
horse!"--"On my word, and so he be," say Slipslop: "and as sure as
twopence he hath leave he behind at the inn." indeed, true it be, the
parson have exhibit a fresh instance of his absence of mind; for he be
so pleased with have get Joseph into the coach, that he never once
thought of the beast in the stable; and, find his leg as nimble as
he desire, he sally out, brandish a crabstick, and have keep on
before the coach, mend and slacken his pace occasionally, so that
he have never be much more or less than a quarter of a mile
distant from it.
Mrs Slipslop desire the coachman to overtake he, which he attempt,
but in vain; for the fast he drive the fast run the parson, often
cry out, "aye, aye, catch I if you can;" till at length the coachman
swear he would as soon attempt to drive after a greyhound, and, give
the parson two or three hearty curse, he cry'd, "softly, softly, boy,"
to his horse, which the civil beast immediately obey.
but we will be more courteous to our reader than he be to Mrs
Slipslop; and, leave the coach and its company to pursue their
journey, we will carry our reader on after parson Adams, who stretch
forward without once look behind he, till, have leave the coach
full three mile in his rear, he come to a place where, by keep the
extreme track to the right, it be just barely possible for a human
creature to miss his way. this track, however, do he keep, as indeed he
have a wonderful capacity at these kind of bare possibility, and,
travel in it about three mile over the plain, he arrive at the
summit of a hill, whence look a great way backwards, and perceive
no coach in sight, he sit himself down on the turf, and, pull out his
Aeschylus, determine to wait here for its arrival.
he have not sit long here before a gun go off very near, a little
startle he; he look up and see a gentleman within a hundred pace
take up a partridge which he have just shoot.
Adams stand up and present a figure to the gentleman which would have
move laughter in many; for his cassock have just again fall down below
his greatcoat, that be to say, it reach his knee, whereas the skirt
of his greatcoat descend no low than half-way down his thigh; but
the gentleman's mirth give way to his surprize at behold such a
personage in such a place.
Adams, advance to the gentleman, tell he he hop he have good sport,
to which the other answer, "very little."--"I see, sir," say Adams,
"you have smite one partridge;" to which the sportsman make no reply,
but proceed to charge his piece.
whilst the gun be charge, Adams remain in silence, which he at last
break by observe that it be a delightful evening. the gentleman, who
have at first sight conceive a very distasteful opinion of the parson,
begin, on perceive a book in his hand and smoake likewise the
information of the cassock, to change his thought, and make a small
advance to conversation on his side by say, "Sir, I suppose you be
not one of these part?"
Adams immediately tell he, "No; that he be a traveller, and invite by
the beauty of the evening and the place to repose a little and amuse
himself with reading."--"I may as well repose myself too," say the
sportsman, "for I have be out this whole afternoon, and the devil a
bird have I see till I come hither."
"perhaps then the game be not very plenty hereabouts?" cry Adams. "no,
sir," say the gentleman: "the soldier, who be quarter in the
neighbourhood, have kill it all."--"It be very probable," cry Adams,
"for shooting be their profession."--"Ay, shoot the game," answer
the other; "but I donot see they be so forward to shoot our enemy. I
donot like that affair of Carthagena; if I have be there, I believe I
should have do other-guess thing, d--n I: whatbe a man's life when
his country demand it? a man who willnot sacrifice his life for his
country deserve to be hang, d--n I." which word he speak with so
violent a gesture, so loud a voice, so strong an accent, and so fierce a
countenance, that he might have frighten a captain of train band at
the head of his company; but Mr Adams be not greatly subject to fear;
he tell he intrepidly that he very much approve his virtue, but
dislike his swearing, and beg he not to addict himself to so bad a
custom, without which he say he might fight as bravely as Achilles do.
indeed he be charm with this discourse; he tell the gentleman he
would willingly have go many mile to have meet a man of his generous
way of thinking; that, if he please to sit down, he should be greatly
delighted to commune with he; for, though he be a clergyman, he would
himself be ready, if thereto call, to lay down his life for
his country.
the gentleman sit down, and Adams by he; and then the latter begin, as
in the follow chapter, a discourse which we have place by itself, as
it be not only the most curious in this but perhaps in any other book.
CHAPTER VIII.
_a notable dissertation by Mr Abraham Adams; wherein that gentleman
appear in a political light._
"I do assure you, sir" (say he, take the gentleman by the hand), "I
be heartily glad to meet with a man of your kidney; for, though I be a
poor parson, I will be bold to say I be an honest man, and would not do
an ill thing to be make a bishop; nay, though it hath not fall in my
way to offer so noble a sacrifice, I have not be without opportunity
of suffer for the sake of my conscience, I thank Heaven for they; for
I have have relation, though I say it, who make some figure in the
world; particularly a nephew, who be a shopkeeper and an alderman of a
corporation. he be a good lad, and be under my care when a boy; and I
believe would do what I bid he to his die day. indeed, it look like
extreme vanity in I to affect be a man of such consequence as to
have so great an interest in an alderman; but other have think so
too, as manifestly appear by the rector, whose curate I formerly be,
send for I on the approach of an election, and tell I, if I
expect to continue in his cure, that I must bring my nephew to vote
for one Colonel Courtly, a gentleman whom I have never hear tiding of
till that instant. I tell the rector I have no power over my nephew's
vote (God forgive I for such prevarication!); that I suppose he would
give it accord to his conscience; that I would by no means endeavour
to influence he to give it otherwise. he tell I it be in vain to
equivocate; that he know I have already speak to he in favour of esquire
Fickle, my neighbour; and, indeed, it be true I have; for it be at a
season when the church be in danger, and when all good man expect
they know not what would happen to we all. I then answer boldly, if he
think I have give my promise, he affront I in propose any breach
of it. not to be too prolix; I persevere, and so do my nephew, in the
esquire's interest, who be choose chiefly through his mean; and so I
lose my curacy, well, sir, but do you think the esquire ever mention a
word of the church? _Ne verbum quidem, ut ita dicam_: within two year
he get a place, and hath ever since live in London; where I have be
inform (but God forbid I should believe that,) that he never so much
as goeth to church. I remain, sir, a considerable time without any
cure, and live a full month on one funeral sermon, which I preach on
the indisposition of a clergyman; but this by the bye. at last, when Mr
Fickle get his place, Colonel courtly stand again; and who should make
interest for he but Mr Fickle himself! that very identical Mr Fickle,
who have formerly tell I the colonel be an enemy to both the church and
state, have the confidence to sollicit my nephew for he; and the colonel
himself offer I to make I chaplain to his regiment, which I refuse
in favour of Sir Oliver Hearty, who tell we he would sacrifice
everything to his country; and I believe he would, except his hunting,
which he stick so close to, that in five year together he go but
twice up to parliament; and one of those time, I have be tell, never
be within sight of the House. however, he be a worthy man, and the
good friend I ever have; for, by his interest with a bishop, he get I
replace into my curacy, and give I eight pound out of his own pocket
to buy I a gown and cassock, and furnish my house. he have our interest
while he live, which be not many year. on his death I have fresh
application make to I; for all the world know the interest I have with
my good nephew, who now be a lead man in the corporation; and Sir
Thomas Booby, buy the estate which have be Sir Oliver's, propose
himself a candidate. he be then a young gentleman just come from his
travel; and it do I good to hear he discourse on affair which, for
my part, I know nothing of. if I have be master of a thousand vote he
should have have they all. I engage my nephew in his interest, and he
be elect; and a very fine parliament-man he be. they tell I he make
speech of an hour long, and, I have be tell, very fine one; but he
could never persuade the parliament to be of his opinion. _Non omnia
possumus omne_. he promise I a living, poor man! and I believe I
should have have it, but an accident happen, which be, that my lady
have promise it before, unknown to he. this, indeed, I never hear till
afterwards; for my nephew, who die about a month before the incumbent,
always tell I I might be assure of it. since that time, Sir Thomas,
poor man, have always so much business, that he never could find leisure
to see I. I believe it be partly my lady's fault too, who do not
think my dress good enough for the gentry at her table. however, I must
do he the justice to say he never be ungrateful; and I have always
find his kitchen, and his cellar too, open to I: many a time, after
service on a Sunday--for I preach at four church--have I recruit my
spirit with a glass of his ale. since my nephew's death, the
corporation be in other hand; and I be not a man of that consequence I
be formerly. I have now no long any talent to lay out in the service
of my country; and to whom nothing be give, of he can nothing be
require. however, on all proper season, such as the approach of an
election, I throw a suitable dash or two into my sermon; which I have
the pleasure to hear be not disagreeable to Sir Thomas and the other
honest gentleman my neighbour, who have all promise I these five
year to procure an ordination for a son of mine, who be now near
thirty, hath an infinite stock of learning, and be, I thank Heaven, of
an unexceptionable life; though, as he be never at an university, the
bishop refuse to ordain he. too much care cannot indeed be take in
admit any to the sacred office; though I hope he will never act so
as to be a disgrace to any order, but will serve his God and his country
to the utmost of his power, as I have endeavour to do before he; nay,
and will lay down his life whenever call to that purpose. I be sure I
have educate he in those principle; so that I have acquit my duty,
and shall have nothing to answer for on that account. but I do not
distrust he, for he be a good boy; and if Providence should throw it in
his way to be of as much consequence in a public light as his father
once be, I can answer for he he will use his talent as honestly as I
have do."
CHAPTER IX.
_in which the gentleman discant on bravery and heroic virtue, till an
unlucky accident put an end to the discourse._
the gentleman highly commend Mr Adams for his good resolution, and
tell he, "he hop his son would tread in his step;" add, "that if
he would not die for his country, he would not be worthy to live in it.
Iwould make no more of shoot a man that would not die for his
country, than--
"Sir," say he, "I have disinherit a nephew, who be in the army,
because he would not exchange his commission and go to the West Indies.
I believe the rascal be a coward, though he pretend to be in love
forsooth. I would have all such fellow hang, sir; I would have they
hang." Adams answer, "that would be too severe; that man do not
make themselves; and if fear have too much ascendance in the mind, the
man be rather to be pity than abhor; that reason and time might
teach he to subdue it." he say, "a man might be a coward at one time,
and brave at another. Homer," say he, "who so well understand and
copy Nature, hath teach we this lesson; for Paris fight and Hector
run away. Nay, we have a mighty instance of this in the history of
later age, no long ago than the 705th year of Rome, when the great
Pompey, who have win so many battle and be honour with so many
triumph, and of whose valour several author, especially Cicero and
Paterculus, have form such elogium; this very Pompey leave the battle
of Pharsalia before he have lose it, and retreat to his tent, where he
sit like the most pusillanimous rascal in a fit of despair, and yield
a victory, which be to determine the empire of the world, to Caesar. I
be not much travel in the history of modern time, that be to say,
these last thousand year; but those who be can, I make no question,
furnish you with parallel instance." he conclude, therefore, that, have
he take any such hasty resolution against his nephew, he hop he
would consider well, and retract they. the gentleman answer with
great warmth, and talk much of courage and his country, till,
perceive it grow late, he ask Adams, "what place he intend for
that night?" he tell he, "he wait there for the stage-coach."--"The
stage-coach, sir!" say the gentleman; "they be all pass by long ago.
you may see the last yourself almost three mile before we."--"I protest
and so they be," cry Adams; "then I must make haste and follow they."
the gentleman tell he, "he would hardly be able to overtake they; and
that, if he do not know his way, he would be in danger of lose
himself on the down, for it would be presently dark; and he might
ramble about all night, and perhaps find himself far from his
journey's end in the morning than he be now." he advise he,
therefore, "to accompany he to his house, which be very little out of
his way," assure he "that he would find some country fellow in his
parish who would conduct he for sixpence to the city where he be
go." Adams accept this proposal, and on they travel, the
gentleman renew his discourse on courage, and the infamy of not be
ready, at all time, to sacrifice our life to our country. night
overtake they much about the same time as they arrive near some bush;
whence, on a sudden, they hear the most violent shriek imaginable in a
female voice. Adams offer to snatch the gun out of his companion's
hand. "what be you do?" say he. "do!" say Adams; "I be
hasten to the assistance of the poor creature whom some villain be
murder." "you be not mad enough, I hope," say the gentleman,
tremble: "do you consider this gun be only charge with shot, and that
the robber be most probably furnish with pistol load with
bullet? this be no business of our; let we make as much haste as
possible out of the way, or we may fall into their hand ourselves." the
shriek now increase, Adams make no answer, but snapt his finger,
and, brandish his crabstick, make directly to the place whence the
voice issue; and the man of courage make as much expedition towards his
own home, whither he escape in a very short time without once look
behind he; where we will leave he, to contemplate his own bravery, and
to censure the want of it in other, and return to the good Adams, who,
on come up to the place whence the noise proceed, find a woman
struggle with a man, who have throw she on the ground, and have almost
overpower she. the great ability of Mr Adams be not necessary to
have form a right judgment of this affair on the first sight. he do
not, therefore, want the entreaty of the poor wretch to assist she;
but, lift up his crabstick, he immediately level a blow at that
part of the ravisher's head where, accord to the opinion of the
ancient, the brain of some person be deposit, and which he have
undoubtedly let forth, have not nature (who, as wise man have observe,
equip all creature with what be most expedient for they) take a
provident care (as she always doth with those she intend for
encounter) to make this part of the head three time as thick as those
of ordinary man who be design to exercise talent which be vulgarly
call rational, and for whom, as brain be necessary, she be oblige
to leave some room for they in the cavity of the skull; whereas, those
ingredient be entirely useless to person of the heroic calling, she
hath an opportunity of thicken the bone, so as to make it less
subject to any impression, or liable to be crack or break: and
indeed, in some who be predestine to the command of army and
empire, she be suppose sometimes to make that part perfectly solid.
as a game cock, when engage in amorous toy with a hen, if perchance
he espy another cock at hand, immediately quit his female, and
oppose himself to his rival, so do the ravisher, on the information of
the crabstick, immediately leap from the woman and hasten to assail the
man. he have no weapon but what Nature have furnish he with. however,
he clench his fist, and presently dart it at that part of Adams's
breast where the heart be lodge. Adams stagger at the violence of the
blow, when, throw away his staff, he likewise clench that fist
which we have before commemorate, and would have discharge it full in
the breast of his antagonist, have he not dexterously catch it with his
leave hand, at the same time dart his head (which some modern hero
of the low class use, like the battering-ram of the ancient, for a
weapon of offence; another reason to admire the cunningness of Nature,
in compose it of those impenetrable material); dash his head, I
say, into the stomach of Adams, he tumble he on his back; and, not
have any regard to the law of heroism, which would have restrain
he from any farth attack on his enemy till he be again on his leg,
he throw himself upon he, and, lay hold on the ground with his left
hand, he with his right belabour the body of Adams till he be weary,
and indeed till he conclude (to use the language of fighting) "that he
have do his business;" or, in the language of poetry, "that he have send
he to the shade below;" in plain English, "that he be dead."
but Adams, who be no chicken, and could bear a drubbing as well as any
boxing champion in the universe, lie still only to watch his
opportunity; and now, perceive his antagonist to pant with his
labour, he exert his utmost force at once, and with such success that
he overturn he, and become his superior; when, fix one of his
knee in his breast, he cry out in an exulting voice, "it be my turn
now;" and, after a few minute' constant application, he give he so
dexterous a blow just under his chin that the fellow no long retain
any motion, and Adams begin to fear he have strike he once too often;
for he often assert "he should be concern to have the blood of even
the wicked upon he."
Adams get up and call aloud to the young woman. "be of good cheer,
damsel," say he, "you be no long in danger of your ravisher, who, I
be terribly afraid, lie dead at my foot; but God forgive I what I have
do in defence of innocence!" the poor wretch, who have be some time
in recover strength enough to rise, and have afterwards, during the
engagement, stand tremble, be disable by fear even from run
away, hear her champion be victorious, come up to he, but not
without apprehension even of her deliverer; which, however, she be
soon relieve from by his courteous behaviour and gentle word. they
be both stand by the body, which lie motionless on the ground, and
which Adams wish to see stir much more than the woman do, when he
earnestly beg she to tell he "by what misfortune she come, at such a
time of night, into so lonely a place." she acquaint he, "she be
travel towards London, and have accidentally meet with the person from
whom he have deliver she, who tell she he be likewise on his journey
to the same place, and would keep her company; an offer which,
suspect no harm, she have accept; that he tell she they be at a
small distance from an inn where she might take up she lodge that
evening, and he would show she a near way to it than by follow the
road; that if she have suspect he (which she do not, he speak so
kindly to she), be alone on these down in the dark, she have no human
mean to avoid he; that, therefore, she put her whole trust in
Providence, and walk on, expect every moment to arrive at the inn;
when on a sudden, be come to those bush, he desire she to stop,
and after some rude kiss, which she resist, and some entreaty,
which she reject, he lay violent hand on she, and be attempt to
execute his wicked will, when, she thank G--, he timely come up and
prevent he." Adams encourage she for say she have put her whole
trust in Providence, and tell she, "he doubt not but Providence have
send he to her deliverance, as a reward for that trust. he wish
indeed he have not deprive the wicked wretch of life, but G--'s will be
do;" say, "he hop the goodness of his intention would excuse he in
the next world, and he trust in her evidence to acquit he in this."
he be then silent, and begin to consider with himself whether it would
be properer to make his escape, or to deliver himself into the hand of
justice; which meditation end as the reader will see in the
next chapter.
CHAPTER X.
_give an account of the strange catastrophe of the precede
adventure, which draw poor Adams into fresh calamity; and who the
woman be who owe the preservation of her chastity to his
victorious arm._
the silence of Adams, add to the darkness of the night and loneliness
of the place, strike dreadful apprehension into the poor woman's mind;
she begin to fear as great an enemy in her deliverer as he have
deliver she from; and as she have not light enough to discover the age
of Adams, and the benevolence visible in his countenance, she suspect
he have use she as some very honest man have use their country; and have
rescue she out of the hand of one rifler in order to rifle she
himself. such be the suspicion she draw from his silence; but indeed
they be ill-ground. he stand over his vanquished enemy, wisely
weigh in his mind the objection which might be make to either of the
two method of proceeding mention in the last chapter, his judgment
sometimes incline to the one, and sometimes to the other; for both
seem to he so equally advisable and so equally dangerous, that
probably he would have end his day, at least two or three of they, on
that very spot, before he have take any resolution; at length he lift
up his eye, and spy a light at a distance, to which he instantly
address himself with _Heus tu, traveller, heus tu!_ he presently hear
several voice, and perceive the light approach toward he. the
person who attend the light begin some to laugh, other to sing, and
other to hollow, at which the woman testify some fear (for she have
conceal her suspicion of the parson himself); but Adams say, "be of
good cheer, damsel, and repose thy trust in the same providence which
hath hitherto protect thee, and never will forsake the innocent."
these people, who now approach, be no other, reader, than a set of
young fellow, who come to these bush in pursuit of a diversion which
they call bird-batting. this, if you be ignorant of it (as perhaps if
thou hast never travel beyond Kensington, Islington, Hackney, or the
Borough, thou mayst be), I will inform thee, be perform by hold a
large clap-net before a lanthorn, and at the same time beat the
bush; for the bird, when they be disturb from their place of
rest, or roost, immediately make to the light, and so be intice
within the net. Adams immediately tell they what happen, and desire
they to hold the lanthorn to the face of the man on the ground, for he
fear he have smite he fatally. but indeed his fear be frivolous;
for the fellow, though he have be stun by the last blow he receive,
have long since recover his sens, and, find himself quit of Adams,
have listen attentively to the discourse between he and the young
woman; for whose departure he have patiently wait, that he might
likewise withdraw himself, have no long hope of succeed in his
desire, which be moreover almost as well cool by Mr Adams as they
could have be by the young woman herself have he obtain his utmost
wish. this fellow, who have a readiness at improve any accident,
think he might now play a well part than that of a dead man; and,
accordingly, the moment the candle be hold to his face he leapt up,
and, lay hold on Adams, cry out, "no, villain, I be not dead,
though you and your wicked whore might well think I so, after the
barbarous cruelty you have exercise on I. gentleman," say he, "you
be luckily come to the assistance of a poor traveller, who would
otherwise have be rob and murder by this vile man and woman, who
lead I hither out of my way from the high-road, and both fall on I
have use I as you see." Adams be go to answer, when one of the
young fellow cry, "D--n they, letus carry they both before the
justice." the poor woman begin to tremble, and Adams lift up his
voice, but in vain. three or four of they lay hand on he; and one
hold the lanthorn to his face, they all agree he have the most
villainous countenance they ever beheld; and an attorney's clerk, who
be of the company, declare he be sure he have remember he at the
bar. as to the woman, her hair be dishevel in the struggle, and her
nose have bleed; so that they could not perceive whether she be handsome
or ugly, but they say her fright plainly discover her guilt. and
search her pocket, as they do those of Adams, for money, which the
fellow say he have lose, they find in her pocket a purse with some gold
in it, which abundantly convince they, especially as the fellow offer
to swear to it. Mr Adams be find to have no more than one halfpenny
about he. this the clerk say "be a great presumption that he be an
old offender, by cunningly give all the booty to the woman." to which
all the rest readily assent.
this accident promise they well sport than what they have propose,
they quit their intention of catch bird, and unanimously resolve
to proceed to the justice with the offender. be inform what a
desperate fellow Adams be, they tie his hand behind he; and, have
hid their net among the bush, and the lanthorn be carry before
they, they place the two prisoner in their front, and then begin their
march; Adams not only submit patiently to his own fate, but
comfort and encourage his companion under her suffering.
whilst they be on their way the clerk inform the rest that this
adventure would prove a very beneficial one; for that they would all be
entitle to their proportion of L80 for apprehend the robber. this
occasion a contention concern the part which they have severally
bear in take they; one insist he ought to have the great share,
for he have first lay his hand on Adams; another claim a superior
part for have first hold the lanthorn to the man's face on the ground,
by which, he say, "the whole be discover." the clerk claim
four-fifth of the reward for have propose to search the prisoner,
and likewise the carry they before the justice: he say, "indeed, in
strict justice, he ought to have the whole." these claim, however,
they at last consent to refer to a future decision, but seem all to
agree that the clerk be entitle to a moiety. they then debate what
money should be allot to the young fellow who have be employ only
in hold the net. he very modestly say, "that he do not apprehend
any large proportion would fall to his share, but hop they would allow
he something; he desire they to consider that they have assign their
net to his care, which prevent he from be as forward as any in
lay hold of the robber" (for so those innocent people be call);
"that if he have not occupy the net, some other must;" conclude,
however, "that he should be content with the small share
imaginable, and should think that rather their bounty than his merit."
but they be all unanimous in exclude he from any part whatever, the
clerk particularly swear, "if they give he a shilling they might do
what they please with the rest; for he would not concern himself with
the affair." this contention be so hot, and so totally engage the
attention of all the party, that a dexterous nimble thief, have he be
in Mr Adams's situation, would have take care to have give the justice
no trouble that evening. indeed, it require not the art of a sheppard
to escape, especially as the darkness of the night would have so much
befriend he; but Adams trust rather to his innocence than his
heel, and, without thinking of flight, which be easy, or resistance
(which be impossible, as there be six lusty young fellow, besides
the villain himself, present), he walk with perfect resignation the
way they think proper to conduct he.
Adams frequently vent himself in ejaculation during their journey; at
last, poor Joseph Andrews occur to his mind, he could not refrain
sigh forth his name, which be hear by his companion in
affliction, she cry with some vehemence, "sure I should know that
voice; you cannot certainly, sir, be Mr Abraham adams?"--"indeed,
damsel," say he, "that be my name; there be something also in your
voice which persuade I I have hear it before."--"La! sir," say she,
"donot you remember poor fanny?"--"how, Fanny!" answer Adams: "indeed
I very well remember you; what can have bring you hither?"--"I have
tell you, sir," reply she, "I be travel towards London; but I
think you mention Joseph Andrews; pray what be become of him?"--"i
leave he, child, this afternoon," say Adams, "in the stage-coach, in
his way towards our parish, whither he be go to see you."--"To see
I! La, sir," answer Fanny, "sure you jeer I; what should he be go
to see I for?"--"can you ask that?" reply Adams. "I hope, Fanny, you
be not inconstant; I assure you he deserve much well of you."--"La!
Mr Adams," say she, "what be Mr Joseph to I? I be sure I never have
anything to say to he, but as one fellow-servant might to another."--"I
be sorry to hear this," say Adams; "a virtuous passion for a young man
be what no woman need be ashamed of. you either do not tell I truth, or
you be false to a very worthy man." Adams then tell she what have
happen at the inn, to which she listen very attentively; and a sigh
often escape from she, notwithstanding her utmost endeavour to the
contrary; nor could she prevent herself from ask a thousand
question, which would have assure any one but Adams, who never see
far into people than they desire to let he, of the truth of a
passion she endeavour to conceal. indeed, the fact be, that this poor
girl, have hear of Joseph's misfortune, by some of the servant
belong to the coach which we have formerly mention to have stopt at
the inn while the poor youth be confine to his bed, that instant
abandon the cow she be milk, and, take with she a little bundle
of clothe under her arm, and all the money she be worth in her own
purse, without consult any one, immediately set forward in pursuit of
one whom, notwithstanding her shyness to the parson, she love with
inexpressible violence, though with the pure and most delicate
passion. this shyness, therefore, as we trust it will recommend her
character to all our female reader, and not greatly surprize such of
our male as be well acquainted with the young part of the other sex,
we shall not give ourselves any trouble to vindicate.
CHAPTER XI.
_what happen to they while before the justice. a chapter very full of
learn._
their fellow-traveller be so engaged in the hot dispute concern
the division of the reward for apprehend these innocent people, that
they attend very little to their discourse. they be now arrive at
the justice's house, and have send one of his servant in to acquaint his
worship that they have take two robber and bring they before he. the
justice, who be just return from a fox-chase, and have not yet
finish his dinner, order they to carry the prisoner into the
stable, whither they be attend by all the servant in the house, and
all the people in the neighbourhood, who flock together to see they
with as much curiosity as if there be something uncommon to be see, or
that a rogue do not look like other people.
the justice, now be in the height of his mirth and his cup,
bethink himself of the prisoner; and, tell his company he believe
they should have good sport in their examination, he order they into
his presence. they have no soon enter the room than he begin to
revile they, say, "that robbery on the highway be now grow so
frequent, that people could not sleep safely in their bed, and assure
they they both should be make example of at the ensue assize." after
he have go on some time in this manner, he be remind by his clerk,
"that it would be proper to take the deposition of the witness
against they." which he bid he do, and he would light his pipe in the
meantime. whilst the clerk be employ in write down the deposition
of the fellow who have pretend to be rob, the justice employ
himself in crack jest on poor Fanny, in which he be second by all
the company at table. one ask, "whether she be to be indict for a
highwayman?" another whisper in her ear, "if she have not provide
herself a great belly, he be at her service." a third say, "he
warrant she be a relation of turpin." to which one of the company, a
great wit, shake his head, and then his side, answer, "he believe
she be near relate to Turpis;" at which there be an universal
laugh. they be proceed thus with the poor girl, when somebody,
smoke the cassock peep forth from under the greatcoat of Adams,
cry out, "what have we here, a parson?" "how, sirrah," say the
justice, "do you go rob in the dress of a clergyman? let I tell you
your habit will not entitle you to the benefit of the clergy." "yes,"
say the witty fellow, "he will have one benefit of clergy, he will be
exalt above the head of the people;" at which there be a second
laugh. and now the witty spark, see his joke take, begin to rise in
spirit; and, turn to Adams, challenge he to cap verse, and,
provoke he by give the first blow, he repeated--
_"Molle meum levibus cord est vilebile telis."_
upon which Adams, with a look full of ineffable contempt, tell he, "he
deserve scourge for his pronunciation." the witty fellow answer,
"what do you deserve, doctor, for not be able to answer the first
time? why, Iwill give one, you blockhead, with an S.
_"'Si licet, ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus haurum.'_
"what, canst not with an M neither? thou art a pretty fellow for a
parson! why didst not steal some of the parson's Latin as well as his
gown?" another at the table then answer, "if he have, you would have
be too hard for he; I remember you at the college a very devil at
this sport; I have see you catch a freshman, for nobody that know you
would engage with you." "I have forget those thing now," cry the wit.
"I believe I could have do pretty well formerly. letus see, what do I
end with?--an M again--aye--
_"'Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.'_
I could have do it once." "ah! evil betide you, and so you can now,"
say the other: "nobody in this country will undertake you." Adams could
hold no long: "friend," say he, "I have a boy not above eight year
old who would instruct thee that the last verse run thus:--
_"'Ut sunt Divorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.'"_
"Iwill hold thee a guinea of that," say the wit, throw the money on
the table. "and Iwill go your half," cry the other. "do," answer
Adams; but upon apply to his pocket he be force to retract, and own
he have no money about he; which set they all a-laugh, and confirm
the triumph of his adversary, which be not moderate, any more than the
approbation he meet with from the whole company, who tell Adams he must
go a little long to school before he attempt to attack that
gentleman in Latin.
the clerk, have finish the deposition, as well of the fellow
himself, as of those who apprehend the prisoner, deliver they to
the justice; who, have swear the several witness without read a
syllable, order his clerk to make the mittimus.
Adams then say, "he hop he should not be condemn unheard." "no,
no," cry the justice, "you will be ask what you have to say for
yourself when you come on your trial: we be not try you now; I shall
only commit you to gaol: if you can prove your innocence at size, you
will be find ignoramus, and so no harm do." "be it no punishment,
sir, for an innocent man to lie several month in gaol?" cry Adams: "I
beg you would at least hear I before you sign the mittimus." "what
signify all you can say?" say the justice: "be it not here in black
and white against you? I must tell you you be a very impertinent fellow
to take up so much of my time. so make haste with his mittimus."
the clerk now acquaint the justice that among other suspicious thing,
as a penknife, &c., find in Adams's pocket, they have discover a book
write, as he apprehend, in cypher; for no one could read a word in
it. "ay," say the justice, "the fellow may be more than a common
robber, he may be in a plot against the Government. produce the book."
upon which the poor manuscript of Aeschylus, which Adams have transcribe
with his own hand, be bring forth; and the justice, look at it,
shake his head, and, turn to the prisoner, ask the meaning of those
cypher. "cypher?" answer Adams, "it be a manuscript of Aeschylus."
"who? who?" say the justice. Adams repeat, "Aeschylus." "that be an
outlandish name," cry the clerk. "a fictitious name rather, I
believe," say the justice. one of the company declare it look very
much like Greek. "greek?" say the justice; "why, 'tis all write."
"no," say the other, "I donot positively say it be so; for it be a very
long time since I have see any Greek." "therebe one," say he, turn
to the parson of the parish, who be present, "will tell we
immediately." the parson, take up the book, and put on his
spectacle and gravity together, mutter some word to himself, and
then pronounce aloud--"Ay, indeed, it be a greek manuscript; a very
fine piece of antiquity. I make no doubt but it be steal from the same
clergyman from whom the rogue take the cassock." "what do the rascal
mean by his Aeschylus?" say the justice. "Pooh!" answer the doctor,
with a contemptuous grin, "do you think that fellow know anything of
this book? Aeschylus! ho! ho! I see now what it be--a manuscript of one
of the father. I know a nobleman who would give a great deal of money
for such a piece of antiquity. ay, ay, question and answer. the
beginning be the catechism in Greek. ay, ay, _Pollaki toi_: whatbe your
name?"--"ay, whatbe your name?" say the justice to Adams; who answer,
"it be Aeschylus, and I will maintain it."--"Oh! it be," say the
justice: "make Mr Aeschylus his mittimus. I will teach you to banter I
with a false name."
one of the company, have look steadfastly at Adams, ask he, "if
he do not know Lady Booby?" upon which Adams, presently call he to
mind, answer in a rapture, "o squire! be you there? I believe you
will inform his worship I be innocent."--"I can indeed say," reply the
squire, "that I be very much surprize to see you in this situation:"
and then, address himself to the justice, he say, "Sir, I assure
you Mr Adams be a clergyman, as he appear, and a gentleman of a very
good character. I wish you would enquire a little far into this
affair; for I be convinced of his innocence."--"Nay," say the justice,
"if he be a gentleman, and you be sure he be innocent, I donot desire
to commit he, not I: I will commit the woman by herself, and take your
bail for the gentleman: look into the book, clerk, and see how it be to
take bail--come--and make the mittimus for the woman as fast as you
can."--"sir," cry Adams, "I assure you she be as innocent as
myself."--"perhap," say the squire, "there may be some mistake! pray
let we hear Mr Adams's relation."--"With all my heart," answer the
justice; "and give the gentleman a glass to wet his whistle before he
begin. I know how to behave myself to gentleman as well as another.
nobody can say I have commit a gentleman since I have be in the
commission." Adams then begin the narrative, in which, though he be
very prolix, he be uninterrupte, unless by several hum and hah of
the justice, and his desire to repeat those part which seem to he
most material. when he have finish, the justice, who, on what the
squire have say, believe every syllable of his story on his bare
affirmation, notwithstanding the deposition on oath to the contrary,
begin to let loose several rogue and rascal against the witness, whom
he order to stand forth, but in vain; the say witness, long since
find what turn matter be likely to take, have privily withdraw,
without attend the issue. the justice now fly into a violent
passion, and be hardly prevail with not to commit the innocent
fellow who have be impose on as well as himself. he swear, "they have
good find out the fellow who be guilty of perjury, and bring he before
he within two day, or he would bind they all over to their good
behaviour." they all promise to use their good endeavour to that
purpose, and be dismiss. then the justice insist that Mr Adams
should sit down and take a glass with he; and the parson of the parish
deliver he back the manuscript without say a word; nor would
Adams, who plainly discern his ignorance, expose it. as for Fanny, she
be, at her own request, recommend to the care of a maid-servant of
the house, who help she to new dress and clean herself.
the company in the parlour have not be long seat before they be
alarm with a horrible uproar from without, where the person who have
apprehend Adams and Fanny have be regale, accord to the custom
of the house, with the justice's strong beer. these be all fall
together by the ear, and be cuff each other without any mercy. the
justice himself sally out, and with the dignity of his presence soon
put an end to the fray. on his return into the parlour, he report,
"that the occasion of the quarrel be no other than a dispute to whom,
if Adams have be convict, the great share of the reward for
apprehend he have belong." all the company laugh at this, except
Adams, who, take his pipe from his mouth, fetch a deep groan, and
say, "he be concerned to see so litigious a temper in man. that he
remember a story something like it in one of the parish where his
cure lay:--There be," continue he, "a competition between three young
fellow for the place of the clerk, which I dispose of, to the good of
my ability, accord to merit; that be, I give it to he who have the
happy knack at set a psalm. the clerk be no soon establish
in his place than a contention begin between the two disappointed
candidate concern their excellence; each contend on whom, have
they two be the only competitor, my election would have fall. this
dispute frequently disturb the congregation, and introduce a discord
into the psalmody, till I be force to silence they both. but, alas!
the litigious spirit could not be stifle; and, be no long able to
vent itself in singing, it now break forth in fighting. it produce many
battle (for they be very near a match), and I believe would have
end fatally, have not the death of the clerk give I an opportunity to
promote one of they to his place; which presently put an end to the
dispute, and entirely reconcile the contend party." Adams then
proceed to make some philosophical observation on the folly of
grow warm in dispute in which neither party be interested. he then
apply himself vigorously to smoake; and a long silence ensue, which
be at length break by the justice, who begin to sing forth his own
praise, and to value himself exceedingly on his nice discernment in the
cause which have lately be before he. he be quickly interrupt by Mr
Adams, between whom and his worship a dispute now arise, whether he
ought not, in strictness of law, to have commit he, the say Adams;
in which the latter maintain he ought to have be commit, and the
justice as vehemently hold he ought not. this have most probably produce
a quarrel (for both be very violent and positive in their opinion),
have not Fanny accidentally hear that a young fellow be go from the
justice's house to the very inn where the stage-coach in which Joseph
be, put up. upon this news, she immediately send for the parson out of
the parlour. Adams, when he find she resolute to go (though she would
not own the reason, but pretend she could not bear to see the face of
those who have suspect she of such a crime), be as fully determined to
go with she; he accordingly take leave of the justice and company: and
so end a dispute in which the law seem shamefully to intend to set a
magistrate and a divine together by the ear.
CHAPTER XII.
_a very delightful adventure, as well to the person concern as to the
good-natured reader._
Adams, Fanny, and the guide, set out together about one in the morning,
the moon be then just risen. they have not go above a mile before a
most violent storm of rain oblige they to take shelter in an inn, or
rather alehouse, where Adams immediately procure himself a good fire, a
toast and ale, and a pipe, and begin to smoke with great content,
utterly forget everything that have happen.
Fanny sit likewise down by the fire; but be much more impatient at the
storm. she presently engage the eye of the host, his wife, the maid of
the house, and the young fellow who be their guide; they all conceive
they have never see anything half so handsome; and indeed, reader, if
thou art of an amorous hue, I advise thee to skip over the next
paragraph; which, to render our history perfect, we be oblige to set
down, humbly hop that we may escape the fate of Pygmalion; for if it
should happen to we, or to thee, to be strike with this picture, we
should be perhaps in as helpless a condition as Narcissus, and might say
to ourselves, _Quod petis est nusquam_. or, if the fine feature in it
should set Lady ----'s image before our eye, we should be still in as
bad a situation, and might say to our desire, _Coelum ipsum petimus
stultitia_.
Fanny be now in the nineteenth year of her age; she be tall and
delicately shape; but not one of those slender young woman who seem
rather intend to hang up in the hall of an anatomist than for any
other purpose. on the contrary, she be so plump that she seem
burst through her tight stay, especially in the part which confine
her swell breast. nor do her hip want the assistance of a hoop to
extend they. the exact shape of her arm denote the form of those limb
which she conceal; and though they be a little reddened by her
labour, yet, if her sleeve slip above her elbow, or her handkerchief
discover any part of her neck, a whiteness appear which the fine
italian paint would be unable to reach. her hair be of a chesnut brown,
and nature have be extremely lavish to she of it, which she have cut,
and on Sundays use to curl down her neck, in the modern fashion. her
forehead be high, her eyebrow arch, and rather full than otherwise.
her eye black and sparkling; her nose just incline to the Roman; her
lip red and moist, and her underlip, accord to the opinion of the
lady, too pouting. her tooth be white, but not exactly even. the
small-pox have leave one only mark on her chin, which be so large, it
might have be mistake for a dimple, have not she left cheek produce
one so near a neighbour to it, that the former serve only for a foil to
the latter. her complexion be fair, a little injure by the sun, but
overspread with such a bloom that the fine lady would have exchange
all their white for it: add to these a countenance in which, though she
be extremely bashful, a sensibility appear almost incredible; and a
sweetness, whenever she smile, beyond either imitation or description.
to conclude all, she have a natural gentility, superior to the
acquisition of art, and which surprize all who behold she.
this lovely creature be sit by the fire with Adams, when her
attention be suddenly engage by a voice from an inner room, which sing
the follow song:--
the SONG.
Say, Chloe, where must the swain stray
who be by thy beauty undo?
to wash their remembrance away,
to what distant Lethe must run?
the wretch who be sentence to die
May escape, and leave justice behind;
from his country perhaps he may fly,
but oh! can he fly from his mind?
O rapture! unthought of before,
to be thus of Chloe possess'd;
nor she, nor no tyrant's hard power,
her image can tear from my breast.
but feel not Narcissus more joy,
with his eye he behold his love charm?
yet what he behold the fond boy
more eagerly wish'd in his arm.
how can it thy dear image be
which fill thus my bosom with woe?
can aught bear resemblance to thee
which grief and not joy can bestow?
this counterfeit snatch from my heart,
Ye pow'rs, tho' with torment I rave,
Tho' mortal will prove the fell smart:
I then shall find rest in my grave.
ah, see the dear nymph o'er the plain
come smile and trip along!
a thousand love dance in her train,
the Graces around her all throng.
to meet her soft Zephyrus fly,
and waft all the sweet from the flower,
ah, rogue I whilst he kiss her eye,
More sweet from her breath he devour.
my soul, whilst I gaze, be on fire:
but her look be so tender and kind,
my hope almost reach'd my desire,
and leave lame despair far behind.
transport with madness, I fly,
and eagerly seize on my bliss;
her bosom but half she withdraw,
but half she refuse my fond kiss.
advance like these make I bold;
I whisper'd she--love, webe alone.--
the rest let immortal unfold;
no language can tell but their own.
ah, Chloe, expiring, I cry,
how long I thy cruelty bore!
ah, Strephon, she blushing reply,
you ne'er be so press before.
Adams have be ruminate all this time on a passage in Aeschylus,
without attend in the least to the voice, though one of the most
melodious that ever be hear, when, cast his eye on Fanny, he cry
out, "bless we, you look extremely pale!"--"pale! Mr Adams," say she;
"o Jesus!" and fall backwards in her chair. Adams jump up, fling his
Aeschylus into the fire, and fall a-roar to the people of the house
for help. he soon summon every one into the room, and the songster
among the rest; but, o reader! when this nightingale, who be no other
than Joseph Andrews himself, see his beloved Fanny in the situation we
have describe she, canst thou conceive the agitation of his mind? if
thou canst not, waive that meditation to behold his happiness, when,
clasp she in his arm, he find life and blood return into her
cheek: when he see she open her beloved eye, and hear she with the
soft accent whisper, "be you Joseph Andrews?"--"Art thou my Fanny?"
he answer eagerly: and, pull she to his heart, he imprint
numberless kiss on her lip, without consider who be present.
if prude be offend at the lusciousness of this picture, they may
take their eye off from it, and survey parson Adams dance about the
room in a rapture of joy. some philosopher may perhaps doubt whether he
be not the happy of the three: for the goodness of his heart enjoy
the blessing which be exult in the breast of both the other two,
together with his own. but we shall leave such disquisition, as too
deep for we, to those who be build some favourite hypothesis, which
they will refuse no metaphysical rubbish to erect and support: for our
part, we give it clearly on the side of Joseph, whose happiness be not
only great than the parson's, but of long duration: for as soon as
the first tumult of Adams's rapture be over he cast his eye towards
the fire, where Aeschylus lie expire; and immediately rescue the
poor remain, to wit, the sheepskin covering, of his dear friend, which
be the work of his own hand, and have be his inseparable companion
for upwards of thirty year.
Fanny have no soon perfectly recover herself than she begin to
restrain the impetuosity of her transport; and, reflect on what she
have do and suffer in the presence of so many, she be immediately
cover with confusion; and, push Joseph gently from she, she beg
he to be quiet, nor would admit of either kiss or embrace any long.
then, see Mrs Slipslop, she curtsy, and offer to advance to she;
but that high woman would not return her curtsy; but, cast her eye
another way, immediately withdraw into another room, muttering, as she
go, she wonder who the creature be.
CHAPTER XIII.
_a dissertation concern high people and low people, with Mrs
Slipslop's departure in no very good temper of mind, and the evil plight
in which she leave Adams and his company._
it will doubtless seem extremely odd to many reader, that Mrs Slipslop,
who have live several year in the same house with Fanny, should, in a
short separation, utterly forget she. and indeed the truth be, that she
remember she very well. as we would not willingly, therefore, that
anything should appear unnatural in this our history, we will endeavour
to explain the reason of her conduct; nor do we doubt be able to
satisfy the most curious reader that Mrs Slipslop do not in the least
deviate from the common road in this behaviour; and, indeed, have she
do otherwise, she must have descend below herself, and would have
very justly be liable to censure.
be it know then, that the human specie be divide into two sort of
people, to wit, high people and low people. as by high people I would
not be understand to mean person literally bear higher in their
dimension than the rest of the specie, nor metaphorically those of
exalt character or ability; so by low people I cannot be construe
to intend the reverse. high people signify no other than people of
fashion, and low people those of no fashion. now, this word fashion hath
by long use lose its original meaning, from which at present it give we
a very different idea; for I be deceive if by person of fashion we do
not generally include a conception of birth and accomplishment superior
to the herd of mankind; whereas, in reality, nothing more be originally
mean by a person of fashion than a person who drest himself in the
fashion of the time; and the word really and truly signify no more at
this day. now, the world be thus divide into people of fashion and
people of no fashion, a fierce contention arise between they; nor would
those of one party, to avoid suspicion, be see publicly to speak to
those of the other, though they often hold a very good correspondence in
private. in this contention it be difficult to say which party
succeed; for, whilst the people of fashion seize several place to
their own use, such as court, assembly, opera, ball, &c., the
people of no fashion, besides one royal place, call his Majesty's
bear-garden, have be in constant possession of all hop, fair,
revel, &c. two place have be agree to be divide between they,
namely, the church and the playhouse, where they segregate themselves
from each other in a remarkable manner; for, as the people of fashion
exalt themselves at church over the head of the people of no fashion,
so in the playhouse they abase themselves in the same degree under
their foot. this distinction I have never meet with any one able to
account for: it be sufficient that, so far from look on each other as
brother in the christian language, they seem scarce to regard each
other as of the same specie. this, the term "strange person, people
one do not know, the creature, wretch, beast, brute," and many
other appellation evidently demonstrate; which Mrs Slipslop, have
often hear her mistress use, think she have also a right to use in her
turn; and perhaps she be not mistaken; for these two party,
especially those border nearly on each other, to wit, the low of
the high, and the high of the low, often change their party
accord to place and time; for those who be people of fashion in one
place be often people of no fashion in another. and with regard to
time, it may not be unpleasant to survey the picture of dependance like
a kind of ladder; as, for instance; early in the morning arise the
postillion, or some other boy, which great family, no more than great
ship, be without, and fall to brush the clothe and clean the
shoe of John the footman; who, be drest himself, apply his hand
to the same labour for Mr Second-hand, the squire's gentleman; the
gentleman in the like manner, a little later in the day, attend the
squire; the squire be no soon equipped than he attend the levee of my
lord; which be no soon over than my lord himself be see at the levee
of the favourite, who, after the hour of homage be at an end, appear
himself to pay homage to the levee of his sovereign. nor be there,
perhaps, in this whole ladder of dependance, any one step at a great
distance from the other than the first from the second; so that to a
philosopher the question might only seem, whether you would chuse to be
a great man at six in the morning, or at two in the afternoon. and yet
there be scarce two of these who do not think the least familiarity
with the person below they a condescension, and, if they be to go one
step far, a degradation.
and now, reader, I hope thou wilt pardon this long digression, which
seem to I necessary to vindicate the great character of Mrs Slipslop
from what low people, who have never see high people, might think an
absurdity; but we who know they must have daily find very high person
know we in one place and not in another, to-day and not to-morrow; all
which it be difficult to account for otherwise than I have here
endeavour; and perhaps, if the god, accord to the opinion of some,
make man only to laugh at they, there be no part of our behaviour which
answer the end of our creation well than this.
but to return to our history: Adams, who know no more of this than the
cat which sit on the table, imagine Mrs Slipslop's memory have be
much bad than it really be, follow she into the next room, cry
out, "Madam Slipslop, here be one of your old acquaintance; do but see
what a fine woman she be grow since she leave Lady Booby's service."--"I
think I reflect something of she," answer she, with great dignity,
"but I cannot remember all the inferior servant in our family." she then
proceed to satisfy Adams's curiosity, by tell he, "when she
arrive at the inn, she find a chaise ready for she; that, her lady
be expect very shortly in the country, she be oblige to make the
utmost haste; and, in commensuration of Joseph's lameness, she have take
he with she;" and lastly, "that the excessive virulence of the storm
have drive they into the house where he find they." after which, she
acquaint Adams with his have leave his horse, and expr some wonder
at his have stray so far out of his way, and at meet he, as she
say, "in the company of that wench, who she fear be no well than
she should be."
the horse be no soon put into Adams's head but he be immediately
drive out by this reflection on the character of Fanny. he protest,
"he believe there be not a chaster damsel in the universe. I heartily
wish, I heartily wish," cry he (snap his finger), "that all her
better be as good." he then proceed to inform she of the accident
of their meeting; but when he come to mention the circumstance of
deliver she from the rape, she say, "she think he properer for
the army than the clergy; that it do not become a clergyman to lay
violent hand on any one; that he should have rather pray that she
might be strengthen." Adams say, "he be very far from be ashamed
of what he have do:" she reply, "want of shame be not the
currycuristic of a clergyman." this dialogue might have probably grow
warmer, have not Joseph opportunely enter the room, to ask leave of
Madam Slipslop to introduce Fanny: but she positively refuse to admit
any such trollop, and tell he, "she would have be burn before she
would have suffer he to get into a chaise with she, if she have once
respect he of have his slut waylay on the road for he;" add,
"that Mr Adams act a very pretty part, and she do not doubt but to
see he a bishop." he make the good bow he could, and cry out, "I
thank you, madam, for that right-reverend appellation, which I shall
take all honest mean to deserve."-"Very honest mean," return she,
with a sneer, "to bring people together." at these word Adams take two
or three stride across the room, when the coachman come to inform Mrs
Slipslop, "that the storm be over, and the moon shine very bright." she
then send for Joseph, who be sit without with his fanny, and would
have have he go with she; but he peremptorily refuse to leave fanny
behind, which throw the good woman into a violent rage. she say, "she
would inform her lady what doing be carry on, and do not doubt
but she would rid the parish of all such people;" and conclude a long
speech, full of bitterness and very hard word, with some reflection on
the clergy not decent to repeat; at last, find Joseph unmoveable, she
fling herself into the chaise, cast a look at Fanny as she go, not
unlike that which Cleopatra give Octavia in the play. to say the truth,
she be most disagreeably disappoint by the presence of Fanny: she
have, from her first see Joseph at the inn, conceive hope of
something which might have be accomplish at an alehouse as well as a
palace. indeed, it be probable Mr Adams have rescue more than Fanny from
the clanger of a rape that evening.
when the chaise have carry off the enraged Slipslop, Adams, Joseph, and
Fanny assemble over the fire, where they have a great deal of innocent
chat, pretty enough; but, as possibly it would not be very entertaining
to the reader, we shall hasten to the morning; only observe that none
of they go to bed that night. Adams, when he have smoake three pipe,
take a comfortable nap in a great chair, and leave the lover, whose eye
be too well employ to permit any desire of shut they, to enjoy
by themselves, during some hour, an happiness which none of my reader
who have never be in love be capable of the least conception of,
though we have as many tongue as Homer desire, to describe it with, and
which all true lover will represent to their own mind without the
least assistance from we.
let it suffice then to say, that Fanny, after a thousand entreaty, at
last give up her whole soul to Joseph; and, almost faint in his arm,
with a sigh infinitely soft and sweet too than any arabian breeze,
she whisper to his lip, which be then close to her, "o Joseph,
you have win I: I will be yours for ever." Joseph, have thank
she on his knee, and embrace she with an eagerness which she now
almost return, leapt up in a rapture, and awaken the parson,
earnestly beg he "that he would that instant join their hand
together." Adams rebuke he for his request, and tell he "he would by
no mean consent to anything contrary to the form of the Church; that
he have no licence, nor indeed would he advise he to obtain one; that
the Church have prescribe a form--namely, the publication of bann--with
which all good Christians ought to comply, and to the omission of which
he attribute the many misery which befell great folk in marriage;"
conclude, "as many as be join together otherwise than G--'s word
doth allow be not join together by G--, neither be their matrimony
lawful." Fanny agree with the parson, say to Joseph, with a blush,
"she assure he she would not consent to any such thing, and that she
wonder at his offering it." in which resolution she be comfort and
commend by Adams; and Joseph be oblige to wait patiently till after
the third publication of the bann, which, however, he obtain the
consent of Fanny, in the presence of Adams, to put in at their arrival.
the sun have be now rise some hour, when Joseph, find his leg
surprizingly recover, propose to walk forwards; but when they be
all ready to set out, an accident a little retarded they. this be no
other than the reckoning, which amount to seven shilling; no great
sum if we consider the immense quantity of ale which Mr Adams pour in.
indeed, they have no objection to the reasonableness of the bill, but
many to the probability of pay it; for the fellow who have take poor
Fanny's purse have unluckily forget to return it. so that the account
stand thus:--
L S D
Mr Adams and company, Dr. 0 7 0
in Mr Adams's pocket 0 0 6 1/2
in Mr Joseph's 0 0 0
in Mrs Fanny's 0 0 0
Balance 0 6 5 1/2
they stand silent some few minute, star at each other, when Adams
whipt out on his toe, and ask the hostess, "if there be no clergyman
in that parish?" she answer, "there be."--"Is he wealthy?" reply
he; to which she likewise answer in the affirmative. Adams then
snap his finger return overjoyed to his companion, cry out,
"Heureka, Heureka;" which not be understand, he tell they in plain
English, "they need give themselves no trouble, for he have a brother in
the parish who would defray the reckoning, and that he would just step
to his house and fetch the money, and return to they instantly."
END of VOL. I
JOSEPH ANDREWS
VOL. II.
content
BOOK ii.--continue.
CHAPTER XIV.
_an interview between parson Adams and parson Trulliber._
CHAPTER XV.
_an adventure, the consequence of a new instance which parson Adams
give of his forgetfulness._
CHAPTER XVI.
_a very curious adventure, in which Mr Adams give a much great
instance of the honest simplicity of his heart, than of his experience
in the way of this world._
CHAPTER XVII.
_a dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and his host, which, by the
disagreement in their opinion, seem to threaten an unlucky
catastrophe, have it not be timely prevent by the return of
the lover._
BOOK III.
CHAPTER I.
_Matter prefatory in praise of biography._
CHAPTER II.
_a night scene, wherein several wonderful adventure befel Adams and
his fellow-traveller._
CHAPTER III.
_in which the gentleman relate the history of his life._
CHAPTER IV.
_a description of Mr Wilson's way of living. the tragical adventure
of the dog, and other grave matter._
CHAPTER V.
_a disputation on school hold on the road between Mr Abraham Adams
and Joseph; and a discovery not unwelcome to they both._
CHAPTER VI.
_moral reflection by Joseph Andrews; with the hunting adventure, and
parson Adams's miraculous escape._
CHAPTER VII.
_a scene of roasting, very nicely adapt to the present taste and
time._
CHAPTER VIII.
_which some reader will think too short and other too long._
CHAPTER IX.
_contain as surprize and bloody adventure as can be find in
this or perhaps any other authentic history._
CHAPTER X.
_a discourse between the poet and the player; of no other use in this
history but to divert the reader._
CHAPTER XI.
_contain the exhortation of parson Adams to his friend in
affliction; calculate for the instruction and improvement of the
reader._
CHAPTER XII.
_More adventure, which we hope will as much please as surprize
the reader._
CHAPTER XIII.
_a curious dialogue which pass between Mr Abraham Adams and Mr
Peter Pounce, well worth read than all the work of Colley
Cibber and many other._
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
_the arrival of Lady Booby and the rest at Booby-hall._
CHAPTER II.
_a dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and the Lady Booby._
CHAPTER III.
_what pass between the lady and lawyer Scout._
CHAPTER IV.
_a short chapter, but very full of matter; particularly the arrival
of Mr Booby and his lady._
CHAPTER V.
_contain justice business; curious precedent of deposition, and
other matter necessary to be peruse by all justice of the peace
and their clerk._
CHAPTER VI.
_of which you be desire to read no more than you like._
CHAPTER VII.
_philosophical reflection, the like not to be find in any light
french romance. Mr Booby's grave advice to Joseph, and Fanny's
encounter with a beau._
CHAPTER VIII.
_a discourse which happen between Mr Adams, Mrs Adams, Joseph, and
Fanny, with some behaviour of Mr Adams which will be call by some
few reader very low, absurd, and unnatural._
CHAPTER ix
_a visit which the polite Lady Booby and her polite friend pay to
the parson._
CHAPTER X.
_the history of two friend, which may afford an useful lesson to
all those person who happen to take up their residence in married
family._
CHAPTER XI.
_in which the history be continue._
CHAPTER XII.
_where the good-natured reader will see something which will give
he no great pleasure._
CHAPTER XIII
_the history, return to the Lady Booby, give some account of the
terrible conflict in her breast between love and pride, with what
happen on the present discovery._
CHAPTER XIV.
_contain several curious night-adventure, in which Mr Adams fall
into many hair-breadth scape, partly owe to his goodness, and
partly to his inadvertency._
CHAPTER XV.
_the arrival of Gaffar and Gammar Andrews with another person not
much expect, and a perfect solution of the difficulty raise by
the pedlar._
CHAPTER XVI.
_be the last. in which this true history be bring to a happy
conclusion._
list of illustration.
MR WILSON relate his history
parson ADAMS
he ran towards her
BOOK ii.--continue.
CHAPTER XIV.
_an interview between parson Adams and parson Trulliber._
Parson Adams come to the house of parson Trulliber, whom he find
stript into his waistcoat, with an apron on, and a pail in his hand,
just come from serve his hog; for Mr Trulliber be a parson on
Sundays, but all the other six might more properly be call a farmer.
he occupy a small piece of land of his own, besides which he rent a
considerable deal more. his wife milk his cow, manage his dairy,
and follow the market with butter and egg. the hog fall chiefly to
his care, which he carefully wait on at home, and attend to fair;
on which occasion he be liable to many joke, his own size be, with
much ale, render little inferior to that of the beast he sell. he
be indeed one of the large man you should see, and could have act
the part of Sir John Falstaff without stuff. add to this that the
rotundity of his belly be considerably increase by the shortness of
his stature, his shadow ascend very near as far in height, when he
lie on his back, as when he stand on his leg. his voice be loud and
hoarse, and his accent extremely broad. to complete the whole, he have
a stateliness in his gait, when he walk, not unlike that of a goose,
only he stalk slow.
Mr Trulliber, be inform that somebody want to speak with he,
immediately slipt off his apron and clothe himself in an old
night-gown, be the dress in which he always see his company at home.
his wife, who inform he of Mr Adams's arrival, have make a small
mistake; for she have tell her husband, "she believe there be a man
come for some of his hog." this supposition make Mr Trulliber hasten
with the utmost expedition to attend his guest. he no soon see Adams
than, not in the least doubt the cause of his errand to be what his
wife have imagine, he tell he, "he be come in very good time; that he
expect a dealer that very afternoon;" and add, "they be all pure
and fat, and upwards of twenty score a-piece." Adams answer, "he
believe he do not know he." "yes, yes," cry Trulliber, "I have see
you often at fair; why, we have deal before now, mun, I warrant you.
yes, yes," cry he, "I remember thy face very well, but willnot mention a
word more till you have see they, though I have never sell thee a
flitch of such bacon as be now in the stye." upon which he lay violent
hand on Adams, and drag he into the hog-stye, which be indeed but
two step from his parlour window. they be no soon arrive there
than he cry'd out, "do but handle they! step in, friend! art welcome to
handle they, whether dost buy or no." at which word, open the gate,
he push Adams into the pig-stye, insist on it that he should handle
they before he would talk one word with he.
Adams, whose natural complacence be beyond any artificial, be oblige
to comply before he be suffer to explain himself; and, lay hold on
one of their tail, the unruly beast give such a sudden spring, that he
throw poor Adams all along in the mire. Trulliber, instead of assist
he to get up, burst into a laughter, and, enter the stye, say to
Adams, with some contempt, "why, dost not know how to handle a hog?" and
be go to lay hold of one himself, but Adams, who think he have
carry his complacence far enough, be no soon on his leg than he
escape out of the reach of the animal, and cry out, "_Nihil habeo
cum porcis_: I be a clergyman, sir, and be not come to buy hog."
Trulliber answer, "he be sorry for the mistake, but that he must
blame his wife," add, "she be a fool, and always commit
blunder." he then desire he to walk in and clean himself, that he
would only fasten up the stye and follow he. Adams desire leave to dry
his greatcoat, wig, and hat by the fire, which Trulliber grant. Mrs
Trulliber would have bring he a basin of water to wash his face, but
her husband bid she be quiet like a fool as she be, or she would commit
more blunder, and then direct Adams to the pump. while Adams be thus
employ, Trulliber, conceive no great respect for the appearance of
his guest, fasten the parlour door, and now conduct he into the
kitchen, tell he he believe a cup of drink would do he no harm,
and whisper his wife to draw a little of the bad ale. after a short
silence Adams say, "I fancy, sir, you already perceive I to be a
clergyman."--"Ay, ay," cry Trulliber, grinning, "I perceive you have
some cassock; I will not venture to caale it a whole one." Adams
answer, "it be indeed none of the good, but he have the misfortune to
tear it about ten year ago in pass over a stile." Mrs Trulliber,
return with the drink, tell her husband, "she fancy the gentleman
be a traveller, and that he would be glad to eat a bit." Trulliber bid
her hold her impertinent tongue, and ask she, "if parson use to
travel without horse?" add, "he suppose the gentleman have none by
his have no boot on."--"Yes, sir, yes," say Adams; "I have a horse,
but I have leave he behind I."--"I be glad to hear you have one," say
Trulliber; "for I assure you I donot love to see clergyman on foot; it
be not seemly nor suit the dignity of the cloth." here Trulliber make
a long oration on the dignity of the cloth (or rather gown) not much
worth relate, till his wife have spread the table and set a mess of
porridge on it for his breakfast. he then say to Adams, "I donot know,
friend, how you come to caale on I; however, as you be here, if you
think proper to eat a morsel, you may." Adams accept the invitation,
and the two parson sit down together; Mrs Trulliber wait behind her
husband's chair, as be, it seem, her custom. trulliber eat heartily,
but scarce put anything in his mouth without find fault with his
wife's cookery. all which the poor woman bear patiently. indeed, she be
so absolute an admirer of her husband's greatness and importance, of
which she have frequent hint from his own mouth, that she almost carry
her adoration to an opinion of his infallibility. to say the truth, the
parson have exercise she more way than one; and the pious woman have so
well edify by her husband's sermon, that she have resolve to receive
the bad thing of this world together with the good. she have indeed be
at first a little contentious; but he have long since get the well;
partly by her love for this, partly by her fear of that, partly by her
religion, partly by the respect he pay himself, and partly by that
which he receive from the parish. she have, in short, absolutely
submit, and now worship her husband, as Sarah do Abraham, call
he (not lord, but) master. whilst they be at table her husband give
she a fresh example of his greatness; for, as she have just deliver a
cup of ale to Adams, he snatch it out of his hand, and, cry out, "I
caal'd vurst," swallow down the ale. Adams deny it; it be refer
to the wife, who, though her conscience be on the side of Adams, durst
not give it against her husband; upon which he say, "no, sir, no; I
should not have be so rude to have take it from you if you have caal'd
vurst, but Iwould have you know Ibe a well man than to suffer the good he
in the kingdom to drink before I in my own house when I caale vurst."
as soon as their breakfast be end, Adams begin in the following
manner: "I think, sir, it be high time to inform you of the business of
my embassy. I be a traveller, and be pass this way in company with
two young people, a lad and a damsel, my parishioner, towards my own
cure; we stopt at a house of hospitality in the parish, where they
direct I to you as have the cure."--"Though I be but a curate,"
say Trulliber, "I believe I be as warm as the vicar himself, or perhaps
the rector of the next parish too; I believe I could buy they
both."--"sir," cry Adams, "I rejoice thereat. now, sir, my business
be, that we be by various accident stript of our money, and be not
able to pay our reckoning, be seven shilling. I therefore request
you to assist I with the loan of those seven shilling, and also seven
shilling more, which, peradventure, I shall return to you; but if not,
I be convinced you will joyfully embrace such an opportunity of lay
up a treasure in a well place than any this world afford."
suppose a stranger, who enter the chamber of a lawyer, be imagine
a client, when the lawyer be prepare his palm for the fee, should
pull out a writ against he. suppose an apothecary, at the door of a
chariot contain some great doctor of eminent skill, should, instead
of direction to a patient, present he with a potion for himself.
suppose a minister should, instead of a good round sum, treat my lord
----, or sir ----, or esq. ---- with a good broomstick. suppose a civil
companion, or a lead captain, should, instead of virtue, and honour, and
beauty, and part, and admiration, thunder vice, and infamy, and
ugliness, and folly, and contempt, in his patron's ear. suppose, when a
tradesman first carry in his bill, the man of fashion should pay it;
or suppose, if he do so, the tradesman should abate what he have
overcharge, on the supposition of wait. in short--suppose what you
will, you never can nor will suppose anything equal to the astonishment
which seize on Trulliber, as soon as Adams have end his speech. a
while he roll his eye in silence; sometimes survey Adams, then his
wife; then cast they on the ground, then lift they up to heaven.
at last he burst forth in the following accent: "Sir, I believe I know
where to lay up my little treasure as well as another. I thank g--, if I
be not so warm as some, I be content; that be a blessing great than
rich; and he to whom that be give need ask no more. to be content
with a little be great than to possess the world; which a man may
possess without be so. lay up my treasure! what matter where a man's
treasure be whose heart be in the scripture? there be the treasure of a
Christian." at these word the water run from Adams's eye; and,
catch Trulliber by the hand in a rapture, "Brother," say he,
"heaven bless the accident by which I come to see you! I would have
walk many a mile to have commune with you; and, believe I, I will
shortly pay you a second visit; but my friend, I fancy, by this time,
wonder at my stay; so let I have the money immediately." Trulliber then
put on a stern look, and cry out, "Thou dost not intend to rob I?" at
which the wife, burst into tear, fall on her knee and roar out,
"o dear sir! for Heaven's sake donot rob my master; we be but poor
people." "get up, for a fool as thou art, and go about thy business,"
say trulliber; "dost think the man will venture his life? he be a
beggar, and no robber." "very true, indeed," answer Adams. "I wish,
with all my heart, the tithing-man be here," cry Trulliber; "I would
have thee punish as a vagabond for thy impudence. fourteen shilling
indeed! I willnot give thee a farthing. I believe thou art no more a
clergyman than the woman there" (point to his wife); "but if thou
art, dost deserve to have thy gown stript over thy shoulder for run
about the country in such a manner." "I forgive your suspicion," say
Adams; "but suppose I be not a clergyman, I be nevertheless thy brother;
and thou, as a Christian, much more as a clergyman, art oblige to
relieve my distress." "dost preach to I?" reply Trulliber; "dost
pretend to instruct I in my duty?" "ifack, a good story," cry Mrs
Trulliber, "to preach to my master." "silence, woman," cry Trulliber.
"I would have thee know, friend" (address himself to Adams), "I shall
not learn my duty from such as thee. I know what charity be, well than
to give to vagabond." "besides, if we be incline, the poor's rate
oblige we to give so much charity," cry the wife. "Pugh! thou art a
fool. Poor's reate! hold thy nonsense," answer Trulliber; and then,
turn to Adams, he tell he, "he would give he nothing." "I be
sorry," answer Adams, "that you do know what charity be, since you
practise it no well: I must tell you, if you trust to your knowledge
for your justification, you will find yourself deceive, though you
should add faith to it, without good work." "fellow," cry Trulliber,
"dost thou speak against faith in my house? get out of my door: I will
no long remain under the same roof with a wretch who speak wantonly
of faith and the scripture." "name not the scripture," say Adams.
"how! not name the scripture! do you disbelieve the scripture?" cry
Trulliber. "no; but you do," answer Adams, "if I may reason from your
practice; for their command be so explicit, and their reward and
punishment so immense, that it be impossible a man should stedfastly
believe without obey. now, there be no command more express, no duty
more frequently enjoin, than charity. whoever, therefore, be void of
charity, I make no scruple of pronounce that he be no Christian." "I
would not advise thee," say Trulliber, "to say that I be no Christian:
I willnot take it of you; for I believe I be as good a man as thyself"
(and indeed, though he be now rather too corpulent for athletic
exercise, he have, in his youth, be one of the good boxer and
cudgel-player in the county). his wife, see he clench his fist,
interpose, and beg he not to fight, but show himself a true
Christian, and take the law of he. as nothing could provoke Adams to
strike, but an absolute assault on himself or his friend, he smile at
the angry look and gesture of Trulliber; and, tell he he be sorry
to see such man in order, depart without further ceremony.
CHAPTER XV.
_an adventure, the consequence of a new instance which parson Adams give
of his forgetfulness._
when he come back to the inn he find Joseph and Fanny sit together.
they be so far from think his absence long, as he have fear they
would, that they never once miss or think of he. indeed, I have
be often assure by both, that they spend these hour in a most
delightful conversation; but, as I never could prevail on either to
relate it, so I cannot communicate it to the reader.
Adams acquaint the lover with the ill success of his enterprize. they
be all greatly confound, none be able to propose any method of
depart, till Joseph at last advise call in the hostess, and
desire she to trust they; which Fanny say she despair of her doing,
as she be one of the sourest-face woman she have ever behold.
but she be agreeably disappoint; for the hostess be no soon ask
the question than she readily agree; and, with a curtsy and smile,
wish they a good journey. however, lest Fanny's skill in physiognomy
should be call in question, we will venture to assign one reason
which might probably incline she to this confidence and good-humour.
when Adams say he be go to visit his brother, he have unwittingly
impose on Joseph and Fanny, who both believe he have mean his natural
brother, and not his brother in divinity, and have so inform the
hostess, on her enquiry after he. now Mr Trulliber have, by his
profession of piety, by his gravity, austerity, reserve, and the
opinion of his great wealth, so great an authority in his parish, that
they all live in the utmost fear and apprehension of he. it be
therefore no wonder that the hostess, who know it be in his option
whether she should ever sell another mug of drink, do not dare to
affront his supposed brother by deny he credit.
they be now just on their departure when Adams recollect he have leave
his greatcoat and hat at Mr Trulliber's. as he be not desirous of
renew his visit, the hostess herself, have no servant at home,
offer to fetch it.
this be an unfortunate expedient; for the hostess be soon undeceived
in the opinion she have entertain of Adams, whom Trulliber abuse in
the gross term, especially when he hear he have have the assurance to
pretend to be his near relation.
at her return, therefore, she entirely change her note. she say,
"folk might be ashamed of travel about, and pretend to be what
they be not. that taxis be high, and for her part she be oblige to
pay for what she have; she could not therefore possibly, nor would she,
trust anybody; no, not her own father. that money be never scarcer, and
she want to make up a sum. that she expect, therefore, they should
pay their reckoning before they leave the house."
Adams be now greatly perplexed; but, as he know that he could easily
have borrow such a sum in his own parish, and as he know he would have
lend it himself to any mortal in distress, so he take fresh courage, and
sally out all round the parish, but to no purpose; he return as
pennyless as he go, groan and lament that it be possible, in a
country profess Christianity, for a wretch to starve in the midst of
his fellow-creature who abound.
whilst he be go, the hostess, who stay as a sort of guard with
Joseph and Fanny, entertain they with the goodness of parson
Trulliber. and, indeed, he have not only a very good character as to
other quality in the neighbourhood, but be repute a man of great
charity; for, though he never give a farthing, he have always that word
in his mouth.
Adams be no soon return the second time than the storm grow
exceedingly high, the hostess declare, among other thing, that, if
they offer to stir without pay she, she would soon overtake they
with a warrant.
Plato and Aristotle, or somebody else, hath say, _that when the most
exquisite cunning fail, chance often hit the mark, and that by mean
the least expect_. Virgil express this very boldly:--
_Turne, quod optanti divum promittere nemo
Auderet, volvenda die, en! attulit ultro._
I would quote more great man if I could; but my memory not permit
I, I will proceed to exemplify these observation by the follow
instance:--
there chance (for Adams have not cunne enough to contrive it) to be at
that time in the alehouse a fellow who have be formerly a drummer in an
irish regiment, and now travel the country as a pedlar. this man,
have attentively listen to the discourse of the hostess, at last
take Adams aside, and ask he what the sum be for which they be
detain. as soon as he be inform, he sigh, and say, "he be sorry
it be so much; for that he have no more than six shilling and sixpence
in his pocket, which he would lend they with all his heart." Adams give
a caper, and cry'd out, "it would do; for that he have sixpence himself."
and thus these poor people, who could not engage the compassion of
rich and piety, be at length deliver out of their distress by the
charity of a poor pedlar.
I shall refer it to my reader to make what observation he please on
this incident: it be sufficient for I to inform he that, after Adams
and his companion have return he a thousand thank, and tell he
where he might call to be repay, they all sally out of the house
without any compliment from their hostess, or indeed without pay she
any; Adams declare he would take particular care never to call there
again; and she on her side assure they she want no such guest.
CHAPTER XVI.
_a very curious adventure, in which Mr Adams give a much great
instance of the honest simplicity of his heart, than of his experience
in the way of this world._
our traveller have walk about two mile from that inn, which they have
more reason to have mistake for a castle than Don Quixote ever have any
of those in which he sojourn, see they have meet with such difficulty
in escape out of its wall, when they come to a parish, and beheld a
sign of invitation hang out. a gentleman sit smoake a pipe at the
door, of whom Adams inquire the road, and receive so courteous and
oblige an answer, accompany with so smile a countenance, that the
good parson, whose heart be naturally disposed to love and affection,
begin to ask several other question; particularly the name of the
parish, and who be the owner of a large house whose front they then have
in prospect. the gentleman answer as obligingly as before; and as to
the house, acquaint he it be his own. he then proceed in the
following manner: "Sir, I presume by your habit you be a clergyman; and
as you be travel on foot I suppose a glass of good beer will not be
disagreeable to you; and I can recommend my landlord's within as some of
the good in all this country. what say you, will you halt a little and
let we take a pipe together? there be no well tobacco in the kingdom."
this proposal be not displease to Adams, who have allay his thirst
that day with no well liquor than what Mrs Trulliber's cellar have
produce; and which be indeed little superior, either in richness or
flavour, to that which distil from those grain her generous husband
bestow on his hog. have, therefore, abundantly thank the
gentleman for his kind invitation, and bid Joseph and Fanny follow he,
he enter the alehouse, where a large loaf and cheese and a pitcher of
beer, which truly answer the character give of it, be set before
they, the three traveller fall to eating, with appetite infinitely
more voracious than be to be find at the most exquisite eating-house
in the parish of St. James's.
the gentleman express great delight in the hearty and cheerful
behaviour of Adams; and particularly in the familiarity with which he
converse with Joseph and Fanny, whom he often call his child; a
term he explain to mean no more than his parishioner; say, "he
look on all those whom God have intrust to his care to stand to he
in that relation." the gentleman, shake he by the hand, highly
applaud those sentiment. "they be, indeed," say he, "the true
principle of a christian divine; and I heartily wish they be
universal; but, on the contrary, I be sorry to say the parson of our
parish, instead of esteem his poor parishioner as a part of his
family, seem rather to consider they as not of the same specie with
himself. he seldom speak to any, unless some few of the rich of
we; nay, indeed, he will not move his hat to the other. I often laugh
when I behold he on Sundays strut along the churchyard like a
turkey-cock through row of his parishioner, who bow to he with as
much submission, and be as unregarde, as a set of servile courtier
by the proud prince in Christendom. but if such temporal pride be
ridiculous, surely the spiritual be odious and detestable; if such a
puff--up empty human bladder, strut in princely robe, justly
move one's derision, surely in the habit of a priest it must raise
our scorn."
"Doubtless," answer Adams, "your opinion be right; but I hope such
example be rare. the clergy whom I have the honour to know maintain a
different behaviour; and you will allow I, sir, that the readiness
which too many of the laity show to contemn the order may be one reason
of their avoid too much humility." "very true, indeed," say the
gentleman; "I find, sir, you be a man of excellent sense, and be happy
in this opportunity of know you; perhaps our accidental meeting may
not be disadvantageous to you neither. at present I shall only say to
you that the incumbent of this living be old and infirm, and that it be
in my gift. doctor, give I your hand; and assure yourself of it at his
decease." Adams tell he, "he be never more confound in his life than
at his utter incapacity to make any return to such noble and unmerited
generosity." "a mere trifle, sir," cry the gentleman, "scarce worth
your acceptance; a little more than three hundred a year. I wish it be
double the value for your sake." Adams bow, and cry from the
emotion of his gratitude; when the other ask he, "if he be marry,
or have any child, besides those in the spiritual sense he have
mention." "Sir," reply the parson, "I have a wife and six at your
service." "that be unlucky," say the gentleman; "for I would otherwise
have take you into my own house as my chaplain; however, I have another
in the parish (for the parsonage-house be not good enough), which I will
furnish for you. pray, do your wife understand a dairy?" "I cannot
profess she do," say Adams. "I be sorry for it," quoth the gentleman;
"I would have give you half-a-dozen cow, and very good ground to have
maintain they." "Sir," say Adams, in an ecstasy, "you be too
liberal; indeed you be." "not at all," cry the gentleman: "I esteem
rich only as they give I an opportunity of do good; and I never
see one whom I have a great inclination to serve." at which word he
shake he heartily by the hand, and tell he he have sufficient room in
his house to entertain he and his friend. Adams beg he might give
he no such trouble; that they could be very well accommodate in the
house where they be; forget they have not a sixpenny piece among
they. the gentleman would not be deny; and, inform himself how far
they be travel, he say it be too long a journey to take on foot,
and beg that they would favour he by suffer he to lend they a
servant and horse; add, withal, that, if they would do he the
pleasure of their company only two day, he would furnish they with his
coach and six. Adams, turn to Joseph, say, "how lucky be this
gentleman's goodness to you, who I be afraid would be scarce able to
hold out on your lame leg!" and then, address the person who make he
these liberal promise, after much bowing, he cry out, "blessed be the
hour which first introduce I to a man of your charity! you be indeed
a Christian of the true primitive kind, and an honour to the country
wherein you live. I would willingly have take a pilgrimage to the Holy
Land to have behold you; for the advantage which we draw from your
goodness give I little pleasure, in comparison of what I enjoy for your
own sake when I consider the treasure you be by these mean lay up
for yourself in a country that passeth not away. we will therefore, most
generous sir, accept your goodness, as well the entertainment you have
so kindly offer we at your house this evening, as the accommodation of
your horse to-morrow morning." he then begin to search for his hat, as
do Joseph for his; and both they and Fanny be in order of departure,
when the gentleman, stop short, and seem to meditate by himself
for the space of about a minute, exclaim thus: "sure never anything
be so unlucky; I have forget that my house-keeper be go abroad, and
hath lock up all my room; indeed, I would break they open for you,
but shall not be able to furnish you with a bed; for she have likewise
put away all my linen. I be glad it enter into my head before I have
give you the trouble of walk there; besides, I believe you will find
well accommodation here than you expected.--landlord, you can provide
good bed for these people, cannot you?" "yes, and please your worship,"
cry the host, "and such as no lord or justice of the peace in the
kingdom need be ashamed to lie in." "I be heartily sorry," say the
gentleman, "for this disappointment. I be resolve I will never suffer
she to carry away the key again." "pray, sir, let it not make you
uneasy," cry Adams; "we shall do very well here; and the loan of your
horse be a favour we shall be incapable of make any return to." "ay!"
say the squire, "the horse shall attend you here at what hour in the
morning you please;" and now, after many civility too tedious to
enumerate, many squeeze by the hand, with most affectionate look and
smile at each other, and after appoint the horse at seven the next
morning, the gentleman take his leave of they, and depart to his own
house. Adams and his companion return to the table, where the parson
smoake another pipe, and then they all retire to rest.
Mr Adams rise very early, and call Joseph out of his bed, between whom
a very fierce dispute ensue, whether Fanny should ride behind Joseph,
or behind the gentleman's servant; Joseph insist on it that he be
perfectly recover, and be as capable of take care of Fanny as any
other person could be. but Adams would not agree to it, and declare he
would not trust she behind he; for that he be weak than he imagine
himself to be.
this dispute continue a long time, and have begin to be very hot, when a
servant arrive from their good friend, to acquaint they that he be
unfortunately prevent from lend they any horse; for that his groom
have, unknown to he, put his whole stable under a course of physic.
this advice presently strike the two disputant dumb: Adams cry out,
"be ever anything so unlucky as this poor gentleman? I protest I be
more sorry on his account than my own. you see, Joseph, how this
good-natured man be treat by his servant; one lock up his linen,
another physics his horse, and I suppose, by his be at this house
last night, the butler have lock up his cellar. bless we! how
good-nature be use in this world! I protest I be more concerned on his
account than my own." "so be not I," cry Joseph; "not that I be much
trouble about walk on foot; all my concern be, how we shall get out
of the house, unless God send another pedlar to redeem we. but
certainly this gentleman have such an affection for you, that he would
lend you a large sum than we owe here, which be not above four or five
shilling." "very true, child," answer Adams; "I will write a letter
to he, and will even venture to solicit he for three half-crown;
there will be no harm in have two or three shilling in our pocket;
as we have full forty mile to travel, we may possibly have occasion for
they."
Fanny be now risen, Joseph pay she a visit, and leave Adams to
write his letter, which have finish, he despatch a boy with it to
the gentleman, and then seat himself by the door, light his pipe,
and betook himself to meditation.
the boy stay long than seem to be necessary, Joseph, who with
Fanny be now return to the parson, express some apprehension that
the gentleman's steward have lock up his purse too. to which Adams
answer, "it might very possibly be, and he should wonder at no
liberty which the devil might put into the head of a wicked servant
to take with so worthy a master;" but add, "that, as the sum be so
small, so noble a gentleman would be easily able to procure it in the
parish, though he have it not in his own pocket. indeed," say he, "if
it be four or five guineas, or any such large quantity of money, it
might be a different matter."
they be now sit down to breakfast over some toast and ale, when the
boy return and inform they that the gentleman be not at home. "very
well!" cry Adams; "but why, child, do you not stay till his return?
go back again, my good boy, and wait for his come home; he cannot be
go far, as his horse be all sick; and besides, he have no intention
to go abroad, for he invite we to spend this day and tomorrow at his
house. therefore go back, child, and tarry till his return home." the
messenger depart, and be back again with great expedition, bring
an account that the gentleman be go a long journey, and would not be
at home again this month. at these word Adams seem greatly
confound, say, "this must be a sudden accident, as the sickness or
death of a relation or some such unforeseen misfortune;" and then,
turn to Joseph, cry, "I wish you have remind I to have borrow
this money last night." Joseph, smile, answer, "he be very much
deceive if the gentleman would not have find some excuse to avoid
lending it.--i own," say he, "I be never much pleased with his
professing so much kindness for you at first sight; for I have hear the
gentleman of our cloth in London tell many such story of their
master. but when the boy bring the message back of his not be at
home, I presently know what would follow; for, whenever a man of fashion
doth not care to fulfil his promise, the custom be to order his
servant that he will never be at home to the person so promise. in
London they call it deny he. I have myself deny Sir Thomas Booby
above a hundred time, and when the man hath dance attendance for about
a month or sometimes long, he be acquaint in the end that the
gentleman be go out of town and could do nothing in the
business."--"Good Lord!" say Adams, "what wickedness be there in the
christian world! I profess almost equal to what I have read of the
heathen. but surely, Joseph, your suspicion of this gentleman must be
unjust, for what a silly fellow must he be who would do the devil's work
for nothing! and canst thou tell I any interest he could possibly
propose to himself by deceive we in his professions?"--"It be not for
I," answer Joseph, "to give reason for what man do, to a gentleman
of your learning."--"you say right," quoth Adams; "knowledge of man be
only to be learn from book; Plato and Seneca for that; and those be
author, I be afraid, child, you never read."--"Not I, sir, truly,"
answer Joseph; "all I know be, it be a maxim among the gentleman of
our cloth, that those master who promise the most perform the least;
and I have often hear they say they have find the large vail in
those family where they be not promise any. but, sir, instead of
consider any far these matter, it would be our wise way to
contrive some method of get out of this house; for the generous
gentleman, instead of do we any service, hath leave we the whole
reckon to pay." Adams be go to answer, when their host come in,
and, with a kind of jeer smile, say, "well, master! the squire hath
not send his horse for you yet. laud help I! how easily some folk
make promises!"--"How!" say Adams; "have you ever know he do anything
of this kind before?"--"Ay! marry have I," answer the host: "it be no
business of mine, you know, sir, to say anything to a gentleman to his
face; but now he be not here, I will assure you, he hath not his fellow
within the three next market-town. I own I could not help laugh when
I hear he offer you the living, for thereby hang a good jest. I
think he would have offer you my house next, for one be no more his
to dispose of than the other." at these word Adams, blessing himself,
declare, "he have never read of such a monster. but what vex I most,"
say he, "be, that he hath decoy we into run up a long debt with
you, which we be not able to pay, for we have no money about we, and,
what be bad, live at such a distance, that if you should trust we, I
be afraid you would lose your money for want of our find any
conveniency of send it."--"trust you, master!" say the host, "that I
will with all my heart. I honour the clergy too much to deny trust
one of they for such a trifle; besides, I like your fear of never pay
I. I have lose many a debt in my lifetime, but be promise to be pay
they all in a very short time. I will score this reckoning for the
novelty of it. it be the first, I do assure you, of its kind. but what
say you, master, shall we have t'other pot before we part? it will waste
but a little chalk more, and if you never pay I a shill the loss
will not ruin I." Adams like the invitation very well, especially as
it be deliver with so hearty an accent. he shake his host by the
hand, and thank he, say, "he would tarry another pot rather for the
pleasure of such worthy company than for the liquor;" add, "he be
glad to find some Christians leave in the kingdom, for that he almost
begin to suspect that he be sojourn in a country inhabit only by
Jews and Turks."
the kind host produce the liquor, and Joseph with Fanny retire into
the garden, where, while they solace themselves with amorous discourse,
Adams sit down with his host; and, both fill their glass, and
light their pipe, they begin that dialogue which the reader will
find in the next chapter.
CHAPTER XVII.
_a dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and his host, which, by the
disagreement in their opinion, seem to threaten an unlucky
catastrophe, have it not be timely prevent by the return of
the lover._
"Sir," say the host, "I assure you you be not the first to whom our
squire hath promise more than he hath perform. he be so famous for
this practice, that his word will not be take for much by those who
know he. I remember a young fellow whom he promise his parent to make
an exciseman. the poor people, who could ill afford it, breed their son
to writing and account, and other learning to qualify he for the
place; and the boy hold up his head above his condition with these
hope; nor would he go to plough, nor to any other kind of work, and
go constantly drest as fine as could be, with two clean Holland shirt
a week, and this for several year; till at last he follow the squire
up to London, think there to mind he of his promise; but he could
never get sight of he. so that, be out of money and business, he
fall into evil company and wicked course; and in the end come to a
sentence of transportation, the news of which break the mother's
heart.--I will tell you another true story of he. there be a neighbour
of mine, a farmer, who have two son whom he breed up to the business.
pretty lad they be. nothing would serve the squire but that the
young must be make a parson. upon which he persuade the father to
send he to school, promise that he would afterwards maintain he at
the university, and, when he be of a proper age, give he a living. but
after the lad have be seven year at school, and his father bring he
to the squire, with a letter from his master that he be fit for the
university, the squire, instead of mind his promise, or send he
thither at his expense, only tell his father that the young man be a
fine scholar, and it be pity he could not afford to keep he at Oxford
for four or five year more, by which time, if he could get he a
curacy, he might have he ordain. the farmer say, 'he be not a man
sufficient to do any such thing.'--'Why, then,' answer the squire, 'I
be very sorry you have give he so much learning; for, if he cannot get
his living by that, it will rather spoil he for anything else; and your
other son, who can hardly write his name, will do more at plough and
sowing, and be in a well condition, than he.' and indeed so it prove;
for the poor lad, not find friend to maintain he in his learning,
as he have expect, and be unwilling to work, fall to drinking,
though he be a very sober lad before; and in a short time, partly with
grief, and partly with good liquor, fall into a consumption, and
died.--Nay, I can tell you more still: there be another, a young woman,
and the handsome in all this neighbourhood, whom he entice up to
London, promise to make she a gentlewoman to one of your woman of
quality; but, instead of keep his word, we have since hear, after
have a child by she himself, she become a common whore; then keep a
coffeehouse in Covent Garden; and a little after die of the french
distemper in a gaol.--I could tell you many more story; but how do you
imagine he serve I myself? you must know, sir, I be breed a seafaring
man, and have be many voyage; till at last I come to be master of a
ship myself, and be in a fair way of make a fortune, when I be
attack by one of those curse guarda-costa who take our ship before
the beginning of the war; and after a fight, wherein I lose the great
part of my crew, my rigging be all demolish, and two shot receive
between wind and water, I be force to strike. the villain carry off
my ship, a brigantine of 150 ton--a pretty creature she be--and put I,
a man, and a boy, into a little bad pink, in which, with much ado, we at
last make Falmouth; though I believe the Spaniards do not imagine she
could possibly live a day at sea. upon my return hither, where my wife,
who be of this country, then live, the squire tell I he be so
pleased with the defence I have make against the enemy, that he do not
fear get I promote to a lieutenancy of a man-of-war, if I would
accept of it; which I thankfully assure he I would. well, sir, two or
three year pass, during which I have many repeat promise, not only
from the squire, but (as he tell I) from the lord of the admiralty. he
never return from London but I be assure I might be satisfied now,
for I be certain of the first vacancy; and, what surprize I still,
when I reflect on it, these assurance be give I with no less
confidence, after so many disappointment, than at first. at last, sir,
grow weary, and somewhat suspicious, after so much delay, I write to
a friend in London, who I know have some acquaintance at the good house
in the admiralty, and desire he to back the squire's interest; for
indeed I fear he have solicit the affair with more coldness than he
pretend. and what answer do you think my friend send I? truly, sir,
he acquaint I that the squire have never mention my name at the
admiralty in his life; and, unless I have much faithfuller interest,
advise I to give over my pretension; which I immediately do, and,
with the concurrence of my wife, resolve to set up an alehouse, where
you be heartily welcome; and so my service to you; and may the squire,
and all such sneak rascal, go to the devil together."--"O fie!" say
Adams, "o fie! he be indeed a wicked man; but g-- will, I hope, turn his
heart to repentance. Nay, if he could but once see the meanness of this
detestable vice; would he but once reflect that he be one of the most
scandalous as well as pernicious lyar; sure he must despise himself to
so intolerable a degree, that it would be impossible for he to continue
a moment in such a course. and to confess the truth, notwithstanding the
baseness of this character, which he hath too well deserve, he hath in
his countenance sufficient symptom of that _bona indole_, that
sweetness of disposition, which furnish out a good Christian."--"Ah,
master! master!" say the host, "if you have travel as far as I have,
and converse with the many nation where I have trade, you would not
give any credit to a man's countenance. symptom in his countenance,
quotha! I would look there, perhaps, to see whether a man have the
small-pox, but for nothing else." he speak this with so little regard to
the parson's observation, that it a good deal nettle he; and, take
the pipe hastily from his mouth, he thus answer: "Master of mine,
perhaps I have travel a great deal far than you without the
assistance of a ship. do you imagine sailing by different city or
country be travel? no.
"Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt.
"I can go far in an afternoon than you in a twelvemonth. what, I
suppose you have see the Pillars of Hercules, and perhaps the wall of
Carthage. Nay, you may have hear Scylla, and see Charybdis; you may
have enter the closet where Archimedes be find at the taking of
Syracuse. I suppose you have sail among the cyclade, and pass the
famous strait which take their name from the unfortunate Helle, whose
fate be sweetly describe by Apollonius Rhodius; you have pass the
very spot, I conceive, where Daedalus fall into that sea, his waxen
wing be melt by the sun; you have traverse the Euxine sea, I make
no doubt; nay, you may have be on the bank of the Caspian, and call
at Colchis, to see if there be ever another golden fleece." "not I,
truly, master," answer the host: "I never touch at any of these
place."--"but I have be at all these," reply Adams. "then, I
suppose," cry the host, "you have be at the East Indies; for there
be no such, I will be swear, either in the West or the Levant."--"Pray
wherebe the Levant?" quoth Adams; "that should be in the East Indies by
right." "Oho! you be a pretty traveller," cry the host, "and not know
the Levant! my service to you, master; you must not talk of these thing
with I! you must not tip we the traveller; it willnot go here." "since
thou art so dull to misunderstand I still," quoth Adams, "I will inform
thee; the travel I mean be in book, the only way of travel by
which any knowledge be to be acquire. from they I learn what I assert
just now, that nature generally imprint such a portraiture of the mind
in the countenance, that a skilful physiognomist will rarely be
deceive. I presume you have never read the story of Socrates to this
purpose, and therefore I will tell it you. a certain physiognomist
assert of Socrates, that he plainly discover by his feature that he
be a rogue in his nature. a character so contrary to the tenour of all
this great man's action, and the generally receive opinion concern
he, incense the boy of Athens so that they throw stone at the
physiognomist, and would have demolish he for his ignorance, have not
Socrates himself prevent they by confess the truth of his
observation, and acknowledge that, though he correct his
disposition by philosophy, he be indeed naturally as incline to vice
as have be predicate of he. now, pray resolve I--how should a man
know this story if he have not read it?" "well, master," say the host,
"and what signify it whether a man know it or no? he who go abroad,
as I have do, will always have opportunity enough of know the
world without trouble his head with Socrates, or any such fellow."
"friend," cry Adams, "if a man should sail round the world, and anchor
in every harbour of it, without learn, he would return home as
ignorant as he go out." "Lord help you!" answer the host; "there be
my boatswain, poor fellow! he could scarce either write or read, and yet
he would navigate a ship with any master of a man-of-war; and a very
pretty knowledge of trade he have too." "trade," answer Adams, "as
Aristotle prove in his first chapter of Politics, be below a
philosopher, and unnatural as it be manage now." the host look
stedfastly at Adams, and after a minute's silence ask he, "if he be
one of the writer of the Gazetteers? for I have hear," say he, "they
be writ by parson." "gazetteer!" answer Adams, "what be that?" "it
be a dirty newspaper," reply the host, "which hath be give away all
over the nation for these many year, to abuse trade and honest man,
which I would not suffer to lye on my table, though it hath be offer
I for nothing." "not I truly," say Adams; "I never write anything but
sermon; and I assure you I be no enemy to trade, whilst it be
consistent with honesty; nay, I have always look on the tradesman as a
very valuable member of society, and, perhaps, inferior to none but the
man of learn." "no, I believe he be not, nor to he neither,"
answer the host. "of what use would learn be in a country without
trade? what would all you parson do to clothe your back and feed your
belly? who fetch you your silk, and your linen, and your wine,
and all the other necessary of life? I speak chiefly with regard to
the sailor." "you should say the extravagancy of life," reply the
parson; "but admit they be the necessary, there be something more
necessary than life itself, which be provide by learn; I mean the
learning of the clergy. who clothe you with piety, meekness, humility,
charity, patience, and all the other christian virtue? who feed your
soul with the milk of brotherly love, and diet they with all the
dainty food of holiness, which at once cleanse they of all impure
carnal affection, and fatten they with the truly rich spirit of grace?
who doth this?" "ay, who, indeed?" cry the host; "for I do not
remember ever to have see any such clothing or such feeding. and so, in
the mean time, master, my service to you." Adams be go to answer
with some severity, when Joseph and Fanny return and press his
departure so eagerly that he would not refuse they; and so, grasp his
crabstick, he take leave of his host (neither of they be so well
pleased with each other as they have be at their first sit down
together), and with Joseph and Fanny, who both express much
impatience, depart, and now all together renew their journey.
BOOK III.
CHAPTER I.
_Matter prefatory in praise of biography._
notwithstanding the preference which may be vulgarly give to the
authority of those romance writer who entitle their book "the history
of England, the history of France, of Spain, &c.," it be most certain
that truth be to be find only in the work of those who celebrate the
life of great man, and be commonly call biographer, as the other
should indeed be term topographer, or chorographer; word which
might well mark the distinction between they; it be the business of
the latter chiefly to describe country and city, which, with the
assistance of map, they do pretty justly, and may be depend upon; but
as to the action and character of man, their writing be not quite so
authentic, of which there need no other proof than those eternal
contradiction occur between two topographer who undertake the
history of the same country: for instance, between my Lord Clarendon and
Mr Whitelocke, between Mr Echard and Rapin, and many other; where,
fact be set forth in a different light, every reader believe as he
please; and, indeed, the more judicious and suspicious very justly
esteem the whole as no other than a romance, in which the writer hath
indulge a happy and fertile invention. but though these widely differ
in the narrative of fact; some ascribe victory to the one, and other
to the other party; some represent the same man as a rogue, while
other give he a great and honest character; yet all agree in the scene
where the fact be suppose to have happen, and where the person, who
be both a rogue and an honest man, live. now with we biographer the
case be different; the fact we deliver may be rely on, though we
often mistake the age and country wherein they happen: for, though it
may be worth the examination of critic, whether the shepherd
Chrysostom, who, as Cervantes inform we, die for love of the fair
Marcella, who hat he, be ever in Spain, will any one doubt but that
such a silly fellow hath really exist? be there in the world such a
sceptic as to disbelieve the madness of Cardenio, the perfidy of
Ferdinand, the impertinent curiosity of Anselmo, the weakness of
Camilla, the irresolute friendship of Lothario? though perhaps, as to
the time and place where those several person live, that good
historian may be deplorably deficient. but the most known instance of
this kind be in the true history of Gil Blas, where the inimitable
biographer hath make a notorious blunder in the country of Dr Sangrado,
who use his patient as a vintner doth his wine-vessel, by let out
their blood, and fill they up with water. Doth not every one, who be
the least verse in physical history, know that Spain be not the
country in which this doctor live? the same writer hath likewise err
in the country of his archbishop, as well as that of those great
personage whose understanding be too sublime to taste anything but
tragedy, and in many other. the same mistake may likewise be observe
in Scarron, the Arabian Nights, the history of Marianne and le Paisan
Parvenu, and perhaps some few other writer of this class, whom I have
not read, or do not at present recollect; for I would by no mean be
think to comprehend those person of surprize genius, the author of
immense romance, or the modern novel and Atalantis writer; who,
without any assistance from nature or history, record person who never
be, or will be, and fact which never do, nor possibly can, happen;
whose hero be of their own creation, and their brain the chaos
whence all their material be select. not that such writer deserve
no honour; so far otherwise, that perhaps they merit the high; for
what can be noble than to be as an example of the wonderful extent of
human genius? one may apply to they what Balzac say of Aristotle, that
they be a second nature (for they have no communication with the first;
by which, author of an inferior class, who cannot stand alone, be
oblige to support themselves as with crutch); but these of whom I be
now speak seem to be possess of those stilt, which the excellent
Voltaire tell we, in his letter, "carry the genius far off, but with
an regular pace." indeed, far out of the sight of the reader,
beyond the realm of Chaos and old Night.
but to return to the former class, who be content to copy nature,
instead of form original from the confused heap of matter in their
own brain, be not such a book as that which record the achievement of
the renowned Don Quixote more worthy the name of a history than even
Mariana's: for, whereas the latter be confine to a particular period of
time, and to a particular nation, the former be the history of the world
in general, at least that part which be polish by law, art, and
science; and of that from the time it be first polished to this day;
nay, and forwards as long as it shall so remain?
I shall now proceed to apply these observation to the work before we;
for indeed I have set they down principally to obviate some
construction which the good nature of mankind, who be always forward
to see their friend' virtue record, may put to particular part. I
question not but several of my reader will know the lawyer in the
stage-coach the moment they hear his voice. it be likewise odd but the
wit and the prude meet with some of their acquaintance, as well as all
the rest of my character. to prevent, therefore, any such malicious
application, I declare here, once for all, I describe not man, but
manner; not an individual, but a species. perhaps it will be answer,
be not the character then take from life? to which I answer in the
affirmative; nay, I believe I might aver that I have writ little more
than I have see. the lawyer be not only alive, but hath be so these
four thousand year; and I hope G-- will indulge his life as many yet to
come. he hath not indeed confine himself to one profession, one
religion, or one country; but when the first mean selfish creature
appear on the human stage, who make self the centre of the whole
creation, would give himself no pain, incur no danger, advance no money,
to assist or preserve his fellow-creature; then be our lawyer bear;
and, whilst such a person as I have describe exist on earth, so long
shall he remain upon it. it be, therefore, do he little honour to
imagine he endeavour to mimick some little obscure fellow, because he
happen to resemble he in one particular feature, or perhaps in his
profession; whereas his appearance in the world be calculate for much
more general and noble purpose; not to expose one pitiful wretch to the
small and contemptible circle of his acquaintance; but to hold the glass
to thousand in their closet, that they may contemplate their
deformity, and endeavour to reduce it, and thus by suffer private
mortification may avoid public shame. this place the boundary between,
and distinguish the satirist from the libeller: for the former
privately correct the fault for the benefit of the person, like a
parent; the latter publickly expose the person himself, as an example
to other, like an executioner.
there be besides little circumstance to be consider; as the drapery
of a picture, which though fashion vary at different time, the
resemblance of the countenance be not by those mean diminish. thus I
believe we may venture to say Mrs Tow-wouse be coeval with our lawyer:
and, though perhaps, during the change which so long an existence must
have pass through, she may in her turn have stand behind the bar at an
inn, I will not scruple to affirm she hath likewise in the revolution of
age sit on a throne. in short, where extreme turbulency of temper,
avarice, and an insensibility of human misery, with a degree of
hypocrisy, have unite in a female composition, Mrs Tow-wouse be that
woman; and where a good inclination, eclipse by a poverty of spirit and
understanding, hath glimmer forth in a man, that man hath be no
other than her sneak husband.
I shall detain my reader no long than to give he one caution more of
an opposite kind: for, as in most of our particular character we mean
not to lash individual, but all of the like sort, so, in our general
description, we mean not universal, but would be understand with many
exception: for instance, in our description of high people, we cannot
be intend to include such as, whilst they be an honour to their high
rank, by a well-guide condescension make their superiority as easy as
possible to those whom fortune chiefly hath place below they. of this
number I could name a peer no less elevate by nature than by fortune;
who, whilst he wear the noble ensign of honour on his person, bear
the true stamp of dignity on his mind, adorn with greatness,
enrich with knowledge, and embellish with genius. I have see this
man relieve with generosity, while he hath converse with freedom, and
be to the same person a patron and a companion. I could name a commoner,
raise higher above the multitude by superior talent than be in the
power of his prince to exalt he, whose behaviour to those he hath
oblige be more amiable than the obligation itself; and who be so great
a master of affability, that, if he could divest himself of an inherent
greatness in his manner, would often make the low of his acquaintance
forget who be the master of that palace in which they be so
courteously entertain. these be picture which must be, I believe,
know: I declare they be take from the life, and not intend to
exceed it. by those high people, therefore, whom I have describe, I
mean a set of wretch, who, while they be a disgrace to their
ancestor, whose honour and fortune they inherit (or perhaps a great
to their mother, for such degeneracy be scarce credible), have the
insolence to treat those with disregard who be at least equal to the
founder of their own splendor. it be, I fancy, impossible to conceive a
spectacle more worthy of our indignation, than that of a fellow, who be
not only a blot in the escutcheon of a great family, but a scandal to
the human specie, maintain a supercilious behaviour to man who be
an honour to their nature and a disgrace to their fortune.
and now, reader, take these hint along with you, you may, if you
please, proceed to the sequel of this our true history.
CHAPTER II.
_a night scene, wherein several wonderful adventure befel Adams and his
fellow-traveller._
it be so late when our traveller leave the inn or alehouse (for it
might be call either), that they have not travel many mile before
night overtake they, or meet they, which you please. the reader must
excuse I if I be not particular as to the way they take; for, as we be
now draw near the seat of the Boobies, and as that be a ticklish
name, which malicious person may apply, accord to their evil
inclination, to several worthy country squire, a race of man whom we
look upon as entirely inoffensive, and for whom we have an adequate
regard, we shall lend no assistance to any such malicious purpose.
Darkness have now overspread the hemisphere, when Fanny whisper Joseph
"that she beg to rest herself a little; for that she be so tired
she could walk no far." Joseph immediately prevail with parson
Adams, who be as brisk as a bee, to stop. he have no soon seat
himself than he lament the loss of his dear Aeschylus; but be a
little comfort when remind that, if he have it in his possession, he
could not see to read.
the sky be so clouded, that not a star appear. it be indeed,
accord to Milton, darkness visible. this be a circumstance, however,
very favourable to Joseph; for Fanny, not suspicious of be oversee
by Adams, give a loose to her passion which she have never do before,
and, recline her head on his bosom, throw her arm carelessly round
he, and suffer he to lay his cheek close to her. all this infuse
such happiness into Joseph, that he would not have change his turf for
the fine down in the fine palace in the universe.
Adams sit at some distance from the lover, and, be unwilling to
disturb they, apply himself to meditation; in which he have not
spend much time before he discover a light at some distance that
seem approach towards he. he immediately hail it; but, to his
sorrow and surprize, it stop for a moment, and then disappear.
he then call to Joseph, ask he, "if he have not see the light?"
Joseph answer, "he have."--"And do you not mark how it vanish?"
return he: "though I be not afraid of ghost, I do not absolutely
disbelieve they."
he then enter into a meditation on those unsubstantial being; which
be soon interrupt by several voice, which he think almost at his
elbow, though in fact they be not so extremely near. however, he could
distinctly hear they agree on the murder of any one they meet; and a
little after hear one of they say, "he have kill a dozen since that
day fortnight."
Adams now fall on his knee, and commit himself to the care of
Providence; and poor Fanny, who likewise hear those terrible word,
embrace Joseph so closely, that have not he, whose ear be also open,
be apprehensive on her account, he would have think no danger which
threaten only himself too dear a price for such embrace.
Joseph now draw forth his penknife, and Adams, have finish his
ejaculation, grasp his crab-stick, his only weapon, and, come up to
Joseph, would have have he quit Fanny, and place she in the rear; but
his advice be fruitless; she cling close to he, not at all regard
the presence of Adams, and in a soothe voice declare, "she would die
in his arm." Joseph, clasp she with inexpressible eagerness,
whisper she, "that he prefer death in her to life out of they."
Adams, brandish his crabstick, say, "he despise death as much as
any man," and then repeat aloud--
"Est hic, est animus lucis contemptor et illum,
Qui vita bene credat emi quo tendis, honorem."
upon this the voice cease for a moment, and then one of they call
out, "D--n you, who be there?" to which Adams be prudent enough to make
no reply; and of a sudden he observe half-a-dozen light, which seem
to rise all at once from the ground and advance briskly towards he.
this he immediately conclude to be an apparition; and now, begin to
conceive that the voice be of the same kind, he call out, "in the
name of the L--d, what wouldst thou have?" he have no soon speak than
he hear one of the voice cry out, "D--n they, here they come;" and
soon after hear several hearty blow, as if a number of man have be
engage at quarterstaff. he be just advance towards the place of
combat, when Joseph, catch he by the skirt, beg he that they
might take the opportunity of the dark to convey away Fanny from the
danger which threaten she. he presently comply, and, Joseph lifting
up Fanny, they all three make the good of their way; and without look
behind they, or be overtake, they have travel full two mile, poor
Fanny not once complain of be tired, when they see afar off
several light scatter at a small distance from each other, and at the
same time find themselves on the descent of a very steep hill. Adams's
foot slip, he instantly disappear, which greatly frighten both
Joseph and Fanny: indeed, if the light have permit they to see it,
they would scarce have refrain laugh to see the parson roll down
the hill; which he do from top to bottom, without receive any harm.
he then hollow as loud as he could, to inform they of his safety, and
relieve they from the fear which they have conceive for he. Joseph and
Fanny halt some time, consider what to do; at last they advance a
few pace, where the declivity seem least steep; and then Joseph,
take his fanny in his arm, walk firmly down the hill, without
make a false step, and at length land she at the bottom, where Adams
soon come to they.
learn hence, my fair countrywoman, to consider your own weakness, and
the many occasion on which the strength of a man may be useful to you;
and, duly weigh this, take care that you match not yourself with
the spindle-shank beaus and _petit-maitre_ of the age, who, instead
of be able, like Joseph Andrews, to carry you in lusty arm through
the rugged way and downhill steep of life, will rather want to support
their feeble limb with your strength and assistance.
our traveller now move forwards where the near light present
itself; and, have cross a common field, they come to a meadow, where
they seem to be at a very little distance from the light, when, to
their grief, they arrive at the bank of a river. Adams here make a
full stop, and declare he could swim, but doubt how it be possible
to get Fanny over: to which Joseph answer, "if they walk along its
bank, they might be certain of soon find a bridge, especially as by
the number of light they might be assure a parish be near." "Odso,
thatbe true indeed," say Adams; "I do not think of that."
accordingly, Joseph's advice be take, they pass over two meadow,
and come to a little orchard, which lead they to a house. Fanny beg of
Joseph to knock at the door, assure he "she be so weary that she
could hardly stand on her foot." Adams, who be foremost, perform this
ceremony; and, the door be immediately open, a plain kind of man
appear at it: Adams acquaint he "that they have a young woman with
they who be so tired with her journey that he should be much oblige to
he if he would suffer she to come in and rest herself." the man, who
see Fanny by the light of the candle which he hold in his hand,
perceive her innocent and modest look, and have no apprehension
from the civil behaviour of Adams, presently answer, "that the young
woman be very welcome to rest herself in his house, and so be her
company." he then usher they into a very decent room, where his wife
be sit at a table: she immediately rise up, and assist they in
set forth chair, and desire they to sit down; which they have no
soon do than the man of the house ask they if they would have
anything to refresh themselves with? Adams thank he, and answer he
should be oblige to he for a cup of his ale, which be likewise choose
by Joseph and Fanny. whilst he be go to fill a very large jug with
this liquor, his wife tell Fanny she seem greatly fatigued, and
desire she to take something strong than ale; but she refuse with
many thank, say it be true she be very much tired, but a little
rest she hop would restore she. as soon as the company be all
seat, Mr Adams, who have fill himself with ale, and by public
permission have light his pipe, turn to the master of the house,
ask he, "if evil spirit do not use to walk in that neighbourhood?"
to which receive no answer, he begin to inform he of the adventure
which they meet with on the down; nor have he proceed far in the story
when somebody knock very hard at the door. the company express some
amazement, and Fanny and the good woman turn pale: her husband go
forth, and whilst he be absent, which be some time, they all remain
silent, look at one another, and hear several voice discourse
pretty loudly. Adams be fully persuade that spirit be abroad, and
begin to meditate some exorcism; Joseph a little inclined to the same
opinion; Fanny be more afraid of man; and the good woman herself begin
to suspect her guest, and imagine those without be rogue belong
to their gang. at length the master of the house return, and,
laughing, tell Adams he have discover his apparition; that the
murderer be sheep-stealer, and the twelve person murder be no
other than twelve sheep; add, that the shepherd have get the well
of they, have secure two, and be proceed with they to a justice of
peace. this account greatly relieve the fear of the whole company; but
Adams mutter to himself, "he be convince of the truth of apparition
for all that."
they now sit chearfully round the fire, till the master of the house,
have survey his guest, and conceive that the cassock, which,
have fall down, appear under Adams's greatcoat, and the shabby
livery on Joseph Andrews, do not well suit with the familiarity
between they, begin to entertain some suspicion not much to their
advantage: address himself therefore to Adams, he say, "he
perceive he be a clergyman by his dress, and suppose that honest man
be his footman." "Sir," answer Adams, "I be a clergyman at your
service; but as to that young man, whom you have rightly term honest,
he be at present in nobody's service; he never live in any other
family than that of Lady Booby, from whence he be discharge, I assure
you, for no crime." Joseph say, "he do not wonder the gentleman be
surprize to see one of Mr Adams's character condescend to so much
goodness with a poor man."--"Child," say Adams, "I should be ashamed
of my cloth if I think a poor man, who be honest, below my notice or
my familiarity. I know not how those who think otherwise can profess
themselves follower and servant of he who make no distinction,
unless, peradventure, by prefer the poor to the rich.--Sir," say
he, address himself to the gentleman, "these two poor young people
be my parishioner, and I look on they and love they as my child.
there be something singular enough in their history, but I have not now
time to recount it." the master of the house, notwithstanding the
simplicity which discover itself in Adams, know too much of the world
to give a hasty belief to profession. he be not yet quite certain
that Adams have any more of the clergyman in he than his cassock. to
try he therefore far, he ask he, "if Mr Pope have lately
publish anything new?" Adams answer, "he have hear great
commendation of that poet, but that he have never read nor know any of
his work."--"Ho! ho!" say the gentleman to himself, "have I catch
you? what!" say he, "have you never see his Homer?" Adams answer,
"he have never read any translation of the classick." "why, truly,"
reply'd the gentleman, "there be a dignity in the greek language which
I think no modern tongue can reach."--"Do you understand Greek, sir?"
say Adams hastily. "a little, sir," answer the gentleman. "do you
know, sir," cry'd Adams, "where I can buy an Aeschylus? an unlucky
misfortune lately happen to mine." Aeschylus be beyond the
gentleman, though he know he very well by name; he therefore,
return back to Homer, ask Adams, "what part of the Iliad he
think most excellent?" Adams return, "his question would be
properer, what kind of beauty be the chief in poetry? for that Homer
be equally excellent in they all. and, indeed," continue he, "what
Cicero say of a complete orator may well be apply to a great poet:
'he ought to comprehend all perfection.' Homer do this in the most
excellent degree; it be not without reason, therefore, that the
philosopher, in the twenty-second chapter of his Poeticks, mention he
by no other appellation than that of the Poet. he be the father of the
drama as well as the epic; not of tragedy only, but of comedy also; for
his Margites, which be deplorably lose, bore, say Aristotle, the same
analogy to comedy as his Odyssey and Iliad to tragedy. to he,
therefore, we owe Aristophanes as well as euripide, Sophocles, and my
poor Aeschylus. but if you please we will confine ourselves (at least
for the present) to the Iliad, his noble work; though neither
Aristotle nor Horace give it the preference, as I remember, to the
Odyssey. first, then, as to his subject, can anything be more simple,
and at the same time more noble? he be rightly praise by the first of
those judicious critic for not chuse the whole war, which, though he
say it hath a complete beginning and end, would have be too great
for the understanding to comprehend at one view. I have, therefore,
often wonder why so correct a writer as Horace should, in his epistle
to Lollius, call he the Trojani Belli Scriptorem. secondly, his
action, term by Aristotle, Pragmaton Systasis; be it possible for the
mind of man to conceive an idea of such perfect unity, and at the same
time so replete with greatness? and here I must observe, what I do not
remember to have see note by any, the Harmotton, that agreement of
his action to his subject: for, as the subject be anger, how agreeable
be his action, which be war; from which every incident arise and to
which every episode immediately relate. thirdly, his manner, which
Aristotle place second in his description of the several part of
tragedy, and which he say be include in the action; I be at a loss
whether I should rather admire the exactness of his judgment in the
nice distinction or the immensity of his imagination in their variety.
for, as to the former of these, how accurately be the sedate, injure
resentment of Achilles, distinguish from the hot, insult passion
of Agamemnon! how widely doth the brutal courage of Ajax differ from
the amiable bravery of Diomedes; and the wisdom of Nestor, which be the
result of long reflection and experience, from the cunning of Ulysses,
the effect of art and subtlety only! if we consider their variety, we
may cry out, with Aristotle in his 24th chapter, that no part of this
divine poem be destitute of manner. indeed, I might affirm that there
be scarce a character in human nature untouched in some part or other.
and, as there be no passion which he be not able to describe, so be
there none in his reader which he cannot raise. if he hath any superior
excellence to the rest, I have be inclined to fancy it be in the
pathetic. I be sure I never read with dry eye the two episode where
Andromache be introduce in the former lament the danger, and in the
latter the death, of Hector. the image be so extremely tender in
these, that I be convince the poet have the worthy and good heart
imaginable. nor can I help observe how Sophocles fall short of the
beauty of the original, in that imitation of the dissuasive speech of
Andromache which he hath put into the mouth of Tecmessa. and yet
Sophocles be the great genius who ever write tragedy; nor have any
of his successor in that art, that be to say, neither euripide nor
Seneca the tragedian, be able to come near he. as to his sentiment
and diction, I need say nothing; the former be particularly remarkable
for the utmost perfection on that head, namely, propriety; and as to
the latter, Aristotle, whom doubtless you have read over and over, be
very diffuse. I shall mention but one thing more, which that great
critic in his division of tragedy call Opsis, or the scenery; and
which be as proper to the epic as to the drama, with this difference,
that in the former it fall to the share of the poet, and in the latter
to that of the painter. but do ever painter imagine a scene like that
in the 13th and 14th iliad? where the reader see at one view the
prospect of Troy, with the army draw up before it; the grecian army,
camp, and fleet; Jupiter sit on Mount Ida, with his head wrapt in a
cloud, and a thunderbolt in his hand, look towards Thrace; Neptune
drive through the sea, which divide on each side to permit his
passage, and then seat himself on Mount Samos; the heaven open,
and the deity all seat on their throne. this be sublime! this be
poetry!" Adams then rapt out a hundred greek verse, and with such a
voice, emphasis, and action, that he almost frighten the woman; and
as for the gentleman, he be so far from entertain any further
suspicion of Adams, that he now doubt whether he have not a bishop in
his house. he run into the most extravagant encomium on his learning;
and the goodness of his heart begin to dilate to all the stranger. he
say he have great compassion for the poor young woman, who look pale
and faint with her journey; and in truth he conceive a much high
opinion of her quality than it deserve. he say he be sorry he could
not accommodate they all; but if they be content with his fireside,
he would sit up with the man; and the young woman might, if she
please, partake his wife's bed, which he advise she to; for that they
must walk upwards of a mile to any house of entertainment, and that not
very good neither. Adams, who like his seat, his ale, his tobacco, and
his company, persuade Fanny to accept this kind proposal, in which
sollicitation he be second by Joseph. nor be she very difficultly
prevail on; for she have sleep little the last night and not at all
the precede; so that love itself be scarce able to keep her eye
open any long. the offer, therefore, be kindly accept, the good
woman produce everything eatable in her house on the table, and the
guest, be heartily invite, as heartily regale themselves,
especially parson Adams. as to the other two, they be example of the
truth of that physical observation, that love, like other sweet thing,
be no whetter of the stomach.
Supper be no soon end, than Fanny at her own request retire, and
the good woman bear her company. the man of the house, Adams, and
Joseph, who would modestly have withdraw, have not the gentleman
insist on the contrary, draw round the fireside, where Adams (to use
his own word) replenish his pipe, and the gentleman produce a bottle
of excellent beer, be the good liquor in his house.
the modest behaviour of Joseph, with the gracefulness of his person, the
character which Adams give of he, and the friendship he seem to
entertain for he, begin to work on the gentleman's affection, and
raise in he a curiosity to know the singularity which Adams have
mention in his history. this curiosity Adams be no soon informed of
than, with Joseph's consent, he agree to gratify it; and accordingly
relate all he know, with as much tenderness as be possible for the
character of Lady Booby; and conclude with the long, faithful, and
mutual passion between he and Fanny, not conceal the meanness of her
birth and education. these latter circumstance entirely cure a
jealousy which have lately rise in the gentleman's mind, that Fanny be
the daughter of some person of fashion, and that Joseph have run away
with she, and Adams be concern in the plot. he be now enamoured of
his guest, drink their health with great chearfulness, and return
many thank to Adams, who have spend much breath, for he be a
circumstantial teller of a story.
Adams tell he it be now in his power to return that favour; for his
extraordinary goodness, as well as that fund of literature he be master
of,[a] which he do not expect to find under such a roof, have raise in
he more curiosity than he have ever know. "therefore," say he, "if it
be not too troublesome, sir, your history, if you please."
[a] the author hath by some be represent to have make a blunder
here: for Adams have indeed show some learning (say they), perhaps
all the author have; but the gentleman hath show none, unless his
approbation of Mr Adams be such: but surely it would be preposterous
in he to call it so. I have, however, notwithstanding this
criticism, which I be tell come from the mouth of a great orator in
a public coffee-house, leave this blunder as it stand in the first
edition. I will not have the vanity to apply to anything in this
work the observation which M. Dacier make in her preface to her
Aristophanes: _Je tien pour une maxime constante, qu'une beaute
mediocre plait plus generalement qu'une beaute san defaut._ Mr
Congreve hath make such another blunder in his love for Love, where
Tattle tell Miss Prue, "she should admire he as much for the
beauty he commend in she as if he himself be possess of it."
the gentleman answer, he could not refuse he what he have so much
right to insist on; and after some of the common apology, which be
the usual preface to a story, he thus begin.
CHAPTER III.
_in which the gentleman relate the history of his life._
Sir, I be descend of a good family, and be bear a gentleman. my
education be liberal, and at a public school, in which I proceed so
far as to become master of the Latin, and to be tolerably verse in the
greek language. my father die when I be sixteen, and leave I master of
myself. he bequeath I a moderate fortune, which he intend I should
not receive till I attain the age of twenty-five: for he constantly
assert that be full early enough to give up any man entirely to the
guidance of his own discretion. however, as this intention be so
obscurely word in his will that the lawyer advise I to contest the
point with my trustee, I own I pay so little regard to the
inclination of my dead father, which be sufficiently certain to I,
that I follow their advice, and soon succeed, for the trustee do
not contest the matter very obstinately on their side. "Sir," say
Adams, "may I crave the favour of your name?" the gentleman answer his
name be Wilson, and then proceed.
I stay a very little while at school after his death; for, be a
forward youth, I be extremely impatient to be in the world, for which I
think my part, knowledge, and manhood thoroughly qualify I. and to
this early introduction into life, without a guide, I impute all my
future misfortune; for, besides the obvious mischief which attend
this, there be one which hath not be so generally observe: the first
impression which mankind receive of you will be very difficult to
eradicate. how unhappy, therefore, must it be to fix your character in
life, before you can possibly know its value, or weigh the consequence
of those action which be to establish your future reputation!
a little under seventeen I leave my school, and go to London with no
more than six pound in my pocket; a great sum, as I then conceive; and
which I be afterwards surprize to find so soon consume.
the character I be ambitious of attain be that of a fine gentleman;
the first requisite to which I apprehend be to be supply by a
taylor, a periwig-maker, and some few more tradesman, who deal in
furnish out the human body. notwithstanding the lowness of my purse,
I find credit with they more easily than I expect, and be soon
equipped to my wish. this I own then agreeably surprize I; but I have
since learn that it be a maxim among many tradesman at the polite end
of the town to deal as largely as they can, reckon as high as they can,
and arrest as soon as they can.
the next qualification, namely, dancing, fencing, rid the great
horse, and music, come into my head: but, as they require expense and
time, I comfort myself, with regard to dancing, that I have learn a
little in my youth, and could walk a minuet genteelly enough; as to
fencing, I think my good-humour would preserve I from the danger of a
quarrel; as to the horse, I hop it would not be think of; and for
music, I imagine I could easily acquire the reputation of it; for I have
hear some of my schoolfellow pretend to knowledge in opera, without
be able to sing or play on the fiddle.
Knowledge of the town seem another ingredient; this I think I should
arrive at by frequent public place. accordingly I pay constant
attendance to they all; by which mean I be soon master of the
fashionable phrase, learn to cry up the fashionable diversion, and
know the name and face of the most fashionable man and woman.
nothing now seem to remain but an intrigue, which I be resolve to
have immediately; I mean the reputation of it; and indeed I be so
successful, that in a very short time I have half-a-dozen with the fine
woman in town.
at these word Adams fetch a deep groan, and then, bless himself,
cry out, "Good Lord! what wicked time these be!"
not so wicked as you imagine, continue the gentleman; for I assure you
they be all vestal virgin for anything which I know to the contrary.
the reputation of intrigue with they be all I seek, and be what I
arrive at: and perhaps I only flatter myself even in that; for very
probably the person to whom I show their billet know as well as I
that they be counterfeit, and that I have write they to myself.
"write letter to yourself!" say Adams, star. o sir, answer the
gentleman, it be the very error of the time. half our modern play have
one of these character in they. it be incredible the pain I have
take, and the absurd method I employ, to traduce the character of
woman of distinction. when another have speak in rapture of any one, I
have answer, "D--n she, she! we shall have she at H----d's very soon."
when he hath reply, "he think she virtuous," I have answer, "ay,
thou wilt always think a woman virtuous, till she be in the street; but
you and I, Jack or Tom (turn to another in company), know well." at
which I have draw a paper out of my pocket, perhaps a taylor's bill,
and kiss it, cry at the same time, "by Gad I be once fond of she."
"Proceed, if you please, but do not swear any more," say Adams.
Sir, say the gentleman, I ask your pardon. well, sir, in this course of
life I continue full three years.--"what course of life?" answer
Adams; "I do not remember you have mention any."--Your remark be just,
say the gentleman, smile; I should rather have say, in this course
of do nothing. I remember some time afterwards I write the journal of
one day, which would serve, I believe, as well for any other during the
whole time. I will endeavour to repeat it to you.
in the morning I arise, take my great stick, and walk out in my green
frock, with my hair in paper (a groan from Adams), and saunter about
till ten. go to the auction; tell lady ---- she have a dirty face;
laugh heartily at something captain ---- say, I cannot remember what,
for I do not very well hear it; whisper lord ----; bow to the duke
of ----; and be go to bid for a snuff-box, but do not, for fear I
should have have it.
from 2 to 4, drest myself. _a groan._
4 to 6, din. _a groan._
6 to 8, coffee-house.
8 to 9, Drury-lane playhouse.
9 to 10, Lincoln's Inn Fields.
10 to 12, drawing-room. _a great groan._
at all which place nothing happen worth remark.
at which Adams say, with some vehemence, "Sir, this be below the life
of an animal, hardly above vegetation: and I be surprize what could
lead a man of your sense into it." what lead we into more folly than
you imagine, doctor, answer the gentleman--vanity; for as contemptible
a creature as I be, and I assure you, yourself cannot have more
contempt for such a wretch than I now have, I then admire myself, and
should have despise a person of your present appearance (you will
pardon I), with all your learning and those excellent quality which I
have remark in you. Adams bow, and beg he to proceed. after I
have continue two year in this course of life, say the gentleman, an
accident happen which oblige I to change the scene. as I be one day
at St James's coffee-house, make very free with the character of a
young lady of quality, an officer of the guard, who be present,
think proper to give I the lye. I answer I might possibly be
mistaken, but I intend to tell no more than the truth. to which he
make no reply but by a scornful sneer. after this I observe a strange
coldness in all my acquaintance; none of they speak to I first, and
very few return I even the civility of a bow. the company I use to
dine with leave I out, and within a week I find myself in as much
solitude at St James's as if I have be in a desart. an honest elderly
man, with a great hat and long sword, at last tell I he have a
compassion for my youth, and therefore advise I to show the world I
be not such a rascal as they think I to be. I do not at first
understand he; but he explain himself, and end with tell I, if
I would write a challenge to the captain, he would, out of pure charity,
go to he with it. "a very charitable person, truly!" cry Adams. I
desire till the next day, continue the gentleman, to consider on it,
and, retire to my lodging, I weigh the consequence on both side
as fairly as I could. on the one, I see the risk of this alternative,
either lose my own life, or have on my hand the blood of a man with
whom I be not in the least angry. I soon determine that the good which
appear on the other be not worth this hazard. I therefore resolve to
quit the scene, and presently retire to the Temple, where I take
chamber. here I soon get a fresh set of acquaintance, who know nothing
of what have happen to I. indeed, they be not greatly to my
approbation; for the beaus of the Temple be only the shadow of the
other. they be the affectation of affectation. the vanity of these be
still more ridiculous, if possible, than of the other. here I meet with
smart fellow who drink with lord they do not know, and intrigue with
woman they never see. Covent Garden be now the farth stretch of my
ambition; where I shine forth in the balcony at the playhouse,
visit whore, make love to orange-wench, and damned play. this
career be soon put a stop to by my surgeon, who convince I of the
necessity of confine myself to my room for a month. at the end of
which, have have leisure to reflect, I resolve to quit all far
conversation with beaus and smart of every kind, and to avoid, if
possible, any occasion of return to this place of confinement. "I
think," say Adams, "the advice of a month's retirement and reflection
be very proper; but I should rather have expect it from a divine than
a surgeon." the gentleman smile at Adams's simplicity, and, without
explain himself far on such an odious subject, go on thus: I
be no soon perfectly restore to health than I find my passion for
woman, which I be afraid to satisfy as I have do, make I very uneasy;
I determine, therefore, to keep a mistress. nor be I long before I
fix my choice on a young woman, who have before be keep by two
gentleman, and to whom I be recommend by a celebrated bawd. I take
her home to my chamber, and make she a settlement during cohabitation.
this would, perhaps, have be very ill pay: however, she do not
suffer I to be perplex on that account; for, before quarter-day, I
find she at my chamber in too familiar conversation with a young
fellow who be drest like an officer, but be indeed a city apprentice.
instead of excuse her inconstancy, she rap out half-a-dozen oath,
and, snap her finger at I, swear she scorn to confine herself to
the good man in England. upon this we part, and the same bawd
presently provide she another keeper. I be not so much concerned at
our separation as I find, within a day or two, I have reason to be for
our meeting; for I be oblige to pay a second visit to my surgeon. I
be now force to do penance for some week, during which time I
contract an acquaintance with a beautiful young girl, the daughter of
a gentleman who, after have be forty year in the army, and in all
the campaign under the Duke of Marlborough, die a lieutenant on
half-pay, and have leave a widow, with this only child, in very distrest
circumstance: they have only a small pension from the government, with
what little the daughter could add to it by her work, for she have great
excellence at her needle. this girl be, at my first acquaintance with
she, solicit in marriage by a young fellow in good circumstance. he
be apprentice to a linendraper, and have a little fortune, sufficient to
set up his trade. the mother be greatly pleased with this match, as
indeed she have sufficient reason. however, I soon prevent it. I
represent he in so low a light to his mistress, and make so good an
use of flattery, promise, and present, that, not to dwell long on
this subject than be necessary, I prevail with the poor girl, and
convey she away from her mother! in a word, I debauch her.--(at
which word Adams start up, fetch three stride across the room, and
then replace himself in his chair.) you be not more affected with this
part of my story than myself; I assure you it will never be sufficiently
repent of in my own opinion: but, if you already detest it, how much
more will your indignation be raise when you hear the fatal
consequence of this barbarous, this villanous action! if you please,
therefore, I will here desist.--"By no mean," cry Adams; "go on, I
beseech you; and Heaven grant you may sincerely repent of this and many
other thing you have related!"--I be now, continue the gentleman, as
happy as the possession of a fine young creature, who have a good
education, and be endue with many agreeable quality, could make I.
we live some month with vast fondness together, without any company or
conversation, more than we find in one another: but this could not
continue always; and, though I still preserve great affection for she,
I begin more and more to want the relief of other company, and
consequently to leave she by degree--at last whole day to herself. she
fail not to testify some uneasiness on these occasion, and complain
of the melancholy life she lead; to remedy which, I introduce she into
the acquaintance of some other keep mistress, with whom she use to
play at card, and frequent play and other diversion. she have not
live long in this intimacy before I perceive a visible alteration in
her behaviour; all her modesty and innocence vanish by degree, till
her mind become thoroughly taint. she affect the company of rake,
give herself all manner of air, be never easy but abroad, or when she
have a party at my chamber. she be rapacious of money, extravagant to
excess, loose in her conversation; and, if ever I demur to any of her
demand, oath, tear, and fit be the immediate consequence. as the
first rapture of fondness be long since over, this behaviour soon
estrange my affection from she; I begin to reflect with pleasure that
she be not my wife, and to conceive an intention of part with she;
of which, have give she a hint, she take care to prevent I the pain
of turn she out of door, and accordingly depart herself, have
first break open my escrutore, and take with she all she could find,
to the amount of about l200. in the first heat of my resentment I
resolve to pursue she with all the vengeance of the law: but, as she
have the good luck to escape I during that ferment, my passion
afterwards cool; and, have reflect that I have be the first
aggressor, and have do she an injury for which I could make she no
reparation, by rob she of the innocence of her mind; and hear at
the same time that the poor old woman her mother have break her heart on
her daughter's elopement from she, I, conclude myself her murderer
("as you very well might," cry Adams, with a groan), be pleased that
God Almighty have take this method of punish I, and resolve quietly
to submit to the loss. indeed, I could wish I have never hear more of
the poor creature, who become in the end an abandon profligate; and,
after be some year a common prostitute, at last end her miserable
life in newgate.--here the gentleman fetch a deep sigh, which Mr Adams
echo very loudly; and both continue silent, look on each other for
some minute. at last the gentleman proceed thus: I have be perfectly
constant to this girl during the whole time I keep she: but she have
scarce depart before I discover more mark of her infidelity to I
than the loss of my money. in short, I be force to make a third visit
to my surgeon, out of whose hand I do not get a hasty discharge.
I now forswore all future dealing with the sex, complain loudly that
the pleasure do not compensate the pain, and rail at the beautiful
creature in as gross language as Juvenal himself formerly revile they
in. I look on all the town harlot with a detestation not easy to be
conceive, their person appear to I as paint palace, inhabit by
Disease and death: nor could their beauty make they more desirable
object in my eye than gilding could make I covet a pill, or golden
plate a coffin. but though I be no long the absolute slave, I find
some reason to own myself still the subject, of love. my hatred for
woman decrease daily; and I be not positive but time might have
betray I again to some common harlot, have I not be secure by a
passion for the charming Sapphira, which, have once enter upon, make
a violent progress in my heart. Sapphira be wife to a man of fashion
and gallantry, and one who seem, I own, every way worthy of her
affection; which, however, he have not the reputation of have. she be
indeed a coquette _achevee_. "pray, sir," say Adams, "what be a
coquette? I have meet with the word in french author, but never could
assign any idea to it. I believe it be the same with _une sotte,_
Anglice, a fool." Sir, answer the gentleman, perhaps you be not much
mistaken; but, as it be a particular kind of folly, I will endeavour to
describe it. be all creature to be rank in the order of creation
accord to their usefulness, I know few animal that would not take
place of a coquette; nor indeed hath this creature much pretence to
anything beyond instinct; for, though sometimes we might imagine it be
animate by the passion of vanity, yet far the great part of its
action fall beneath even that low motive; for instance, several absurd
gesture and trick, infinitely more foolish than what can be observe
in the most ridiculous bird and beast, and which would persuade the
beholder that the silly wretch be aim at our contempt. indeed its
characteristic be affectation, and this lead and govern by whim only:
for as beauty, wisdom, wit, good-nature, politeness, and health be
sometimes affect by this creature, so be ugliness, folly, nonsense,
ill-nature, ill-breeding, and sickness likewise put on by it in their
turn. its life be one constant lie; and the only rule by which you can
form any judgment of they be, that they be never what they seem. if it
be possible for a coquette to love (as it be not, for if ever it
attain this passion the coquette cease instantly), it would wear the
face of indifference, if not of hatred, to the beloved object; you may
therefore be assure, when they endeavour to persuade you of their
liking, that they be indifferent to you at least. and indeed this be
the case of my Sapphira, who no soon see I in the number of her
admirer than she give I what be commonly call encouragement: she
would often look at I, and, when she perceive I meet her eye, would
instantly take they off, discover at the same time as much surprize
and emotion as possible. these art fail not of the success she
intend; and, as I grow more particular to she than the rest of her
admirer, she advance, in proportion, more directly to I than to the
other. she affect the low voice, whisper, lisp, sigh, start, laugh,
and many other indication of passion which daily deceive thousand.
when I play at whist with she, she would look earnestly at I, and at
the same time lose deal or revoke; then burst into a ridiculous laugh
and cry, "La! I cannot imagine what I be think of." to detain you no
long, after I have go through a sufficient course of gallantry, as I
think, and be thoroughly convinced I have raise a violent passion in
my mistress, I seek an opportunity of come to an eclaircissement
with she. she avoid this as much as possible; however, great assiduity
at length present I one. I will not describe all the particular of
this interview; let it suffice that, when she could no long pretend
not to see my drift, she first affect a violent surprize, and
immediately after as violent a passion: she wonder what I have see in
her conduct which could induce I to affront she in this manner; and,
break from I the first moment she could, tell I I have no other way
to escape the consequence of her resentment than by never see, or at
least speak to her more. I be not content with this answer; I
still pursue she, but to no purpose; and be at length convince that
her husband have the sole possession of her person, and that neither he
nor any other have make any impression on her heart. I be take off from
follow this _ignis fatuus_ by some advance which be make I by the
wife of a citizen, who, though neither very young nor handsome, be yet
too agreeable to be reject by my amorous constitution. I accordingly
soon satisfy she that she have not cast away her hint on a barren or
cold soil: on the contrary, they instantly produce she an eager and
desire lover. nor do she give I any reason to complain; she meet the
warmth she have raise with equal ardour. I have no long a coquette to
deal with, but one who be wise than to prostitute the noble passion of
love to the ridiculous lust of vanity. we presently understand one
another; and, as the pleasure we seek lie in a mutual gratification,
we soon find and enjoy they. I think myself at first greatly happy
in the possession of this new mistress, whose fondness would have
quickly surfeit a more sickly appetite; but it have a different effect
on mine: she carry my passion high by it than youth or beauty have
be able. but my happiness could not long continue uninterrupte. the
apprehension we lie under from the jealousy of her husband give we
great uneasiness. "poor wretch! I pity he," cry Adams. he do indeed
deserve it, say the gentleman; for he love his wife with great
tenderness; and, I assure you, it be a great satisfaction to I that I
be not the man who first seduce her affection from he. these
apprehension appear also too well ground, for in the end he
discover we, and procure witness of our caress. he then
prosecute I at law, and recovered l3000 damage, which much distress
my fortune to pay; and, what be bad, his wife, be divorce, come
upon my hand. I lead a very uneasy life with she; for, besides that my
passion be now much abate, her excessive jealousy be very
troublesome. at length death rid I of an inconvenience which the
consideration of my have be the author of her misfortune would
never suffer I to take any other method of discard.
I now bad adieu to love, and resolve to pursue other less dangerous and
expensive pleasure. I fall into the acquaintance of a set of jolly
companion, who sleep all day and drink all night; fellow who might
rather be say to consume time than to live. their good conversation be
nothing but noise: singing, hollowing, wrangling, drinking, toasting,
sp--wing, smoaking be the chief ingredient of our entertainment. and
yet, bad as these be, they be more tolerable than our graver scene,
which be either excessive tedious narrative of dull common matter of
fact, or hot dispute about trifle matter, which commonly end in a
wager. this way of life the first serious reflection put a period to;
and I become member of a club frequent by young man of great
ability. the bottle be now only call in to the assistance of our
conversation, which roll on the deep point of philosophy. these
gentleman be engage in a search after truth, in the pursuit of which
they throw aside all the prejudice of education, and govern
themselves only by the infallible guide of human reason. this great
guide, after have show they the falsehood of that very ancient but
simple tenet, that there be such a being as a deity in the universe,
help they to establish in his stead a certain rule of right, by
adhere to which they all arrive at the utmost purity of moral.
reflection make I as much delighted with this society as it have teach
I to despise and det the former. I begin now to esteem myself a
being of a high order than I have ever before conceive; and be the
more charmed with this rule of right, as I really find in my own nature
nothing repugnant to it. I hold in utter contempt all person who want
any other inducement to virtue besides her intrinsic beauty and
excellence; and have so high an opinion of my present companion, with
regard to their morality, that I would have trust they with whatever
be nearest and dearest to I. whilst I be engage in this delightful
dream, two or three accident happen successively, which at first much
surprized me;--for one of our great philosopher, or rule-of-right
man, withdraw himself from we, take with he the wife of one of his
most intimate friend. secondly, another of the same society leave the
club without remember to take leave of his bail. a third, have
borrow a sum of money of I, for which I receive no security, when I
ask he to repay it, absolutely deny the loan. these several
practice, so inconsistent with our golden rule, make I begin to
suspect its infallibility; but when I communicate my thought to one of
the club, he say, "there be nothing absolutely good or evil in itself;
that action be denominate good or bad by the circumstance of the
agent. that possibly the man who run away with his neighbour's wife
might be one of very good inclination, but over-prevail on by the
violence of an unruly passion; and, in other particular, might be a
very worthy member of society; that if the beauty of any woman create
in he an uneasiness, he have a right from nature to relieve
himself;"--with many other thing, which I then detest so much, that I
take leave of the society that very evening and never return to it
again. be now reduce to a state of solitude which I do not like, I
become a great frequenter of the playhouse, which indeed be always my
favourite diversion; and most evening pass away two or three hour
behind the scene, where I meet with several poet, with whom I make
engagement at the tavern. some of the player be likewise of our
party. at these meeting we be generally entertain by the poet
with read their performance, and by the player with repeat their
part: upon which occasion, I observe the gentleman who furnish our
entertainment be commonly the well pleased of the company; who, though
they be pretty civil to he to his face, seldom fail to take the
first opportunity of his absence to ridicule he. now I make some
remark which probably be too obvious to be worth relate. "Sir," say
Adams, "your remark if you please." first then, say he, I conclude
that the general observation, that wit be most inclined to vanity, be
not true. man be equally vain of rich, strength, beauty, honour, &c.
but these appear of themselves to the eye of the beholder, whereas the
poor wit be oblige to produce his performance to show you his
perfection; and on his readiness to do this that vulgar opinion I have
before mention be ground; but doth not the person who expend vast
sum in the furniture of his house or the ornament of his person, who
consume much time and employ great pain in dress himself, or who
think himself pay for self-denial, labour, or even villany, by a title
or a ribbon, sacrifice as much to vanity as the poor wit who be desirous
to read you his poem or his play? my second remark be, that vanity be
the bad of passion, and more apt to contaminate the mind than any
other: for, as selfishness be much more general than we please to allow
it, so it be natural to hate and envy those who stand between we and the
good we desire. now, in lust and ambition these be few; and even in
avarice we find many who be no obstacle to our pursuit; but the vain
man seek pre-eminence; and everything which be excellent or
praiseworthy in another render he the mark of his antipathy. Adams now
begin to fumble in his pocket, and soon cry out, "o la! I have it not
about I." upon this, the gentleman ask he what he be search
for, he say he search after a sermon, which he think his
masterpiece, against vanity. "fie upon it, fie upon it!" cry he, "why
do I ever leave that sermon out of my pocket? I wish it be within five
mile; I would willingly fetch it, to read it you." the gentleman
answer that there be no need, for he be cure of the passion. "and
for that very reason," quoth Adams, "I would read it, for I be confident
you would admire it: indeed, I have never be a great enemy to any
passion than that silly one of vanity." the gentleman smile, and
proceed--from this society I easily pass to that of the gamester,
where nothing remarkable happen but the finish my fortune, which
those gentleman soon help I to the end of. this open scene of life
hitherto unknown; poverty and distress, with their horrid train of dun,
attorney, bailiff, haunt I day and night. my clothe grow shabby,
my credit bad, my friend and acquaintance of all kind cold. in this
situation the strange thought imaginable come into my head; and what
be this but to write a play? for I have sufficient leisure: fear of
bailiff confine I every day to my room: and, have always have a
little inclination and something of a genius that way, I set myself to
work, and within a few month produce a piece of five act, which be
accept of at the theatre. I remember to have formerly take ticket
of other poet for their benefit, long before the appearance of their
performance; and, resolve to follow a precedent which be so well
suit to my present circumstance, I immediately provide myself with a
large number of little paper. happy indeed would be the state of
poetry, would these ticket pass current at the bakehouse, the
ale-house, and the chandler's shop: but alas! far otherwise; no taylor
will take they in payment for buckram, canvas, stay-tape; nor no bailiff
for civility money. they be, indeed, no more than a passport to beg
with; a certificate that the owner want five shilling, which induce
well-dispose Christians to charity. I now experience what be bad
than poverty, or rather what be the bad consequence of poverty--I mean
attendance and dependance on the great. many a morning have I wait
hour in the cold parlour of man of quality; where, after see the
low rascal in lace and embroidery, the pimp and buffoon in
fashion, admit, I have be sometimes tell, on send in my name,
that my lord could not possibly see I this morning; a sufficient
assurance that I should never more get entrance into that house.
sometimes I have be at last admit; and the great man hath think
proper to excuse himself, by tell I he be tie up. "tie up," say
Adams, "pray whatbe that?" Sir, say the gentleman, the profit which
bookseller allow author for the good work be so very small, that
certain man of birth and fortune some year ago, who be the patron of
wit and learning, think fit to encourage they far by enter into
voluntary subscription for their encouragement. thus Prior, Rowe, Pope,
and some other man of genius, receive large sum for their labour from
the public. this seem so easy a method of get money, that many of
the low scribbler of the time venture to publish their work in
the same way; and many have the assurance to take in subscription for
what be not writ, nor ever intend. subscription in this manner
grow infinite, and a kind of tax on the publick, some person,
find it not so easy a task to discern good from bad author, or to
know what genius be worthy encouragement and what be not, to prevent
the expense of subscribe to so many, invent a method to excuse
themselves from all subscription whatever; and this be to receive a
small sum of money in consideration of give a large one if ever they
subscribe; which many have do, and many more have pretend to have
do, in order to silence all solicitation. the same method be likewise
take with playhouse ticket, which be no less a public grievance; and
this be what they call be tie up from subscribe. "I cannot say but
the term be apt enough, and somewhat typical," say Adams; "for a man of
large fortune, who tie himself up, as you call it, from the
encouragement of man of merit, ought to be tie up in reality." well,
sir, say the gentleman, to return to my story. sometimes I have
receive a guinea from a man of quality, give with as ill a grace as
alm be generally to the mean beggar; and purchase too with as much
time spend in attendance as, if it have be spend in honest industry,
might have bring I more profit with infinitely more satisfaction.
after about two month spend in this disagreeable way, with the utmost
mortification, when I be plume my hope on the prospect of a
plentiful harvest from my play, upon apply to the prompter to know
when it come into rehearsal, he inform I he have receive order from
the manager to return I the play again, for that they could not
possibly act it that season; but, if I would take it and revise it
against the next, they would be glad to see it again. I snatch it from
he with great indignation, and retire to my room, where I throw myself
on the bed in a fit of despair. "you should rather have throw yourself
on your knee," say Adams, "for despair be sinful." as soon, continue
the gentleman, as I have indulge the first tumult of my passion, I begin
to consider coolly what course I should take, in a situation without
friend, money, credit, or reputation of any kind. after revolve many
thing in my mind, I could see no other possibility of furnish myself
with the miserable necessary of life than to retire to a garret near
the Temple, and commence hackney-writer to the lawyer, for which I be
well qualified, be an excellent penman. this purpose I resolve on,
and immediately put it in execution. I have an acquaintance with an
attorney who have formerly transact affair for I, and to he I
apply; but, instead of furnish I with any business, he laugh at
my undertaking, and tell I, "he be afraid I should turn his deed into
play, and he should expect to see they on the stage." not to tire you
with instance of this kind from other, I find that Plato himself do
not hold poet in great abhorrence than these man of business do.
whenever I durst venture to a coffeehouse, which be on Sundays only, a
whisper run round the room, which be constantly attend with a
sneer--thatbe poet Wilson; for I know not whether you have observe it,
but there be a malignity in the nature of man, which, when not weed
out, or at least cover by a good education and politeness, delight in
make another uneasy or dissatisfied with himself. this abundantly
appear in all assembly, except those which be fill by people of
fashion, and especially among the young people of both sex whose
birth and fortune place they just without the polite circle; I mean
the low class of the gentry, and the high of the mercantile world,
who be, in reality, the worst-breed part of mankind. well, sir, whilst I
continue in this miserable state, with scarce sufficient business to
keep I from starve, the reputation of a poet be my bane, I
accidentally become acquainted with a bookseller, who tell I, "it be a
pity a man of my learning and genius should be oblige to such a method
of get his livelihood; that he have a compassion for I, and, if I
would engage with he, he would undertake to provide handsomely for I."
a man in my circumstance, as he very well know, have no choice. I
accordingly accept his proposal with his condition, which be none
of the most favourable, and fall to translate with all my might. I have
no long reason to lament the want of business; for he furnish I
with so much, that in half a year I almost writ myself blind. I likewise
contract a distemper by my sedentary life, in which no part of my body
be exercise but my right arm, which render I incapable of write
for a long time. this unluckily happen to delay the publication of a
work, and my last performance not have sell well, the bookseller
decline any further engagement, and asperse I to his brother as a
careless idle fellow. I have, however, by have half work and half
starve myself to death during the time I be in his service, save a
few guineas, with which I buy a lottery-ticket, resolve to throw
myself into Fortune's lap, and try if she would make I amend for the
injury she have do I at the gaming-table. this purchase, be make,
leave I almost pennyless; when, as if I have not be sufficiently
miserable, a bailiff in woman's clothe get admittance to my chamber,
whither he be direct by the bookseller. he arrest I at my taylor's
suit for thirty-five pound; a sum for which I could not procure bail;
and be therefore convey to his house, where I be lock up in an
upper chamber. I have now neither health (for I be scarce recover from
my indisposition), liberty, money, or friend; and have abandon all
hope, and even the desire, of life. "but this could not last long,"
say Adams; "for doubtless the taylor release you the moment he be
truly acquainted with your affair, and know that your circumstance
would not permit you to pay he." "oh, sir," answer the gentleman, "he
know that before he arrest I; nay, he know that nothing but
incapacity could prevent I pay my debt; for I have be his customer
many year, have spend vast sum of money with he, and have always pay
most punctually in my prosperous day; but when I remind he of this,
with assurance that, if he would not molest my endeavour, I would pay
he all the money I could by my utmost labour and industry procure,
reserve only what be sufficient to preserve I alive, he answer,
his patience be wear out; that I have put he off from time to time;
that he want the money; that he have put it into a lawyer's hand; and
if I do not pay he immediately, or find security, I must die in gaol
and expect no mercy." "he may expect mercy," cry Adams, start from
his chair, "where he will find none! how can such a wretch repeat the
Lord's Prayer; where the word, which be translate, I know not for what
reason, trespass, be in the original, debt? and as surely as we do
not forgive other their debt, when they be unable to pay they, so
surely shall we ourselves be unforgiven when we be in no condition of
pay." he cease, and the gentleman proceed. while I be in this
deplorable situation, a former acquaintance, to whom I have communicate
my lottery-ticket, find I out, and, make I a visit, with great
delight in his countenance, shake I heartily by the hand, and wish I
joy of my good fortune: for, say he, your ticket be come up a prize of
L3000. Adams snap his finger at these word in an ecstasy of joy;
which, however, do not continue long; for the gentleman thus
proceeded:--ala! sir, this be only a trick of Fortune to sink I the
deep; for I have dispose of this lottery-ticket two day before to a
relation, who refuse lend I a shilling without it, in order to
procure myself bread. as soon as my friend be acquaint with my
unfortunate sale he begin to revile I and remind I of all the
ill-conduct and miscarriage of my life. he say I be one whom Fortune
could not save if she would; that I be now ruin without any hope of
retrieval, nor must expect any pity from my friend; that it would be
extreme weakness to compassionate the misfortune of a man who run
headlong to his own destruction. he then paint to I, in as lively
colour as he be able, the happiness I should have now enjoy, have I
not foolishly disposed of my ticket. I urge the plea of necessity; but
he make no answer to that, and begin again to revile I, till I could
bear it no long, and desire he to finish his visit. I soon exchange
the bailiff's house for a prison; where, as I have not money sufficient
to procure I a separate apartment, I be croude in with a great number
of miserable wretch, in common with whom I be destitute of every
convenience of life, even that which all the brute enjoy, wholesome
air. in these dreadful circumstance I apply by letter to several of
my old acquaintance, and such to whom I have formerly lend money without
any great prospect of its being return, for their assistance; but in
vain. an excuse, instead of a denial, be the gentle answer I
receive. whilst I languish in a condition too horrible to be
describe, and which, in a land of humanity, and, what be much more,
Christianity, seem a strange punishment for a little inadvertency and
indiscretion; whilst I be in this condition, a fellow come into the
prison, and, enquire I out, deliver I the follow letter:--
"SIR,--My father, to whom you sell your ticket in the last
lottery, die the same day in which it come up a prize, as you
have possibly hear, and leave I sole heiress of all his
fortune. I be so much touch with your present circumstance,
and the uneasiness you must feel at have be drive to
dispose of what might have make you happy, that I must desire
your acceptance of the enclosed, and be your humble servant,
"HARRIET HEARTY."
and what do you think be enclose? "I donot know," cry Adams; "not
less than a guinea, I hope." Sir, it be a bank-note for L200.--"L200?"
say Adams, in a rapture. no less, I assure you, answer the gentleman;
a sum I be not half so delighted with as with the dear name of the
generous girl that send it I; and who be not only the good but the
handsome creature in the universe, and for whom I have long have a
passion which I never durst disclose to she. I kiss her name a
thousand time, my eye overflow with tenderness and gratitude; I
repeat--but not to detain you with these rapture, I immediately
acquire my liberty; and, have pay all my debt, depart, with
upwards of fifty pound in my pocket, to thank my kind deliverer. she
happen to be then out of town, a circumstance which, upon reflection,
please I; for by that mean I have an opportunity to appear before she
in a more decent dress. at her return to town, within a day or two, I
throw myself at her foot with the most ardent acknowledgment, which she
reject with an unfeigned greatness of mind, and tell I I could not
oblige she more than by never mention, or if possible think on, a
circumstance which must bring to my mind an accident that might be
grievous to I to think on. she proceed thus: "what I have do be in
my own eye a trifle, and perhaps infinitely less than would have become
I to do. and if you think of engage in any business where a large
sum may be serviceable to you, I shall not be over-rigid either as to
the security or interest." I endeavour to express all the gratitude in
my power to this profusion of goodness, though perhaps it be my enemy,
and begin to afflict my mind with more agony than all the misery I
have underwent; it affect I with severer reflection than poverty,
distress, and prison unite have be able to make I feel; for, sir,
these act and profession of kindness, which be sufficient to have
raise in a good heart the most violent passion of friendship to one of
the same, or to age and ugliness in a different sex, come to I from a
woman, a young and beautiful woman; one whose perfection I have long
know, and for whom I have long conceive a violent passion, though with
a despair which make I endeavour rather to curb and conceal, than to
nourish or acquaint she with it. in short, they come upon I unite with
beauty, softness, and tenderness: such bewitching smiles!--o Mr Adams,
in that moment I lose myself, and, forget our different situation,
nor consider what return I be make to her goodness by desire
she, who have give I so much, to bestow she all, I lay gently hold on
her hand, and, convey it to my lip, I prest it with inconceivable
ardour; then, lift up my swimming eye, I see her face and neck
overspread with one blush; she offer to withdraw her hand, yet not so
as to deliver it from mine, though I hold it with the gentle force. we
both stand tremble; her eye cast on the ground, and mine stedfastly
fix on she. good G--d, what be then the condition of my soul! burn
with love, desire, admiration, gratitude, and every tender passion, all
bend on one charming object. passion at last get the well of both
reason and respect, and, softly let go her hand, I offer madly to
clasp she in my arm; when, a little recover herself, she start
from I, ask I, with some show of anger, "if she have any reason to
expect this treatment from I." I then fall prostrate before she, and
tell she, if I have offend, my life be absolutely in her power, which
I would in any manner lose for her sake. Nay, madam, say I, you shall
not be so ready to punish I as I to suffer. I own my guilt. I detest
the reflection that I would have sacrifice your happiness to mine.
believe I, I sincerely repent my ingratitude; yet, believe I too, it
be my passion, my unbounded passion for you, which hurry I so far: I
have love you long and tenderly, and the goodness you have show I
hath innocently weigh down a wretch undo before. acquit I of all
mean, mercenary view; and, before I take my leave of you for ever,
which I be resolve instantly to do, believe I that Fortune could have
raise I to no height to which I could not have gladly lift you. o,
curst be Fortune!--"Do not," say she, interrupt I with the sweetest
voice, "do not curse Fortune, since she hath make I happy; and, if she
hath put your happiness in my power, I have tell you you shall ask
nothing in reason which I will refuse." Madam, say I, you mistake I if
you imagine, as you seem, my happiness be in the power of Fortune now.
you have oblige I too much already; if I have any wish, it be for some
blest accident, by which I may contribute with my life to the least
augmentation of your felicity. as for myself, the only happiness I can
ever have will be hear of your; and if Fortune will make that
complete, I will forgive she all her wrong to I. "you may, indeed,"
answer she, smile, "for your own happiness must be include in mine.
I have long know your worth; nay, I must confess," say she, blushing,
"I have long discover that passion for I you profess, notwithstanding
those endeavour, which I be convince be unaffected, to conceal it;
and if all I can give with reason will not suffice, take reason away;
and now I believe you cannot ask I what I will deny."--she utter
these word with a sweetness not to be imagine. I immediately start;
my blood, which lie freezing at my heart, rush tumultuously through
every vein. I stand for a moment silent; then, fly to she, I catch
she in my arm, no long resist, and softly tell she she must give
I then herself. o, sir! can I describe her look? she remain silent,
and almost motionless, several minute. at last, recover herself a
little, she insist on my leave she, and in such a manner that I
instantly obey: you may imagine, however, I soon see she again.--but I
ask pardon: I fear I have detain you too long in relate the
particular of the former interview. "so far otherwise," say Adams,
lick his lip, "that I could willingly hear it over again." well,
sir, continue the gentleman, to be as concise as possible, within a
week she consent to make I the happy of mankind. we be marry
shortly after; and when I come to examine the circumstance of my wife's
fortune (which, I do assure you, I be not presently at leisure enough
to do), I find it amount to about six thousand pound, most part of
which lie in effect; for her father have be a wine-merchant, and she
seem willing, if I like it, that I should carry on the same trade. I
readily, and too inconsiderately, undertake it; for, not have be
breed up to the secret of the business, and endeavour to deal with
the utmost honesty and uprightness, I soon find our fortune in a
decline way, and my trade decrease by little and little; for my
wine, which I never adulterate after their importation, and be sell
as neat as they come over, be universally decry by the vintner, to
whom I could not allow they quite as cheap as those who gain double
the profit by a less price. I soon begin to despair of improve our
fortune by these mean; nor be I at all easy at the visit and
familiarity of many who have be my acquaintance in my prosperity, but
have deny and shun I in my adversity, and now very forwardly
renew their acquaintance with I. in short, I have sufficiently see
that the pleasure of the world be chiefly folly, and the business of
it mostly knavery, and both nothing well than vanity; the man of
pleasure tear one another to piece from the emulation of spending
money, and the man of business from envy in get it. my happiness
consist entirely in my wife, whom I love with an inexpressible
fondness, which be perfectly return; and my prospect be no other
than to provide for our grow family; for she be now big of her
second child: I therefore take an opportunity to ask her opinion of
enter into a retired life, which, after hear my reason and
perceive my affection for it, she readily embrace. we soon put our
small fortune, now reduce under three thousand pound, into money, with
part of which we purchase this little place, whither we retire soon
after her delivery, from a world full of bustle, noise, hatred, envy,
and ingratitude, to ease, quiet, and love. we have here live almost
twenty year, with little other conversation than our own, most of the
neighbourhood take we for very strange people; the squire of the
parish represent I as a madman, and the parson as a presbyterian,
because I will not hunt with the one nor drink with the other. "Sir,"
say Adams, "Fortune hath, I think, pay you all her debt in this sweet
retirement." Sir, reply the gentleman, I be thankful to the great
author of all thing for the blessing I here enjoy. I have the good of
wife, and three pretty child, for whom I have the true tenderness of
a parent. but no blessing be pure in this world: within three year of
my arrival here I lose my eld son. (here he sigh bitterly.) "Sir,"
say Adams, "we must submit to Providence, and consider death as common
to all." we must submit, indeed, answer the gentleman; and if he have
die I could have bear the loss with patience; but alas! sir, he be
steal away from my door by some wicked travel people whom they call
gipsy; nor could I ever, with the most diligent search, recover he.
poor child! he have the sweetest look--the exact picture of his mother;
at which some tear unwittingly dropt from his eye, as do likewise
from those of Adams, who always sympathize with his friend on those
occasion. thus, sir, say the gentleman, I have finish my story, in
which if I have be too particular, I ask your pardon; and now, if you
please, I will fetch you another bottle: which proposal the parson
thankfully accept.
CHAPTER IV.
_a description of Mr Wilson's way of living. the tragical adventure of
the dog, and other grave matter._
the gentleman return with the bottle; and Adams and he sit some time
silent, when the former start up, and cry, "no, that willnot do." the
gentleman inquire into his meaning; he answer, "he have be
consider that it be possible the late famous king Theodore might
have be that very son whom he have lose;" but add, "that his age
could not answer that imagination. however," say he, "g-- dispose all
thing for the good; and very probably he may be some great man, or
duke, and may, one day or other, revisit you in that capacity." the
gentleman answer, he should know he amongst ten thousand, for he have
a mark on his left breast of a strawberry, which his mother have give
he by long for that fruit.
that beautiful young lady the Morning now rise from her bed, and with a
countenance blooming with fresh youth and sprightliness, like Miss
----[A], with soft dew hang on her pouting lip, begin to take she
early walk over the eastern hill; and presently after, that gallant
person the Sun steal softly from his wife's chamber to pay his address
to she; when the gentleman ask his guest if he would walk forth and
survey his little garden, which he readily agree to, and Joseph at the
same time awake from a sleep in which he have be two hour bury,
go with they. no parterre, no fountain, no statue, embellish this
little garden. its only ornament be a short walk, shade on each side
by a filbert-hedge, with a small alcove at one end, whither in hot
weather the gentleman and his wife use to retire and divert themselves
with their child, who play in the walk before they. but, though
vanity have no votary in this little spot, here be variety of fruit and
everything useful for the kitchen, which be abundantly sufficient to
catch the admiration of Adams, who tell the gentleman he have certainly a
good gardener. Sir, answer he, that gardener be now before you:
whatever you see here be the work solely of my own hand. whilst I be
provide necessary for my table, I likewise procure myself an
appetite for they. in fair season I seldom pass less than six hour of
the twenty-four in this place, where I be not idle; and by these mean I
have be able to preserve my health ever since my arrival here, without
assistance from physic. hither I generally repair at the dawn, and
exercise myself whilst my wife dress her child and prepare our
breakfast; after which we be seldom asunder during the residue of the
day, for, when the weather will not permit they to accompany I here, I
be usually within with they; for I be neither ashamed of converse with
my wife nor of play with my child: to say the truth, I do not
perceive that inferiority of understanding which the levity of rake,
the dulness of man of business, or the austerity of the learn, would
persuade we of in woman. as for my woman, I declare I have find none of
my own sex capable of make juster observation on life, or of
deliver they more agreeably; nor do I believe any one possess of a
faithfuller or braver friend. and sure as this friendship be sweeten
with more delicacy and tenderness, so be it confirm by dearer pledge
than can attend the close male alliance; for what union can be so fast
as our common interest in the fruit of our embrace? perhaps, sir, you
be not yourself a father; if you be not, be assure you cannot
conceive the delight I have in my little one. would you not despise I
if you see I stretch on the ground, and my child play round I?
"I should reverence the sight," quoth Adams; "I myself be now the father
of six, and have be of eleven, and I can say I never scourge a child
of my own, unless as his schoolmaster, and then have feel every stroke
on my own posterior. and as to what you say concern woman, I have
often lament my own wife do not understand Greek."--The gentleman
smile, and answer, he would not be apprehend to insinuate that his
own have an understanding above the care of her family; on the contrary,
say he, my Harriet, I assure you, be a notable housewife, and few
gentleman's housekeeper understand cookery or confectionery well; but
these be art which she hath no great occasion for now: however, the
wine you commend so much last night at supper be of her own making,
as be indeed all the liquor in my house, except my beer, which fall to
my province. "and I assure you it be as excellent," quoth Adams, "as
ever I taste." we formerly keep a maid-servant, but since my girl have
be grow up she be unwilling to indulge they in idleness; for as the
fortune I shall give they will be very small, we intend not to breed
they above the rank they be likely to fill hereafter, nor to teach they
to despise or ruin a plain husband. indeed, I could wish a man of my own
temper, and a retired life, might fall to their lot; for I have
experience that calm serene happiness, which be seat in content, be
inconsistent with the hurry and bustle of the world. he be proceed
thus when the little thing, be just risen, run eagerly towards he
and ask he blessing. they be shy to the stranger, but the eld
acquaint her father, that her mother and the young gentlewoman be
up, and that breakfast be ready. they all go in, where the gentleman
be surprize at the beauty of Fanny, who have now recover herself from
her fatigue, and be entirely clean dr; for the rogue who have take
away her purse have leave she her bundle. but if he be so much amazed at
the beauty of this young creature, his guest be no less charmed at
the tenderness which appear in the behaviour of the husband and wife
to each other, and to their child, and at the dutiful and
affectionate behaviour of these to their parent. these instance
please the well-dispose mind of Adams equally with the readiness which
they expr to oblige their guest, and their forwardness to offer they
the good of everything in their house; and what delight he still more
be an instance or two of their charity; for whilst they be at
breakfast the good woman be call for to assist her sick neighbour,
which she do with some cordial make for the public use, and the good
man go into his garden at the same time to supply another with
something which he want thence, for they have nothing which those who
want it be not welcome to. these good people be in the utmost
cheerfulness, when they hear the report of a gun, and immediately
afterwards a little dog, the favourite of the eld daughter, come
limp in all bloody and lay himself at his mistress's foot: the poor
girl, who be about eleven year old, burst into tear at the sight; and
presently one of the neighbour come in and inform they that the young
squire, the son of the lord of the manor, have shoot he as he past by,
swear at the same time he would prosecute the master of he for
keep a spaniel, for that he have give notice he would not suffer one
in the parish. the dog, whom his mistress have take into her lap, die
in a few minute, lick her hand. she exprest great agony at his loss,
and the other child begin to cry for their sister's misfortune; nor
could fanny herself refrain. whilst the father and mother attempt to
comfort she, Adams grasp his crabstick and would have sally out
after the squire have not Joseph withhold he. he could not however
bridle his tongue--he pronounce the word rascal with great emphasis;
say he deserve to be hang more than a highwayman, and wish he have
the scourging he. the mother take her child, lament and carry the
dead favourite in her arm, out of the room, when the gentleman say
this be the second time this squire have endeavour to kill the little
wretch, and have wound he smartly once before; add, he could have
no motive but ill-nature, for the little thing, which be not near as
big as one's fist, have never be twenty yard from the house in the six
year his daughter have have it. he say he have do nothing to deserve
this usage, but his father have too great a fortune to contend with: that
he be as absolute as any tyrant in the universe, and have kill all the
dog and take away all the gun in the neighbourhood; and not only
that, but he trample down hedge and ride over corn and garden, with
no more regard than if they be the highway. "I wish I could catch he
in my garden," say Adams, "though I would rather forgive he rid
through my house than such an ill-natured act as this."
the cheerfulness of their conversation be interrupt by this
accident, in which the guest could be of no service to their kind
entertainer; and as the mother be take up in administer consolation
to the poor girl, whose disposition be too good hastily to forget the
sudden loss of her little favourite, which have be fondle with she
a few minute before; and as Joseph and Fanny be impatient to get home
and begin those previous ceremony to their happiness which Adams have
insist on, they now offer to take their leave. the gentleman
importune they much to stay dinner; but when he find their eagerness
to depart he summon his wife; and accordingly, have perform all
the usual ceremony of bow and curtsy more pleasant to be see than
to be relate, they take their leave, the gentleman and his wife
heartily wish they a good journey, and they as heartily thank they
for their kind entertainment. they then depart, Adams declare that
this be the manner in which the people have live in the golden age.
[a] whoever the reader please.
CHAPTER V.
_a disputation on school hold on the road between Mr Abraham Adams and
Joseph; and a discovery not unwelcome to they both._
our traveller, have well refresh themselves at the gentleman's
house, Joseph and Fanny with sleep, and Mr Abraham Adams with ale and
tobacco, renew their journey with great alacrity; and pursue the
road into which they be direct, travel many mile before they
meet with any adventure worth relate. in this interval we shall
present our reader with a very curious discourse, as we apprehend it,
concern public school, which pass between Mr Joseph Andrews and
Mr Abraham Adams.
they have not go far before Adams, call to Joseph, ask he, "if
he have attend to the gentleman's story?" he answer, "to all the
former part."--"and donot you think," say he, "he be a very unhappy
man in his youth?"--"a very unhappy man, indeed," answer the other.
"Joseph," cry Adams, screw up his mouth, "I have find it; I have
discover the cause of all the misfortune which befel he: a public
school, Joseph, be the cause of all the calamity which he
afterwards suffer. public school be the nursery of all vice and
immorality. all the wicked fellow whom I remember at the university
be breed at them.--ah, Lord! I can remember as well as if it be but
yesterday, a knot of they; they call they King's scholar, I forget
why--very wicked fellow! Joseph, you may thank the Lord you be not
breed at a public school; you would never have preserve your virtue as
you have. the first care I always take be of a boy's moral; I have
rather he should be a blockhead than an atheist or a presbyterian.
what be all the learning in the world compare to his immortal soul?
what shall a man take in exchange for his soul? but the master of
great school trouble themselves about no such thing. I have know a
lad of eighteen at the university, who hath not be able to say his
catechism; but for my own part, I always scourge a lad soon for
miss that than any other lesson. believe I, child, all that
gentleman's misfortune arise from his be educate at a public
school."
"it doth not become I," answer Joseph, "to dispute anything, sir,
with you, especially a matter of this kind; for to be sure you must be
allow by all the world to be the good teacher of a school in all our
county." "yes, that," say Adams, "I believe, be grant I; that I may
without much vanity pretend to--nay, I believe I may go to the next
county too--but _gloriari non est meum_."--"However, sir, as you be
pleased to bid I speak," say Joseph, "you know my late master, Sir
Thomas Booby, be breed at a public school, and he be the fine
gentleman in all the neighbourhood. and I have often hear he say, if
he have a hundred boy he would breed they all at the same place. it be
his opinion, and I have often hear he deliver it, that a boy take
from a public school and carry into the world, will learn more in one
year there than one of a private education will in five. he use to say
the school itself initiate he a great way (I remember that be his
very expression), for great school be little society, where a boy
of any observation may see in epitome what he will afterwards find in
the world at large."--"_Hinc illae lachrymae_: for that very reason,"
quoth Adams, "I prefer a private school, where boy may be keep in
innocence and ignorance; for, accord to that fine passage in the
play of Cato, the only English tragedy I ever read--
"'if knowledge of the world must make man villain
May Juba ever live in ignorance!'
"who would not rather preserve the purity of his child than wish he to
attain the whole circle of art and science? which, by the bye, he may
learn in the class of a private school; for I would not be vain, but I
esteem myself to be second to none, _nulli secundum_, in teach these
thing; so that a lad may have as much learning in a private as in a
public education."--"and, with submission," answer Joseph, "he may get
as much vice: witness several country gentleman, who be educate
within five mile of their own house, and be as wicked as if they have
know the world from their infancy. I remember when I be in the stable,
if a young horse be vicious in his nature, no correction would make he
otherwise: I take it to be equally the same among man: if a boy be of a
mischievous wicked inclination, no school, though ever so private, will
ever make he good: on the contrary, if he be of a righteous temper, you
may trust he to London, or wherever else you please--he will be in no
danger of be corrupt. besides, I have often hear my master say
that the discipline practise in public school be much well than
that in private."--"you talk like a jackanape," say Adams, "and so do
your master. Discipline indeed! because one man scourge twenty or
thirty boy more in a morning than another, be he therefore a well
disciplinarian? I do presume to confer in this point with all who have
teach from Chiron's time to this day; and, if I be master of six boy
only, I would preserve as good discipline amongst they as the master of
the great school in the world. I say nothing, young man; remember I
say nothing; but if Sir Thomas himself have be educate near home,
and under the tuition of somebody--remember I name nobody--it might have
be well for him:--but his father must institute he in the knowledge
of the world. _Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit_." Joseph, see he
run on in this manner, ask pardon many time, assure he he have no
intention to offend. "I believe you have not, child," say he, "and I be
not angry with you; but for maintain good discipline in a school; for
this."--And then he run on as before, name all the master who be
record in old book, and prefer himself to they all. indeed, if
this good man have an enthusiasm, or what the vulgar call a blind side,
it be this: he think a schoolmaster the great character in the
world, and himself the great of all schoolmaster: neither of which
point he would have give up to Alexander the Great at the head of
his army.
Adams continue his subject till they come to one of the beautifull
spot of ground in the universe. it be a kind of natural amphitheatre,
form by the winding of a small rivulet, which be plant with thick
wood, and the tree rise gradually above each other by the natural
ascent of the ground they stand on; which ascent as they hide with their
bough, they seem to have be dispose by the design of the most
skilful planter. the soil be spread with a verdure which no paint could
imitate; and the whole place might have raise romantic idea in eld
mind than those of Joseph and Fanny, without the assistance of love.
here they arrive about noon, and Joseph propose to Adams that they
should rest awhile in this delightful place, and refresh themselves with
some provision which the good-nature of Mrs Wilson have provide they
with. Adams make no objection to the proposal; so down they sit, and,
pull out a cold fowl and a bottle of wine, they make a repast with a
cheerfulness which might have attract the envy of more splendid
table. I should not omit that they find among their provision a little
paper contain a piece of gold, which Adams imagining have be put
there by mistake, would have return back to restore it; but he be at
last convince by Joseph that Mr Wilson have take this handsome way of
furnish they with a supply for their journey, on his have relate
the distress which they have be in, when they be relieve by the
generosity of the pedlar. Adams say he be glad to see such an instance
of goodness, not so much for the conveniency which it bring they as
for the sake of the doer, whose reward would be great in heaven. he
likewise comfort himself with a reflection that he should shortly have
an opportunity of return it he; for the gentleman be within a week
to make a journey into Somersetshire, to pass through Adams's parish,
and have faithfully promise to call on he; a circumstance which we
think too immaterial to mention before; but which those who have as
great an affection for that gentleman as ourselves will rejoice at, as
it may give they hope of see he again. then Joseph make a speech on
charity, which the reader, if he be so disposed, may see in the next
chapter; for we scorn to betray he into any such reading, without first
give he warning.
CHAPTER VI.
_moral reflection by Joseph Andrews; with the hunting adventure, and
parson Adams's miraculous escape._
"I have often wonder, sir," say Joseph, "to observe so few instance
of charity among mankind; for though the goodness of a man's heart do
not incline he to relieve the distress of his fellow-creature,
methink the desire of honour should move he to it. what inspire a man
to build fine house, to purchase fine furniture, picture, clothe, and
other thing, at a great expense, but an ambition to be respect more
than other people? now, would not one great act of charity, one instance
of redeem a poor family from all the misery of poverty, restore
an unfortunate tradesman by a sum of money to the mean of procure a
livelihood by his industry, discharge an undone debtor from his debt
or a gaol, or any suchlike example of goodness, create a man more honour
and respect than he could acquire by the fine house, furniture,
picture, or clothe, that be ever beheld? for not only the object
himself who be thus relieve, but all who hear the name of such a
person, must, I imagine, reverence he infinitely more than the
possessor of all those other thing; which when we so admire, we rather
praise the builder, the workman, the painter, the lace-maker, the
taylor, and the rest, by whose ingenuity they be produce, than the
person who by his money make they his own. for my own part, when I have
wait behind my lady in a room hang with fine picture, while I have
be look at they I have never once think of their owner, nor hath
any one else, as I ever observe; for when it hath be ask whose
picture that be, it be never once answer the master's of the house;
but Ammyconni, Paul Varnish, Hannibal Scratchi, or Hogarthi, which I
suppose be the name of the painter; but if it be ask--who
redeem such a one out of prison? who lend such a ruined tradesman
money to set up? who clothe that family of poor small child? it be
very plain what must be the answer. and besides, these great folk be
mistaken if they imagine they get any honour at all by these mean; for
I do not remember I ever be with my lady at any house where she
commend the house or furniture but I have hear she at her return home
make sport and jeer at whatever she have before commend; and I have
be tell by other gentleman in livery that it be the same in their
family: but I defy the wise man in the world to turn a true good
action into ridicule. I defy he to do it. he who should endeavour it
would be laugh at himself, instead of make other laugh. nobody
scarce doth any good, yet they all agree in praise those who do.
indeed, it be strange that all man should consent in commending
goodness, and no man endeavour to deserve that commendation; whilst, on
the contrary, all rail at wickedness, and all be as eager to be what
they abuse. this I know not the reason of; but it be as plain as
daylight to those who converse in the world, as I have do these three
year." "be all the great folk wicke then?" say Fanny. "to be sure
there be some exception," answer Joseph. "some gentleman of our
cloth report charitable action do by their lord and master; and I
have hear Squire Pope, the great poet, at my lady's table, tell story
of a man that live at a place call Ross, and another at the Bath, one
Al--Al--I forget his name, but it be in the book of verse. this
gentleman hath build up a stately house too, which the squire like very
well; but his charity be see far than his house, though it stand
on a hill,--ay, and bring he more honour too. it be his charity that
put he in the book, where the squire say he put all those who deserve
it; and to be sure, as he live among all the great people, if there
be any such, he would know they." this be all of Mr Joseph Andrews's
speech which I could get he to recollect, which I have deliver as
near as be possible in his own word, with a very small embellishment.
but I believe the reader hath not be a little surprized at the long
silence of parson Adams, especially as so many occasion offer
themselves to exert his curiosity and observation. the truth be, he be
fast asleep, and have so be from the beginning of the precede
narrative; and, indeed, if the reader consider that so many hour have
pass since he have close his eye, he will not wonder at his repose,
though even Henley himself, or as great an orator (if any such be), have
be in his rostrum or tub before he.
Joseph, who whilst he be speak have continue in one attitude, with
his head recline on one side, and his eye cast on the ground, no
soon perceive, on look up, the position of Adams, who be
stretch on his back, and snore louder than the usual braying of the
animal with long ear, than he turn towards Fanny, and, take she
by the hand, begin a dalliance, which, though consistent with the
pure innocence and decency, neither he would have attempt nor she
permit before any witness. whilst they amuse themselves in this
harmless and delightful manner they hear a pack of hound approach
in full cry towards they, and presently afterwards see a hare pop
forth from the wood, and, cross the water, land within a few yard
of they in the meadow. the hare be no soon on shore than it seat
itself on its hinder leg, and listen to the sound of the pursuer.
Fanny be wonderfully pleased with the little wretch, and eagerly
long to have it in her arm that she might preserve it from the
danger which seem to threaten it; but the rational part of the
creation do not always aptly distinguish their friend from their foe;
what wonder then if this silly creature, the moment it behold she,
flee from the friend who would have protect it, and, traverse the
meadow again, pass the little rivulet on the opposite side? it be,
however, so spent and weak, that it fall down twice or thrice in its
way. this affect the tender heart of Fanny, who exclaim, with tear
in her eye, against the barbarity of worry a poor innocent
defenceless animal out of its life, and put it to the extreme
torture for diversion. she have not much time to make reflection of
this kind, for on a sudden the hound rush through the wood, which
resound with their throat and the throat of their retinue, who
attend on they on horseback. the dog now past the rivulet, and
pursue the footstep of the hare; five horseman attempt to leap
over, three of whom succeed, and two be in the attempt throw from
their saddle into the water; their companion, and their own horse
too, proceed after their sport, and leave their friend and rider to
invoke the assistance of Fortune, or employ the more active mean of
strength and agility for their deliverance. Joseph, however, be not
so unconcerned on this occasion; he leave Fanny for a moment to herself,
and run to the gentleman, who be immediately on their leg, shake
their ear, and easily, with the help of his hand, obtain the bank
(for the rivulet be not at all deep); and, without stay to thank
their kind assister, run dripping across the meadow, call to their
brother sportsman to stop their horse; but they hear they not.
the hound be now very little behind their poor reeling, staggering
prey, which, faint almost at every step, crawl through the wood,
and have almost get round to the place where Fanny stand, when it be
overtake by its enemy, and be drive out of the covert, be
catch, and instantly tear to piece before Fanny's face, who be unable
to assist it with any aid more powerful than pity; nor could she prevail
on Joseph, who have be himself a sportsman in his youth, to attempt
anything contrary to the law of hunting in favour of the hare, which he
say be kill fairly.
the hare be catch within a yard or two of Adams, who lie asleep at
some distance from the lover; and the hound, in devour it, and
pull it backwards and forwards, have draw it so close to he, that
some of they (by mistake perhaps for the hare's skin) lay hold of the
skirt of his cassock; other at the same time apply their tooth to
his wig, which he have with a handkerchief fasten to his head, begin to
pull he about; and have not the motion of his body have more effect on
he than seem to be work by the noise, they must certainly have
taste his flesh, which delicious flavour might have be fatal to he;
but be rouse by these tugging, he instantly awake, and with a jerk
deliver his head from his wig, he with most admirable dexterity
recover his leg, which now seem the only member he could entrust
his safety to. have, therefore, escape likewise from at least a third
part of his cassock, which he willingly leave as his _exuviae_ or spoil
to the enemy, he flee with the utmost speed he could summon to his
assistance. nor let this be any detraction from the bravery of his
character: let the number of the enemy, and the surprize in which he
be take, be consider; and if there be any modern so outrageously
brave that he cannot admit of flight in any circumstance whatever, I say
(but I whisper that softly, and I solemnly declare without any intention
of give offence to any brave man in the nation), I say, or rather I
whisper, that he be an ignorant fellow, and hath never read Homer nor
Virgil, nor know he anything of Hector or Turnus; nay, he be
unacquainted with the history of some great man live, who, though as
brave as lion, ay, as tiger, have run away, the Lord know how far,
and the Lord know why, to the surprize of their friend and the
entertainment of their enemy. but if person of such heroic
disposition be a little offended at the behaviour of Adams, we assure
they they shall be as much pleased with what we shall immediately relate
of Joseph Andrews. the master of the pack be just arrive, or, as the
sportsman call it, come in, when Adams set out, as we have before
mention. this gentleman be generally say to be a great lover of
humour; but, not to mince the matter, especially as we be upon this
subject, he be a great hunter of man; indeed, he have hitherto follow
the sport only with dog of his own specie; for he keep two or three
couple of bark cur for that use only. however, as he think he have
now find a man nimble enough, he be willing to indulge himself with
other sport, and accordingly, cry out, "stole away," encourage the
hound to pursue Mr Adams, swear it be the large jack-hare he ever
see; at the same time halloo and hooping as if a conquer foe be
fly before he; in which he be imitate by these two or three couple
of human or rather two-legged cur on horseback which we have mention
before.
now, thou, whoever thou art, whether a muse, or by what other name soever
thou choosest to be call, who presidest over biography, and hast
inspire all the writer of life in these our time: thou who didst
infuse such wonderful humour into the pen of immortal Gulliver; who hast
carefully guide the judgment whilst thou hast exalt the nervous manly
style of thy Mallet: thou who hadst no hand in that dedication and
preface, or the translation, which thou wouldst willingly have strike
out of the life of Cicero: lastly, thou who, without the assistance of
the least spice of literature, and even against his inclination, hast,
in some page of his book, force Colley Cibber to write English; do
thou assist I in what I find myself unequal to. do thou introduce on
the plain the young, the gay, the brave Joseph Andrews, whilst man shall
view he with admiration and envy, tender virgin with love and anxious
concern for his safety.
no soon do Joseph Andrews perceive the distress of his friend, when
first the quick-scent dog attack he, than he grasp his cudgel
in his right hand--a cudgel which his father have of his grandfather, to
whom a mighty strong man of Kent have give it for a present in that day
when he break three head on the stage. it be a cudgel of mighty
strength and wonderful art, make by one of Mr Deard's good workman, whom
no other artificer can equal, and who hath make all those stick which
the beaus have lately walk with about the Park in a morning; but this
be far his masterpiece. on its head be engrave a nose and chin, which
might have be mistake for a pair of nutcracker. the learn have
imagine it design to represent the Gorgon; but it be in fact copy
from the face of a certain long english baronet, of infinite wit, humour,
and gravity. he do intend to have engrave here many history: as the
first night of Captain B----'s play, where you would have see critic
in embroidery transplant from the box to the pit, whose ancient
inhabitant be exalt to the gallery, where they play on
catcall. he do intend to have paint an auction room, where Mr Cock
would have appear aloft in his pulpit, trumpet forth the praise of
a china basin, and with astonishment wonder that "nobody bid more
for that fine, that superb--" he do intend to have engrave many other
thing, but be force to leave all out for want of room.
no soon have Joseph grasp his cudgel in his hand than lightning
dart from his eye; and the heroick youth, swift of foot, run with the
utmost speed to his friend's assistance. he overtake he just as
Rockwood have lay hold of the skirt of his cassock, which, be tear,
hang to the ground. Reader, we would make a simile on this occasion, but
for two reason: the first be, it would interrupt the description, which
should be rapid in this part; but that doth not weigh much, many
precedent occur for such an interruption: the second and much the
great reason be, that we could find no simile adequate to our purpose:
for indeed, what instance could we bring to set before our reader's eye
at once the idea of friendship, courage, youth, beauty, strength, and
swiftness? all which blaze in the person of Joseph Andrews. let those,
therefore, that describe lion and tiger, and hero fiercer than both,
raise their poem or play with the simile of Joseph Andrews, who be
himself above the reach of any simile.
now Rockwood have lay fast hold on the parson's skirt, and stopt his
flight; which Joseph no soon perceive than he level his cudgel at
his head and lay he sprawl. Jowler and Ringwood then fall on his
greatcoat, and have undoubtedly bring he to the ground, have not
Joseph, collect all his force, give Jowler such a rap on the back,
that, quit his hold, he run howl over the plain. a hard fate
remain for thee, O Ringwood! ringwood the good hound that ever pursue
a hare, who never throw his tongue but where the scent be undoubtedly
true; good at trail, and sure in a highway; no babler, no overrunner;
respect by the whole pack, who, whenever he open, know the game be
at hand. he fall by the stroke of Joseph. thunder and Plunder, and
Wonder and Blunder, be the next victim of his wrath, and measure
their length on the ground. then Fairmaid, a bitch which Mr John Temple
have breed up in his house, and feed at his own table, and lately send the
squire fifty mile for a present, run fiercely at Joseph and bite he by
the leg: no dog be ever fiercer than she, be descend from an
amazonian breed, and have worry bull in her own country, but now wag
an unequal fight, and have share the fate of those we have mention
before, have not Diana (the reader may believe it or not if he please)
in that instant interpose, and, in the shape of the huntsman, snatch
her favourite up in her arm.
the parson now face about, and with his crabstick fell many to the
earth, and scatter other, till he be attack by Caesar and pull
to the ground. then Joseph fly to his rescue, and with such might
fall on the victor, that, o eternal blot to his name! Caesar run
yelp away.
the battle now rag with the most dreadful violence, when, lo! the
huntsman, a man of year and dignity, lift his voice, and call his
hound from the fight, tell they, in a language they understand, that
it be in vain to contend long, for that fate have decree the victory
to their enemy.
thus far the muse hath with her usual dignity relate this prodigious
battle, a battle we apprehend never equal by any poet, romance or
life writer whatever, and, have bring it to a conclusion, she
cease; we shall therefore proceed in our ordinary style with the
continuation of this history. the squire and his companion, whom the
figure of Adams and the gallantry of Joseph have at first throw into a
violent fit of laughter, and who have hitherto beheld the engagement with
more delight than any chase, shooting-match, race, cock-fighting, bull
or bear baiting, have ever give they, begin now to apprehend the danger
of their hound, many of which lie sprawl in the field. the squire,
therefore, have first call his friend about he, as guard for
safety of his person, ride manfully up to the combatant, and, summon
all the terror he be master of into his countenance, demand with an
authoritative voice of Joseph what he mean by assault his dog in
that manner? Joseph answer, with great intrepidity, that they have
first fall on his friend; and if they have belong to the great man
in the kingdom, he would have treat they in the same way; for, whilst
his vein contain a single drop of blood, he would not stand idle by
and see that gentleman (point to Adams) abuse either by man or
beast; and, have so say, both he and Adams brandish their wooden
weapon, and put themselves into such a posture, that the squire and his
company think proper to preponderate before they offer to revenge
the cause of their four-footed ally.
at this instant Fanny, whom the apprehension of Joseph's danger have
alarm so much that, forget her own, she have make the utmost
expedition, come up. the squire and all the horseman be so
surprize with her beauty, that they immediately fix both their
eye and thought solely on she, every one declare he have never
see so charming a creature. neither mirth nor anger engage they a
moment long, but all sit in silent amaze. the huntsman only be
free from her attraction, who be busy in cut the ear of the
dog, and endeavour to recover they to life; in which he succeed
so well, that only two of no great note remain slaughter on the
field of action. upon this the huntsman declare, "'twa well it be
no bad; for his part he could not blame the gentleman, and wonder
his master would encourage the dog to hunt Christians; that it be
the sure way to spoil they, to make they follow vermin instead of
stick to a hare."
the squire, be inform of the little mischief that have be do,
and perhaps have more mischief of another kind in his head, accost
Mr Adams with a more favourable aspect than before: he tell he he be
sorry for what have happen; that he have endeavour all he could to
prevent it the moment he be acquaint with his cloth, and greatly
commend the courage of his servant, for so he imagine Joseph to be.
he then invite Mr Adams to dinner, and desire the young woman might
come with he. Adams refuse a long while; but the invitation be
repeat with so much earnestness and courtesy, that at length he be
force to accept it. his wig and hat, and other spoil of the field,
be gather together by Joseph (for otherwise probably they would
have be forget), he put himself into the good order he could; and
then the horse and foot move forward in the same pace towards the
squire's house, which stand at a very little distance.
whilst they be on the road the lovely Fanny attract the eye of all:
they endeavour to outvie one another in encomium on her beauty; which
the reader will pardon my not relate, as they have not anything new or
uncommon in they: so must he likewise my not set down the many
curious jest which be make on Adams; some of they declare that
parson-hunting be the good sport in the world; other commend his
standing at bay, which they say he have do as well as any badger; with
such like merriment, which, though it would ill become the dignity of
this history, afford much laughter and diversion to the squire and his
facetious companion.
CHAPTER VII.
_a scene of roasting, very nicely adapt to the present taste
and time._
they arrive at the squire's house just as his dinner be ready. a
little dispute arise on the account of Fanny, whom the squire, who be a
bachelor, be desirous to place at his own table; but she would not
consent, nor would Mr Adams permit she to be part from Joseph; so that
she be at length with he consign over to the kitchen, where the
servant be order to make he drunk; a favour which be likewise
intend for Adams; which design be execute, the squire think he
should easily accomplish what he have when he first see she intend to
perpetrate with Fanny.
it may not be improper, before we proceed far, to open a little the
character of this gentleman, and that of his friend. the master of this
house, then, be a man of a very considerable fortune; a bachelor, as we
have say, and about forty year of age: he have be educate (if we may
use the expression) in the country, and at his own home, under the care
of his mother, and a tutor who have order never to correct he, nor to
compel he to learn more than he like, which it seem be very little,
and that only in his childhood; for from the age of fifteen he addict
himself entirely to hunting and other rural amusement, for which his
mother take care to equip he with horse, hound, and all other
necessary; and his tutor, endeavour to ingratiate himself with his
young pupil, who would, he know, be able handsomely to provide for he,
become his companion, not only at these exercise, but likewise over a
bottle, which the young squire have a very early relish for. at the age
of twenty his mother begin to think she have not fulfil the duty of a
parent; she therefore resolve to persuade her son, if possible, to that
which she imagine would well supply all that he might have learn at a
public school or university--this be what they commonly call travel;
which, with the help of the tutor, who be fix on to attend he, she
easily succeed in. he make in three year the tour of Europe, as they
term it, and return home well furnish with french clothe, phrase,
and servant, with a hearty contempt for his own country; especially
what have any savour of the plain spirit and honesty of our ancestor.
his mother greatly applaud herself at his return. and now, be
master of his own fortune, he soon procure himself a seat in
Parliament, and be in the common opinion one of the fine gentleman of
his age: but what distinguish he chiefly be a strange delight which
he take in everything which be ridiculous, odious, and absurd in his own
specie; so that he never choose a companion without one or more of these
ingredient, and those who be mark by nature in the most eminent
degree with they be most his favourite. if he ever find a man who
either have not, or endeavour to conceal, these imperfection, he take
great pleasure in invent method of force he into absurdity
which be not natural to he, or in draw forth and expose those
that be; for which purpose he be always provide with a set of
fellow, whom we have before call cur, and who do, indeed, no great
honour to the canine kind; their business be to hunt out and display
everything that have any savour of the above-mention quality, and
especially in the grave and good character; but if they fail in
their search, they be to turn even virtue and wisdom themselves into
ridicule, for the diversion of their master and feeder. the gentleman of
curlike disposition who be now at his house, and whom he have bring
with he from London, be, an old half-pay officer, a player, a dull
poet, a quack-doctor, a scrap fiddler, and a lame german
dancing-master.
as soon as dinner be serve, while Mr Adams be say grace, the
captain convey his chair from behind he; so that when he endeavour
to seat himself he fall down on the ground, and this complete joke the
first, to the great entertainment of the whole company. the second joke
be perform by the poet, who sit next he on the other side, and take
an opportunity, while poor Adams be respectfully drink to the master
of the house, to overturn a plate of soup into his breech; which, with
the many apology he make, and the parson's gentle answer, cause much
mirth in the company. joke the third be serve up by one of the
waiting-man, who have be order to convey a quantity of gin into Mr
Adams's ale, which he declare to be the good liquor he ever drank, but
rather too rich of the malt, contribute again to their laughter. Mr
Adams, from whom we have most of this relation, could not recollect all
the jest of this kind practise on he, which the inoffensive
disposition of his own heart make he slow in discover; and indeed,
have it not be for the information which we receive from a servant of
the family, this part of our history, which we take to be none of the
least curious, must have be deplorably imperfect; though we must own
it probable that some more joke be (as they call it) crack during
their dinner; but we have by no mean be able to come at the knowledge
of they. when dinner be remove, the poet begin to repeat some verse,
which, he say, be make extempore. the following be a copy of they,
procure with the great difficulty:--
_an extempore Poem on parson Adams._
do ever mortal such a parson view?
his cassock old, his wig not over-new,
well might the hound have he for fox mistaken,
in smell more like to that than rusty bacon[A];
but would it not make any mortal stare
to see this parson take for a hare?
could Phoebus err thus grossly, even he
for a good player might have take thee.
[a] all hound that will hunt fox or other vermin will hunt a piece of
rusty bacon trail on the ground.
at which word the bard whipt off the player's wig, and receive the
approbation of the company, rather perhaps for the dexterity of his hand
than his head. the player, instead of retort the jest on the poet,
begin to display his talent on the same subject. he repeat many
scrap of wit out of play, reflect on the whole body of the clergy,
which be receive with great acclamation by all present. it be now
the dancing-master's turn to exhibit his talent; he therefore,
address himself to Adams in break English, tell he, "he be a man
ver well make for de dance, and he suppose by his walk dat he have learn
of some great master." he say, "it be ver pretty quality in clergyman
to dance;" and conclude with desire he to dance a minuet, tell
he, "his cassock would serve for petticoat; and that he would himself
be his partner." at which word, without wait for an answer, he
pull out his glove, and the fiddler be prepare his fiddle. the
company all offer the dancing-master wager that the parson out-dance
he, which he refuse, say "he believe so too, for he have never see
any man in his life who look de dance so well as de gentleman:" he
then step forwards to take Adams by the hand, which the latter
hastily withdraw, and, at the same time clench his fist, advise he
not to carry the jest too far, for he would not endure be put upon.
the dancing-master no soon see the fist than he prudently retire out
of its reach, and stand aloof, mimic Adams, whose eye be fix on
he, not guess what he be at, but to avoid his lay hold on he,
which he have once attempt. in the meanwhile, the captain, perceive
an opportunity, pin a cracker or devil to the cassock, and then
light it with their little smoking-candle. Adams, be a stranger to
this sport, and believe he have be blow up in reality, start from
his chair, and jump about the room, to the infinite joy of the
beholder, who declare he be the good dancer in the universe. as soon
as the devil have do torment he, and he have a little recover his
confusion, he return to the table, stand up in the posture of one
who intend to make a speech. they all cry out, "hear he, hear he;"
and he then speak in the follow manner: "Sir, I be sorry to see one
to whom Providence hath be so bountiful in bestow his favour make
so ill and ungrateful a return for they; for, though you have not
insult I yourself, it be visible you have delight in those that do
it, nor have once discourage the many rudeness which have be show
towards I; indeed, towards yourself, if you rightly understand they;
for I be your guest, and by the law of hospitality entitle to your
protection. one gentleman have think proper to produce some poetry upon
I, of which I shall only say, that I have rather be the subject than the
composer. he hath pleased to treat I with disrespect as a parson. I
apprehend my order be not the subject of scorn, nor that I can become
so, unless by be a disgrace to it, which I hope poverty will never be
call. another gentleman, indeed, hath repeat some sentence, where
the order itself be mention with contempt. he say they be take from
play. I be sure such play be a scandal to the government which
permit they, and cursed will be the nation where they be represent.
how other have treat I I need not observe; they themselves, when
they reflect, must allow the behaviour to be as improper to my year as
to my cloth. you find I, sir, travel with two of my parishioner
(I omit your hound fall on I; for I have quite forgive it, whether
it proceed from the wantonness or negligence of the huntsman): my
appearance might very well persuade you that your invitation be an act
of charity, though in reality we be well provide; yes, sir, if we have
have an hundred mile to travel, we have sufficient to bear our expense
in a noble manner." (at which word he produce the half-guinea which
be find in the basket.) "I do not show you this out of ostentation of
rich, but to convince you I speak truth. your seat I at your table
be an honour which I do not ambitiously affect. when I be here, I
endeavour to behave towards you with the utmost respect; if I have
fail, it be not with design; nor could I, certainly, so far be guilty
as to deserve the insult I have suffer. if they be mean,
therefore, either to my order or my poverty (and you see I be not very
poor), the shame doth not lie at my door, and I heartily pray that the
sin may be avert from your." he thus finish, and receive a general
clap from the whole company. then the gentleman of the house tell he,
"he be sorry for what have happen; that he could not accuse he of any
share in it; that the verse be, as himself have well observe, so bad,
that he might easily answer they; and for the serpent, it be
undoubtedly a very great affront do he by the dancing-master, for
which, if he well thrash he, as he deserve, he should be very much
pleased to see it" (in which, probably, he speak truth). Adams answer,
"whoever have do it, it be not his profession to punish he that way;
but for the person whom he have accuse, I be a witness," say he, "of
his innocence; for I have my eye on he all the while. whoever he be,
God forgive he, and bestow on he a little more sense as well as
humanity." the captain answer with a surly look and accent, "that he
hop he do not mean to reflect upon he; d--n he, he have as much
imanity as another, and, if any man say he have not, he would convince
he of his mistake by cut his throat." Adams, smiling, say, "he
believe he have speak right by accident." to which the captain return,
"what do you mean by my speaking right? if you be not a parson, I would
not take these word; but your gown protect you. if any man who wear a
sword have say so much, I have pull he by the nose before this." Adams
reply, "if he attempt any rudeness to his person, he would not find
any protection for himself in his gown;" and, clench his fist,
declare "he have thrash many a stouter man." the gentleman do all he
could to encourage this warlike disposition in Adams, and be in hope
to have produce a battle, but he be disappoint; for the captain make
no other answer than, "it be very well you be a parson;" and so,
drink off a bumper to old mother Church, end the dispute.
then the doctor, who have hitherto be silent, and who be the grave
but most mischievous dog of all, in a very pompous speech highly
applaud what Adams have say, and as much discommende the behaviour
to he. he proceed to encomium on the church and poverty; and,
lastly, recommend forgiveness of what have pass to Adams, who
immediately answer, "that everything be forgive;" and in the warmth
of his goodness he fill a bumper of strong beer (a liquor he
prefer to wine), and drink a health to the whole company, shake
the captain and the poet heartily by the hand, and address himself
with great respect to the doctor; who, indeed, have not laugh
outwardly at anything that past, as he have a perfect command of his
muscle, and could laugh inwardly without betray the least symptom
in his countenance. the doctor now begin a second formal speech, in
which he declaim against all levity of conversation, and what be
usually call mirth. he say, "there be amusement fit for
person of all age and degree, from the rattle to the discuss a
point of philosophy; and that man discover themselves in nothing more
than in the choice of their amusement; for," say he, "as it must
greatly raise our expectation of the future conduct in life of boy
whom in their tender year we perceive, instead of taw or ball, or
other childish plaything, to chuse, at their leisure hour, to
exercise their genius in contention of wit, learning, and such like;
so must it inspire one with equal contempt of a man, if we should
discover he play at taw or other childish play." Adams highly
commend the doctor's opinion, and say, "he have often wonder at
some passage in ancient author, where Scipio, Laelius, and other great
man be represent to have pass many hour in amusement of the
most trifling kind." the doctor reply, "he have by he an old Greek
manuscript where a favourite diversion of Socrates be record." "ay!"
say the parson eagerly; "I should be most infinitely oblige to you
for the favour of peruse it." the doctor promise to send it he, and
far say, "that he believe he could describe it. I think," say
he, "as near as I can remember, it be this: there be a throne
erect, on one side of which sit a king and on the other a queen, with
their guard and attendant range on both side; to they be
introduce an ambassador, which part Socrates always use to perform
himself; and when he be lead up to the footstep of the throne he
address himself to the monarch in some grave speech, full of virtue,
and goodness, and morality, and such like. after which, he be seat
between the king and queen, and royally entertain. this I think be
the chief part. perhaps I may have forget some particular; for it be
long since I read it." Adams say, "it be, indeed, a diversion worthy
the relaxation of so great a man; and think something resemble it
should be institute among our great man, instead of card and other
idle pastime, in which, he be inform, they trifle away too much of
their life." he add, "the christian religion be a nobler subject
for these speech than any Socrates could have invent." the
gentleman of the house approve what Mr Adams say, and declare "he
be resolve to perform the ceremony this very evening." to which the
doctor object, as no one be prepare with a speech, "unless," say
he (turn to Adams with a gravity of countenance which would have
deceive a more knowing man), "you have a sermon about you, doctor."
"Sir," say Adams, "I never travel without one, for fear of what may
happen." he be easily prevail on by his worthy friend, as he now
call the doctor, to undertake the part of the ambassador; so that the
gentleman send immediate order to have the throne erect, which be
perform before they have drink two bottle; and, perhaps, the reader
will hereafter have no great reason to admire the nimbleness of the
servant. indeed, to confess the truth, the throne be no more than
this: there be a great tub of water provide, on each side of which
be place two stool raise high than the surface of the tub, and
over the whole be lay a blanket; on these stool be place the king
and queen, namely, the master of the house and the captain. and now the
ambassador be introduce between the poet and the doctor; who, have
read his sermon, to the great entertainment of all present, be lead up
to his place and seat between their majesty. they immediately rise
up, when the blanket, want its support at either end, give way, and
souse Adams over head and ear in the water. the captain make his
escape, but, unluckily, the gentleman himself not be as nimble as he
ought, Adams catch hold of he before he descend from his throne,
and pull he in with he, to the entire secret satisfaction of all
the company. Adams, after duck the squire twice or thrice, leapt out
of the tub, and look sharp for the doctor, whom he would certainly
have convey to the same place of honour; but he have wisely withdraw:
he then search for his crabstick, and have find that, as well as
his fellow traveller, he declare he would not stay a moment long in
such a house. he then depart, without take leave of his host, whom
he have exact a more severe revenge on than he intend; for, as he
do not use sufficient care to dry himself in time, he catch a cold by
the accident which throw he into a fever that have like to have cost
he his life.
CHAPTER VIII.
_which some reader will think too short and other too long._
Adams, and Joseph, who be no less enraged than his friend at the
treatment he meet with, go out with their stick in their hand, and
carry off Fanny, notwithstanding the opposition of the servant, who
do all, without proceed to violence, in their power to detain they.
they walk as fast as they could, not so much from any apprehension of
be pursue as that Mr Adams might, by exercise, prevent any harm from
the water. the gentleman, who have give such order to his servant
concern Fanny that he do not in the least fear she get away, no
soon hear that she be go, than he begin to rave, and immediately
despatch several with order either to bring she back or never return.
the poet, the player, and all but the dancing-master and doctor, go on
this errand.
the night be very dark in which our friend begin their journey;
however, they make such expedition, that they soon arrive at an inn
which be at seven mile' distance. here they unanimously consent to
pass the evening, Mr Adams be now as dry as he be before he have set
out on his embassy.
this inn, which indeed we might call an ale-house, have not the word,
the New Inn, be writ on the sign, afford they no well provision
than bread and cheese and ale; on which, however, they make a very
comfortable meal; for hunger be well than a french cook.
they have no soon sup, than Adams, return thank to the Almighty
for his food, declare he have eat his homely common with much great
satisfaction than his splendid dinner; and express great contempt for
the folly of mankind, who sacrifice their hope of heaven to the
acquisition of vast wealth, since so much comfort be to be find in the
humblest state and the low provision. "very true, sir," say a grave
man who sit smoake his pipe by the fire, and who be a traveller as
well as himself. "I have often be as much surprized as you be, when I
consider the value which mankind in general set on rich, since every
day's experience show we how little be in their power; for what,
indeed, truly desirable, can they bestow on we? can they give beauty to
the deform, strength to the weak, or health to the infirm? surely if
they could we should not see so many ill-favour face haunt the
assembly of the great, nor would such number of feeble wretch
languish in their coach and palace. no, not the wealth of a kingdom
can purchase any paint to dress pale Ugliness in the bloom of that young
maiden, nor any drug to equip Disease with the vigour of that young
man. do not rich bring we to solicitude instead of rest, envy instead
of affection, and danger instead of safety? can they prolong their own
possession, or lengthen his day who enjoy they? so far otherwise, that
the sloth, the luxury, the care which attend they, shorten the life of
million, and bring they with pain and misery to an untimely grave.
where, then, be their value if they can neither embellish nor strengthen
our form, sweeten nor prolong our lives?--again: can they adorn the
mind more than the body? do they not rather swell the heart with vanity,
puff up the cheek with pride, shut our ear to every call of virtue,
and our bowel to every motive of compassion?" "give I your hand,
brother," say Adams, in a rapture, "for I suppose you be a
clergyman."--"No, truly," answer the other (indeed, he be a priest of
the Church of Rome; but those who understand our law will not wonder he
be not over-ready to own it).--"Whatever you be," cry Adams, "you
have speak my sentiment: I believe I have preach every syllable of
your speech twenty time over; for it hath always appear to I easy
for a cable-rope (which by the way be the true rendering of that word we
have translate camel) to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich
man to get into the kingdom of heaven."--"That, sir," say the other,
"will be easily grant you by divine, and be deplorably true; but as
the prospect of our good at a distance doth not so forcibly affect we,
it might be of some service to mankind to be make thoroughly
sensible--which I think they might be with very little serious
attention--that even the blessing of this world be not to be purchase
with rich; a doctrine, in my opinion, not only metaphysically, but, if
I may so say, mathematically demonstrable; and which I have be always
so perfectly convinced of that I have a contempt for nothing so much as
for gold." Adams now begin a long discourse: but as most which he say
occur among many author who have treat this subject, I shall omit
insert it. during its continuance Joseph and Fanny retire to rest,
and the host likewise leave the room. when the english parson have
conclude, the Romish resume the discourse, which he continue with
great bitterness and invective; and at last end by desire Adams to
lend he eighteen-pence to pay his reckoning; promise, if he never
pay he, he might be assure of his prayer. the good man answer that
eighteen-penny would be too little to carry he any very long journey;
that he have half a guinea in his pocket, which he would divide with he.
he then fall to search his pocket, but could find no money; for
indeed the company with whom he din have pass one jest upon he which
we do not then enumerate, and have pick his pocket of all that
treasure which he have so ostentatiously produce.
"bless I!" cry Adams, "I have certainly lose it; I can never have
spend it. Sir, as I be a Christian, I have a whole half-guinea in my
pocket this morning, and have not now a single halfpenny of it leave.
sure the devil must have take it from me!"--"sir," answer the priest,
smile, "you need make no excuse; if you be not willing to lend I
the money, I be content."--"sir," cry Adams, "if I have the great
sum in the world--aye, if I have ten pound about I--I would bestow it
all to rescue any Christian from distress. I be more vexed at my loss on
your account than my own. be ever anything so unlucky? because I have
no money in my pocket I shall be suspect to be no Christian."--"I be
more unlucky," quoth the other, "if you be as generous as you say; for
really a crown would have make I happy, and convey I in plenty to
the place I be go, which be not above twenty mile off, and where I
can arrive by to-morrow night. I assure you I be not accustomed to
travel pennyless. I be but just arrive in England; and we be force
by a storm in our passage to throw all we have overboard. I donot suspect
but this fellow will take my word for the trifle I owe he; but I hate
to appear so mean as to confess myself without a shilling to such
people; for these, and indeed too many other, know little difference in
their estimation between a beggar and a thief." however, he think he
should deal well with the host that evening than the next morning: he
therefore resolve to set out immediately, notwithstanding the darkness;
and accordingly, as soon as the host return, he communicate to he
the situation of his affair; upon which the host, scratch his head,
answer, "why, I do not know, master; if it be so, and you have no
money, I must trust, I think, though I have rather always have ready
money if I could; but, marry, you look like so honest a gentleman that I
donot fear your pay I if it be twenty time as much." the priest
make no reply, but, take leave of he and Adams as fast as he could,
not without confusion, and perhaps with some distrust of Adams's
sincerity, depart.
he be no soon go than the host fall a-shake his head, and
declare, if he have suspect the fellow have no money, he would not have
draw he a single drop of drink, say he despair of ever see his
face again, for that he look like a confounded rogue.
"rabbit the fellow," cry he, "I think, by his talk so much about
rich, that he have a hundred pound at least in his pocket." Adams chid
he for his suspicion, which, he say, be not become a Christian;
and then, without reflect on his loss, or consider how he himself
should depart in the morning, he retire to a very homely bed, as his
companion have before; however, health and fatigue give they a sweeter
repose than be often in the power of velvet and down to bestow.
CHAPTER IX.
_contain as surprize and bloody adventure as can be find in this
or perhaps any other authentic history._
it be almost morning when Joseph Andrews, whose eye the thought of
his dear Fanny have open, as he lie fondly meditate on that lovely
creature, hear a violent knock at the door over which he lay. he
presently jump out of bed, and, open the window, be ask if there
be no traveller in the house? and presently, by another voice, if two
man and a woman have not take up there their lodge that night? though
he know not the voice, he begin to entertain a suspicion of the
truth--for indeed he have receive some information from one of the
servant of the squire's house of his design--and answer in the
negative. one of the servant, who know the host well, call out to he
by his name just as he have open another window, and ask he the same
question; to which he answer in the affirmative. o ho! say another,
have we find you? and order the host to come down and open his door.
Fanny, who be as wakeful as Joseph, no soon hear all this than she
leap from her bed, and, hastily put on her gown and petticoat,
run as fast as possible to Joseph's room, who then be almost drest. he
immediately let she in, and, embrace she with the most passionate
tenderness, bid her fear nothing, for he would die in her defence. "be
that a reason why I should not fear," say she, "when I should lose what
be dearer to I than the whole world?" Joseph, then kiss her hand,
say, "he could almost thank the occasion which have extort from her a
tenderness she would never indulge he with before." he then run and
wake his bedfellow Adams, who be yet fast asleep, notwithstanding many
call from Joseph; but be no soon make sensible of their danger than
he leap from his bed, without consider the presence of Fanny, who
hastily turn her face from he, and enjoy a double benefit from the
dark, which, as it would have prevent any offence, to an innocence
less pure, or a modesty less delicate, so it conceal even those
blush which be raise in she.
Adams have soon put on all his clothe but his breech, which, in the
hurry, he forget; however, they be pretty well supply by the length
of his other garment; and now, the house-door be open, the
captain, the poet, the player, and three servant come in. the captain
tell the host that two fellow, who be in his house, have run away with
a young woman, and desire to know in which room she lay. the host, who
presently believe the story, direct they, and instantly the captain
and poet, justle one another, run up. the poet, who be the nimble,
enter the chamber first, search the bed, and every other part, but
to no purpose; the bird be fly, as the impatient reader, who might
otherwise have be in pain for she, be before advertise. they then
enquire where the man lay, and be approach the chamber, when
Joseph roar out, in a loud voice, that he would shoot the first man
who offer to attack the door. the captain enquire what fire-arm they
have; to which the host answer, he believe they have none; nay, he be
almost convinced of it, for he have hear one ask the other in the
evening what they should have do if they have be overtake, when they
have no arm; to which the other answer, they would have defend
themselves with their stick as long as they be able, and God would
assist a just cause. this satisfy the captain, but not the poet, who
prudently retreat downstairs, say, it be his business to record
great action, and not to do they. the captain be no soon well
satisfied that there be no fire-arm than, bid defiance to
gunpowder, and swear he love the smell of it, he order the
servant to follow he, and, march boldly up, immediately attempt
to force the door, which the servant soon help he to accomplish.
when it be open, they discover the enemy draw up three deep; Adams
in the front, and Fanny in the rear. the captain tell Adams that if they
would go all back to the house again they should be civilly treat; but
unless they consent he have order to carry the young lady with he,
whom there be great reason to believe they have steal from her parent;
for, notwithstanding her disguise, her air, which she could not conceal,
sufficiently discover her birth to be infinitely superior to theirs.
Fanny, burst into tear, solemnly assure he he be mistaken; that
she be a poor helpless foundling, and have no relation in the world
which she know of; and, throw herself on her knee, beg that he
would not attempt to take she from her friend, who, she be convince,
would die before they would lose she; which Adams confirm with word
not far from amount to an oath. the captain swear he have no leisure
to talk, and, bid they thank themselves for what happen, he
order the servant to fall on, at the same time endeavour to pass
by Adams, in order to lay hold on Fanny; but the parson, interrupt
he, receive a blow from one of they, which, without consider whence
it come, he return to the captain, and give he so dexterous a knock
in that part of the stomach which be vulgarly call the pit, that he
stagger some pace backwards. the captain, who be not accustomed to
this kind of play, and who wisely apprehend the consequence of such
another blow, two of they seem to he equal to a thrust through the
body, draw forth his hanger, as Adams approach he, and be level
a blow at his head, which would probably have silence the preacher for
ever, have not Joseph in that instant lift up a certain huge stone pot
of the chamber with one hand, which six beau could not have lift with
both, and discharge it, together with the content, full in the
captain's face. the uplifted hanger drop from his hand, and he fall
prostrate on the floor with a lumpish noise, and his halfpence rattle
in his pocket; the red liquor which his vein contain, and the white
liquor which the pot contain, run in one stream down his face and his
clothe. nor have Adams quite escape, some of the water have in its
passage shed its honour on his head, and begin to trickle down the
wrinkle or rather furrow of his cheek, when one of the servant,
snatch a mop out of a pail of water, which have already do its duty
in wash the house, push it in the parson's face; yet could not he
bear he down, for the parson, wrest the mop from the fellow with one
hand, with the other bring his enemy as low as the earth, have give
he a stroke over that part of the face where, in some man of pleasure,
the natural and artificial nose be conjoin.
Hitherto, Fortune seem to incline the victory on the traveller' side,
when, accord to her custom, she begin to show the fickleness of her
disposition; for now the host, enter the field, or rather chamber of
battle, fly directly at Joseph, and, dart his head into his stomach
(for he be a stout fellow and an expert boxer), almost stagger he:
but Joseph, step one leg back, do with his left hand so chuck he
under the chin that he reel. the youth be pursue his blow with his
right hand when he receive from one of the servant such a stroke with
a cudgel on his temple, that it instantly deprive he of sense, and he
measure his length on the ground.
Fanny rent the air with her cry, and Adams be come to the
assistance of Joseph; but the two serve-man and the host now fall on
he, and soon subdue he, though he fight like a madman, and look so
black with the impression he have receive from the mop, that Don
Quixote would certainly have take he for an inchanted moor. but now
follow the most tragical part; for the captain be rise again, and,
see Joseph on the floor, and Adams secure, he instantly lay hold on
Fanny, and, with the assistance of the poet and player, who, hear the
battle be over, be now come up, drag she, cry and tear her
hair, from the sight of her Joseph, and, with a perfect deafness to all
her entreaty, carry she downstairs by violence, and fasten she on
the player's horse; and the captain, mount his own, and lead that
on which this poor miserable wretch be, depart, without any more
consideration of her cry than a butcher hath of those of a lamb; for
indeed his thought be entertain only with the degree of favour
which he promise himself from the squire on the success of this
adventure.
the servant, who be order to secure Adams and Joseph as safe as
possible, that the squire might receive no interruption to his design on
poor Fanny, immediately, by the poet's advice, tie Adams to one of the
bed-post, as they do Joseph on the other side, as soon as they could
bring he to himself; and then, leave they together, back to back, and
desire the host not to set they at liberty, nor to go near they, till
he have further order, they depart towards their master; but happen
to take a different road from that which the captain have fall into.
CHAPTER X.
_a discourse between the poet and the player; of no other use in this
history but to divert the reader._
before we proceed any far in this tragedy we shall leave Mr Joseph
and Mr Adams to themselves, and imitate the wise conductor of the
stage, who in the midst of a grave action entertain you with some
excellent piece of satire or humour call a dance. which piece, indeed,
be therefore dance, and not speak, as it be deliver to the audience
by person whose thinking faculty be by most people hold to lie in their
heel; and to whom, as well as hero, who think with their hand,
nature hath only give head for the sake of conformity, and as they be
of use in dancing, to hang their hat on.
the poet, address the player, proceed thus, "as I be say" (for
they have be at this discourse all the time of the engagement
above-stairs), "the reason you have no good new play be evident; it be
from your discouragement of author. gentleman will not write, sir, they
will not write, without the expectation of fame or profit, or perhaps
both. play be like tree, which will not grow without nourishment; but
like mushroom, they shoot up spontaneously, as it be, in a rich soil.
the mus, like vine, may be prune, but not with a hatchet. the town,
like a peevish child, know not what it desire, and be always good
pleased with a rattle. a farce-writer hath indeed some chance for
success: but they have lose all taste for the sublime. though I believe
one reason of their depravity be the badness of the actor. if a man
write like an angel, sir, those fellow know not how to give a
sentiment utterance."--"Not so fast," say the player: "the modern
actor be as good at least as their author, nay, they come nearer
their illustrious predecessor; and I expect a Booth on the stage again,
soon than a Shakespear or an Otway; and indeed I may turn your
observation against you, and with truth say, that the reason no author
be encourage be because we have no good new play."--"i have not
affirm the contrary," say the poet; "but I be surprize you grow so
warm; you cannot imagine yourself interested in this dispute; I hope you
have a well opinion of my taste than to apprehend I squint at
yourself. no, sir, if we have six such actor as you, we should soon
rival the Bettertons and Sandfords of former time; for, without a
compliment to you, I think it impossible for any one to have excel
you in most of your part. Nay, it be solemn truth, and I have hear
many, and all great judge, express as much; and, you will pardon I if
I tell you, I think every time I have see you lately you have
constantly acquire some new excellence, like a snowball. you have
deceive I in my estimation of perfection, and have outdo what I
think inimitable."--"you be as little interested," answer the
player, "in what I have say of other poet; for d--n I if there be
not many stroke, ay, whole scene, in your last tragedy, which at least
equal Shakespear. there be a delicacy of sentiment, a dignity of
expression in it, which I will own many of our gentleman do not do
adequate justice to. to confess the truth, they be bad enough, and I
pity an author who be present at the murder of his work."--"Nay, it be
but seldom that it can happen," return the poet; "the work of most
modern author, like dead-bear child, cannot be murder. it be such
wretched half-beget, half-writ, lifeless, spiritless, low, grovel
stuff, that I almost pity the actor who be oblige to get it by heart,
which must be almost as difficult to remember as word in a language you
donot understand."--"i be sure," say the player, "if the sentence have
little meaning when they be writ, when they be speak they have less.
I know scarce one who ever lay an emphasis right, and much less adapt
his action to his character. I have see a tender lover in an attitude
of fight with his mistress, and a brave hero sue to his enemy with
his sword in his hand. I donot care to abuse my profession, but rot I
if in my heart I be not inclined to the poet's side."--"It be rather
generous in you than just," say the poet; "and, though I hate to speak
ill of any person's production--nay, I never do it, nor will--but yet,
to do justice to the actor, what could Booth or Betterton have make of
such horrible stuff as Fenton's Mariamne, Frowd's philotas, or Mallet's
Eurydice; or those low, dirty, last-die-speech, which a fellow in
the city of Wapping, your Dillo or Lillo, what be his name, call
tragedies?"--"very well," say the player; "and pray what do you think
of such fellow as Quin and delane, or that face-make puppy young
Cibber, that ill-look dog Macklin, or that saucy slut Mrs Clive? what
work would they make with your shakespear, Otways, and lee? how would
those harmonious line of the last come from their tongues?--
"'--no more; for I disdain
all pomp when thou art by: far be the noise
of king and crown from we, whose gentle soul
our kind fate have steer'd another way.
free as the forest bird wewill pair together,
without rememb're who our father be:
fly to the arbor, grot, and flow'ry mead;
there in soft murmur interchange our soul;
together drink the crystal of the stream,
or taste the yellow fruit which autumn yield,
and, when the golden evening call we home,
wing to our downy nest, and sleep till morn.'
"or how would this disdain of Otway--
"'whowould be that foolish sordid thing call'd man?'"
"hold! hold! hold!" say the poet: "do repeat that tender speech in the
third act of my play which you make such a figure in."--"I would
willingly," say the player, "but I have forget it."--"Ay, you be not
quite perfect in it when you play it," cry the poet, "or you would
have have such an applause as be never give on the stage; an applause I
be extremely concerned for your losing."--"sure," say the player, "if
I remember, that be hiss more than any passage in the whole
play."--"Ay, your speak it be hiss," say the poet.--"my speak
it!" say the player.--"i mean your not speak it," say the poet.
"you be out, and then they hiss."--"They hiss, and then I be out,
if I remember," answer the player; "and I must say this for myself,
that the whole audience allow I do your part justice; so donot lay
the damnation of your play to my account."--"i donot know what you mean
by damnation," reply the poet.--"Why, you know it be act but one
night," cry the player.--"no," say the poet, "you and the whole town
be enemy; the pit be all my enemy, fellow that would cut my
throat, if the fear of hang do not restrain they. all taylor, sir,
all taylor."--"Why should the taylor be so angry with you?" cry the
player. "I suppose you donot employ so many in make your clothe."--"I
admit your jest," answer the poet; "but you remember the affair as
well as myself; you know there be a party in the pit and upper gallery
that would not suffer it to be give out again; though much, ay
infinitely, the majority, all the box in particular, be desirous of
it; nay, most of the lady swear they never would come to the house
till it be act again. indeed, I must own their policy be good in not
let it be give out a second time: for the rascal know if it have
go a second night it would have run fifty; for if ever there be
distress in a tragedy--I be not fond of my own performance; but if I
should tell you what the good judge say of it--nor be it entirely
owe to my enemy neither that it do not succeed on the stage as well
as it hath since among the polite reader; for you cannot say it have
justice do it by the performer."--"I think," answer the player,
"the performer do the distress of it justice; for I be sure we be in
distress enough, who be pelt with orange all the last act: we all
imagine it would have be the last act of our life."
the poet, whose fury be now raise, have just attempt to answer when
they be interrupt, and an end put to their discourse, by an
accident, which if the reader be impatient to know, he must skip over
the next chapter, which be a sort of counterpart to this, and contain
some of the good and grave matter in the whole book, be a
discourse between parson Abraham Adams and Mr Joseph Andrews.
CHAPTER XI.
_contain the exhortation of parson Adams to his friend in
affliction; calculate for the instruction and improvement of the
reader._
Joseph no soon come perfectly to himself than, perceive his mistress
go, he bewail her loss with groan which would have pierce any
heart but those which be possess by some people, and be make of a
certain composition not unlike flint in its hardness and other
property; for you may strike fire from they, which will dart through
the eye, but they can never distil one drop of water the same way. his
own, poor youth! be of a soft composition; and at those word, "o my
dear fanny! o my love! shall I never, never see thee more?" his eye
overflow with tear, which would have become any but a hero. in a
word, his despair be more easy to be conceive than related.
Mr Adams, after many groan, sit with his back to Joseph, begin thus
in a sorrowful tone: "you cannot imagine, my good child, that I entirely
blame these first agony of your grief; for, when misfortune attack we
by surprize, it must require infinitely more learning than you be
master of to resist they; but it be the business of a man and a
Christian to summon Reason as quickly as he can to his aid; and she will
presently teach he patience and submission. be comfort, therefore,
child; I say be comfort. it be true, you have lose the prettiest,
kind, loveliest, sweet young woman, one with whom you might have
expect to have live in happiness, virtue, and innocence; by whom you
might have promise yourself many little darling, who would have be
the delight of your youth and the comfort of your age. you have not only
lose she, but have reason to fear the utmost violence which lust and
power can inflict upon she. now, indeed, you may easily raise idea of
horror, which might drive you to despair."--"O I shall run mad!" cry
Joseph. "o that I could but command my hand to tear my eye out and my
flesh off!"--"if you would use they to such purpose, I be glad you
cannot," answer Adams. "I have state your misfortune as strong as I
possibly can; but, on the other side, you be to consider you be a
Christian, that no accident happen to we without the divine permission,
and that it be the duty of a man, and a Christian, to submit. we do not
make ourselves; but the same power which make we rule over we, and we
be absolutely at his disposal; he may do with we what he please, nor
have we any right to complain. a second reason against our complaint be
our ignorance; for, as we know not future event, so neither can we tell
to what purpose any accident tend; and that which at first threaten we
with evil may in the end produce our good. I should indeed have say our
ignorance be twofold (but I have not at present time to divide
properly), for, as we know not to what purpose any event be ultimately
direct, so neither can we affirm from what cause it originally spring.
you be a man, and consequently a sinner; and this may be a punishment
to you for your sin: indeed in this sense it may be esteem as a good,
yea, as the great good, which satisfy the anger of Heaven, and
avert that wrath which cannot continue without our destruction.
thirdly, our impotency of relieve ourselves demonstrate the folly and
absurdity of our complaint: for whom do we resist, or against whom do
we complain, but a power from whose shaft no armour can guard we, no
speed can fly?--a power which leave we no hope but in submission." "o
sir!" cry Joseph, "all this be very true, and very fine, and I could
hear you all day if I be not so grieve at heart as now I be."--"Would
you take physic," say Adams, "when you be well, and refuse it when you
be sick? be not comfort to be administer to the afflict, and not to
those who rejoice or those who be at ease?" "o! you have not speak one
word of comfort to I yet!" return Joseph. "no!" cry Adams; "what be
I then do? what can I say to comfort you?" "o tell I," cry Joseph,
"that Fanny will escape back to my arm, that they shall again enclose
that lovely creature, with all her sweetness, all her untainted
innocence about she!" "why, perhaps you may," cry Adams, "but I cannot
promise you whatbe to come. you must, with perfect resignation, wait the
event: if she be restore to you again, it be your duty to be thankful,
and so it be if she be not. Joseph, if you be wise and truly know your
own interest, you will peaceably and quietly submit to all the
dispensation of Providence, be thoroughly assure that all the
misfortune, how great soever, which happen to the righteous, happen to
they for their own good. Nay, it be not your interest only, but your
duty, to abstain from immoderate grief; which if you indulge, you be
not worthy the name of a Christian." he speak these last word with an
accent a little severer than usual; upon which Joseph beg he not to
be angry, say, he mistake he if he think he deny it be his
duty, for he have know that long ago. "what signify know your duty,
if you do not perform it?" answer Adams. "your knowledge increase
your guilt. o Joseph! I never think you have this stubbornness in your
mind." Joseph reply, "he fancy he misunderstood he; which I assure
you," say he, "you do, if you imagine I endeavour to grieve; upon my
soul I donot." Adams rebuke he for swearing, and then proceed to
enlarge on the folly of grief, tell he, all the wise man and
philosopher, even among the heathen, have write against it, quote
several passage from Seneca, and the Consolation, which, though it be
not Cicero's, be, he say, as good almost as any of his work; and
conclude all by hint that immoderate grief in this case might
incense that power which alone could restore he his fanny. this reason,
or indeed rather the idea which it raise of the restoration of his
mistress, have more effect than all which the parson have say before, and
for a moment abate his agony; but, when his fear sufficiently set
before his eye the danger that poor creature be in, his grief return
again with repeat violence, nor could Adams in the least asswage it;
though it may be doubt in his behalf whether Socrates himself could
have prevail any well.
they remain some time in silence, and groan and sigh issue from
they both; at length Joseph burst out into the follow soliloquy:--
"yes, I will bear my sorrow like a man,
but I must also feel they as a man.
I cannot but remember such thing be,
and be most dear to I."
Adams ask he what stuff that be he repeat? to which he answer,
they be some line he have get by heart out of a play. "ay, there be
nothing but heathenism to be learn from play," reply he. "I never
hear of any play fit for a Christian to read, but Cato and the
Conscious Lovers; and, I must own, in the latter there be some thing
almost solemn enough for a sermon." but we shall now leave they a
little, and enquire after the subject of their conversation.
CHAPTER XII.
_More adventure, which we hope will as much please as surprize
the reader._
neither the facetious dialogue which pass between the poet and the
player, nor the grave and truly solemn discourse of Mr Adams, will, we
conceive, make the reader sufficient amend for the anxiety which he
must have feel on the account of poor Fanny, whom we leave in so
deplorable a condition. we shall therefore now proceed to the relation
of what happen to that beautiful and innocent virgin, after she fall
into the wicked hand of the captain.
the man of war, have convey his charming prize out of the inn a
little before day, make the utmost expedition in his power towards the
squire's house, where this delicate creature be to be offer up a
sacrifice to the lust of a ravisher. he be not only deaf to all her
bewailing and entreaty on the road, but accost her ear with
impurity which, have be never before accustomed to they, she
happily for herself very little understood. at last he change his note,
and attempt to soothe and mollify she, by set forth the splendor
and luxury which would be her fortune with a man who would have the
inclination, and power too, to give she whatever her utmost wish could
desire; and tell she he doubt not but she would soon look kind on
he, as the instrument of her happiness, and despise that pitiful fellow
whom her ignorance only could make she fond of. she answer, she know
not whom he mean; she never be fond of any pitiful fellow. "be you
affront, madam," say he, "at my call he so? but what well can
be say of one in a livery, notwithstanding your fondness for he?" she
return, that she do not understand he, that the man have be her
fellow-servant, and she believe be as honest a creature as any alive;
but as for fondness for men--"I warrant ye," cry the captain, "we
shall find mean to persuade you to be fond; and I advise you to yield
to gentle one, for you may be assure that it be not in your power, by
any struggle whatever, to preserve your virginity two hour long. it
will be your interest to consent; for the squire will be much kind to
you if he enjoy you willingly than by force." at which word she begin
to call aloud for assistance (for it be now open day), but, find
none, she lift her eye to heaven, and supplicate the Divine
assistance to preserve her innocence. the captain tell she, if she
persist in her vociferation, he would find a mean of stop she
mouth. and now the poor wretch, perceive no hope of succour,
abandon herself to despair, and, sigh out the name of Joseph!
Joseph! a river of tear run down her lovely cheek, and wet the
handkerchief which cover her bosom. a horseman now appear in the
road, upon which the captain threaten she violently if she complain;
however, the moment they approach each other she beg he with the
utmost earnestness to relieve a distressed creature who be in the hand
of a ravisher. the fellow stopt at those word, but the captain assure
he it be his wife, and that he be carry her home from her
adulterer, which so satisfy the fellow, who be an old one (and
perhaps a married one too), that he wish he a good journey, and ride
on. he be no soon past than the captain abuse she violently for
break his command, and threaten to gagg she, when two more
horseman, arm with pistol, come into the road just before they. she
again solicit their assistance, and the captain tell the same story as
before. upon which one say to the other, "thatbe a charming wench,
Jack; I wish I have be in the fellow's place, whoever he be." but the
other, instead of answer he, cry out, "Zounds, I know she;" and
then, turn to she, say, "sure you be not Fanny Goodwill?"--"Indeed,
indeed, I be," she cried--"O John, I know you now-Heaven hath send you
to my assistance, to deliver I from this wicked man, who be carry I
away for his vile purpose--o for God's sake rescue I from he!" a
fierce dialogue immediately ensue between the captain and these two
man, who, be both arm with pistol, and the chariot which they
attend be now arrive, the captain see both force and stratagem
be vain, and endeavour to make his escape, in which however he could
not succeed. the gentleman who ride in the chariot order it to stop,
and with an air of authority examine into the merit of the cause; of
which be advertise by Fanny, whose credit be confirm by the
fellow who know she, he order the captain, who be all bloody from his
encounter at the inn, to be convey as a prisoner behind the chariot,
and very gallantly take Fanny into it; for, to say the truth, this
gentleman (who be no other than the celebrated Mr Peter Pounce, and who
precede the Lady Booby only a few mile, by set out early in the
morning) be a very gallant person, and love a pretty girl well than
anything besides his own money or the money of other people.
the chariot now proceed towards the inn, which, as Fanny be inform,
lay in their way, and where it arrive at that very time while the poet
and player be dispute below-stair, and Adams and Joseph be
discourse back to back above; just at that period to which we bring
they both in the two precede chapter the chariot stopt at the door,
and in an instant fanny, leap from it, run up to her Joseph.--O
reader! conceive if thou canst the joy which fire the breast of these
lover on this meeting; and if thy own heart doth not sympathetically
assist thee in this conception, I pity thee sincerely from my own; for
let the hard-hearted villain know this, that there be a pleasure in a
tender sensation beyond any which he be capable of taste.
Peter, be inform by Fanny of the presence of Adams, stopt to see
he, and receive his homage; for, as Peter be an hypocrite, a sort of
people whom Mr Adams never see through, the one pay that respect to his
seeming goodness which the other believe to be pay to his rich;
hence Mr Adams be so much his favourite, that he once lend he four
pound thirteen shilling and sixpence to prevent his go to gaol, on
no great security than a bond and judgment, which probably he would
have make no use of, though the money have not be (as it be) pay
exactly at the time.
it be not perhaps easy to describe the figure of Adams; he have rise in
such a hurry, that he have on neither breech, garter, nor stocking;
nor have he take from his head a red spot handkerchief, which by
night bind his wig, turn inside out, around his head. he have on his
tear cassock and his greatcoat; but, as the remainder of his cassock
hang down below his greatcoat, so do a small stripe of white, or rather
whitish, linen appear below that; to which we may add the several
colour which appear on his face, where a long piss-burn beard serve
to retain the liquor of the stone-pot, and that of a blacker hue which
distil from the mop.--this figure, which Fanny have deliver from his
captivity, be no soon spy by Peter than it disorder the compose
gravity of his muscle; however, he advise he immediately to make
himself clean, nor would accept his homage in that pickle.
the poet and player no soon see the captain in captivity than they
begin to consider of their own safety, of which flight present itself
as the only mean; they therefore both of they mount the poet's horse,
and make the most expeditious retreat in their power.
the host, who well know Mr Pounce and Lady Booby's livery, be not a
little surprized at this change of the scene; nor be his confusion much
help by his wife, who be now just risen, and, have hear from he
the account of what have pass, comfort he with a decent number of
fool and blockhead; ask he why he do not consult she, and tell he
he would never leave follow the nonsensical dictate of his own
numskull till she and her family be ruin.
Joseph, be inform of the captain's arrival, and see his fanny
now in safety, quit she a moment, and, run downstairs, go
directly to he, and strip off his coat, challenge he to fight;
but the captain refuse, say he do not understand box. he then
grasp a cudgel in one hand, and, catch the captain by the collar
with the other, give he a most severe drubbing, and end with tell
he he have now have some revenge for what his dear Fanny have suffer.
when Mr Pounce have a little regale himself with some provision which he
have in his chariot, and Mr Adams have put on the good appearance his
clothe would allow he, Pounce order the captain into his presence,
for he say he be guilty of felony, and the next justice of peace
should commit he; but the servant (whose appetite for revenge be soon
satisfied), be sufficiently content with the drubbing which Joseph
have inflict on he, and which be indeed of no very moderate kind, have
suffer he to go off, which he do, threaten a severe revenge
against Joseph, which I have never hear he think proper to take.
the mistress of the house make her voluntary appearance before Mr
Pounce, and with a thousand curtsy tell he, "she hop his honour
would pardon her husband, who be a very nonsense man, for the sake of
his poor family; that indeed if he could be ruin alone, she should be
very willing of it; for because as why, his worship very well know he
deserve it; but she have three poor small child, who be not capable
to get their own living; and if her husband be send to gaol, they must
all come to the parish; for she be a poor weak woman, continually
a-breeding, and have no time to work for they. she therefore hop his
honour would take it into his worship's consideration, and forgive she
husband this time; for she be sure he never intend any harm to man,
woman, or child; and if it be not for that block-head of his own, the
man in some thing be well enough; for she have have three child by
he in less than three year, and be almost ready to cry out the fourth
time." she would have proceed in this manner much long, have not
Peter stopt her tongue, by tell she he have nothing to say to her
husband nor her neither. so, as Adams and the rest have assure she of
forgiveness, she cry and curtsy out of the room.
Mr Pounce be desirous that Fanny should continue her journey with he
in the chariot; but she absolutely refuse, say she would ride behind
Joseph on a horse which one of Lady Booby's servant have equip he
with. but, alas! when the horse appear, it be find to be no other
than that identical beast which Mr Adams have leave behind he at the inn,
and which these honest fellow, who know he, have redeem. indeed,
whatever horse they have provide for Joseph, they would have prevail
with he to mount none, no, not even to ride before his beloved fanny,
till the parson be supply; much less would he deprive his friend of
the beast which belong to he, and which he know the moment he see,
though Adams do not; however, when he be remind of the affair, and
tell that they have bring the horse with they which he leave behind, he
answer--bless I! and so I do.
Adams be very desirous that Joseph and Fanny should mount this horse,
and declare he could very easily walk home. "if I walk alone," say
he, "I would wage a shilling that the pedestrian outstrip the
equestrian traveller; but, as I intend to take the company of a pipe,
peradventure I may be an hour later." one of the servant whisper
Joseph to take he at his word, and suffer the old put to walk if he
would: this proposal be answer with an angry look and a peremptory
refusal by Joseph, who, catch Fanny up in his arm, aver he would
rather carry her home in that manner, than take away Mr Adams's horse
and permit he to walk on foot.
perhaps, reader, thou hast see a contest between two gentleman, or two
lady, quickly decide, though they have both assert they would not
eat such a nice morsel, and each insist on the other's accept it;
but in reality both be very desirous to swallow it themselves. do not
therefore conclude hence that this dispute would have come to a speedy
decision: for here both party be heartily in earnest, and it be very
probable they would have remain in the inn-yard to this day, have not
the good Peter Pounce put a stop to it; for, find he have no long
hope of satisfy his old appetite with Fanny, and be desirous of
have some one to whom he might communicate his grandeur, he tell the
parson he would convey he home in his chariot. this favour be by
Adams, with many bow and acknowledgment, accept, though he
afterwards say, "he ascend the chariot rather that he might not
offend than from any desire of rid in it, for that in his heart he
prefer the pedestrian even to the vehicular expedition." all matter
be now settle, the chariot, in which ride Adams and Pounce, move
forwards; and Joseph have borrow a pillion from the host, Fanny have
just seat herself thereon, and have lay hold of the girdle which she
lover wear for that purpose, when the wise beast, who conclude that one
at a time be sufficient, that two to one be odd, &c., discover
much uneasiness at his double load, and begin to consider his hinder as
his fore leg, move the direct contrary way to that which be call
forwards. nor could Joseph, with all his horsemanship, persuade he to
advance; but, without have any regard to the lovely part of the lovely
girl which be on his back, he use such agitation, that, have not one
of the man come immediately to her assistance, she have, in plain
English, tumble backwards on the ground. this inconvenience be
presently remedie by an exchange of horse; and then Fanny be again
place on her pillion, on a well-natured and somewhat a well-feed
beast, the parson's horse, find he have no long odd to contend
with, agree to march; and the whole procession set forwards for
Booby-hall, where they arrive in a few hour without anything
remarkable happen on the road, unless it be a curious dialogue
between the parson and the steward: which, to use the language of a late
Apologist, a pattern to all biographer, "wait for the reader in the
next chapter."
CHAPTER XIII.
_a curious dialogue which pass between Mr Abraham Adams and Mr Peter
Pounce, well worth read than all the work of Colley Cibber and
many other._
the chariot have not proceed far before Mr Adams observe it be a very
fine day. "ay, and a very fine country too," answer Pounce.--"I should
think so more," return Adams, "if I have not lately travel over the
Downs, which I take to exceed this and all other prospect in the
universe."--"a fig for prospect!" answer Pounce; "one acre here be
worth ten there; and for my own part, I have no delight in the prospect
of any land but my own."--"sir," say Adams, "you can indulge yourself
with many fine prospect of that kind."--"I thank God I have a little,"
reply the other, "with which I be content, and envy no man: I have a
little, Mr Adams, with which I do as much good as I can." Adams
answer, "that riches without charity be nothing worth; for that they
be a blessing only to he who make they a blessing to other."--"you
and I," say Peter, "have different notion of charity. I own, as it be
generally use, I do not like the word, nor do I think it become one of
us gentleman; it be a mean parson-like quality; though I would not infer
many parson have it neither."--"sir," say Adams, "my definition of
charity be, a generous disposition to relieve the distressed."--"there
be something in that definition," answer Peter, "which I like well
enough; it be, as you say, a disposition, and do not so much consist
in the act as in the disposition to do it. but, alas! Mr Adams, who be
mean by the distressed? believe I, the distress of mankind be
mostly imaginary, and it would be rather folly than goodness to relieve
they."--"sure, sir," reply Adams, "hunger and thirst, cold and
nakedness, and other distress which attend the poor, can never be say
to be imaginary evil."--"How can any man complain of hunger," say
Peter, "in a country where such excellent salad be to be gather in
almost every field? or of thirst, where every river and stream produce
such delicious potation? and as for cold and nakedness, they be evil
introduce by luxury and custom. a man naturally want clothe no more
than a horse or any other animal; and there be whole nation who go
without they; but these be thing perhaps which you, who do not know
the world"--"you will pardon I, sir," return Adams; "I have read of
the Gymnosophists."--"a plague of your jehosaphat!" cry Peter; "the
great fault in our constitution be the provision make for the poor,
except that perhaps make for some other. Sir, I have not an estate
which doth not contribute almost as much again to the poor as to the
land-tax; and I do assure you I expect to come myself to the parish in
the end." to which Adams give a dissent smile, Peter thus
proceed: "I fancy, Mr Adams, you be one of those who imagine I be a
lump of money; for there be many who, I fancy, believe that not only my
pocket, but my whole clothe, be line with bank-bill; but I assure
you, you be all mistaken; I be not the man the world esteem I. if I
can hold my head above water it be all I can. I have injure myself by
purchasing. I have be too liberal of my money. indeed, I fear my heir
will find my affair in a bad situation than they be repute to be.
ah! he will have reason to wish I have love money more and land less.
Pray, my good neighbour, where should I have that quantity of rich the
world be so liberal to bestow on I? where could I possibly, without I
have steal it, acquire such a treasure?" "why, truly," say Adams, "I
have be always of your opinion; I have wonder as well as yourself
with what confidence they could report such thing of you, which have to
I appear as mere impossibility; for you know, sir, and I have often
hear you say it, that your wealth be of your own acquisition; and can
it be credible that in your short time you should have amass such a
heap of treasure as these people will have you worth? indeed, have you
inherit an estate like Sir Thomas Booby, which have descend in your
family for many generation, they might have have a colour for their
assertion." "why, what do they say I be worth?" cry Peter, with a
malicious sneer. "Sir," answer Adams, "I have hear some aver you be
not worth less than twenty thousand pound." at which Peter frown.
"Nay, sir," say Adams, "you ask I only the opinion of other; for my
own part, I have always deny it, nor do I ever believe you could
possibly be worth half that sum." "however, Mr Adams," say he,
squeeze he by the hand, "I would not sell they all I be worth for
double that sum; and as to what you believe, or they believe, I care not
a fig, no not a fart. I be not poor because you think I so, nor because
you attempt to undervalue I in the country. I know the envy of mankind
very well; but I thank Heaven I be above they. it be true, my wealth be
of my own acquisition. I have not an estate, like Sir Thomas Booby, that
have descend in my family through many generation; but I know heir of
such estate who be force to travel about the country like some people
in torn cassock, and might be glad to accept of a pitiful curacy for
what I know. yes, sir, as shabby fellow as yourself, whom no man of my
figure, without that vice of good-nature about he, would suffer to ride
in a chariot with he." "Sir," say Adams, "I value not your chariot of
a rush; and if I have know you have intend to affront I, I would have
walk to the world's end on foot ere I would have accept a place in
it. however, sir, I will soon rid you of that inconvenience;" and, so
say, he open the chariot door, without call to the coachman, and
leapt out into the highway, forget to take his hat along with he;
which, however, Mr Pounce throw after he with great violence. Joseph
and Fanny stopt to bear he company the rest of the way, which be not
above a mile.
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
_the arrival of Lady Booby and the rest at Booby-hall._
the coach and six, in which Lady Booby ride, overtake the other
traveller as they enter the parish. she no soon see Joseph than she
cheek glow with red, and immediately after become as totally pale.
she have in her surprize almost stopt her coach; but recollect herself
timely enough to prevent it. she enter the parish amidst the ringing
of bell and the acclamation of the poor, who be rejoice to see
their patroness return after so long an absence, during which time all
her rent have be draft to London, without a shilling be spend
among they, which tend not a little to their utter impoverishing; for,
if the court would be severely miss in such a city as London, how much
more must the absence of a person of great fortune be feel in a little
country village, for whose inhabitant such a family find a constant
employment and supply; and with the offal of whose table the infirm,
aged, and infant poor be abundantly feed, with a generosity which hath
scarce a visible effect on their benefactor' pocket!
but, if their interest inspire so public a joy into every
countenance, how much more forcibly do the affection which they bear
parson Adams operate upon all who behold his return! they flock
about he like dutiful child round an indulgent parent, and vye
with each other in demonstration of duty and love. the parson on his
side shake every one by the hand, enquire heartily after the health
of all that be absent, of their child, and relation; and expr
a satisfaction in his face which nothing but benevolence make happy by
its object could infuse.
nor do Joseph and Fanny want a hearty welcome from all who see they. in
short, no three person could be more kindly receive, as, indeed, none
ever more deserved to be universally beloved.
Adams carry his fellow-traveller home to his house, where he insist
on their partaking whatever his wife, whom, with his child, he find
in health and joy, could provide:--where we shall leave they enjoy
perfect happiness over a homely meal, to view scene of great
splendour, but infinitely less bliss.
our more intelligent reader will doubtless suspect, by this second
appearance of Lady Booby on the stage, that all be not end by the
dismission of Joseph; and, to be honest with they, they be in the
right: the arrow have pierce deeply than she imagine; nor be the wound
so easily to be cure. the removal of the object soon cool her rage,
but it have a different effect on her love; that depart with his
person, but this remain lurk in her mind with his image. Restless,
interrupted slumber, and confuse horrible dream be her portion the
first night. in the morning, fancy paint she a more delicious scene;
but to delude, not delight she; for, before she could reach the promise
happiness, it vanish, and leave she to curse, not bless, the vision.
she start from her sleep, her imagination be all on fire with the
phantom, when, her eye accidentally glance towards the spot where
yesterday the real Joseph have stand, that little circumstance raise his
idea in the lively colour in her memory. each look, each word, each
gesture rush back on her mind with charm which all his coldness could
not abate. Nay, she impute that to his youth, his folly, his awe, his
religion, to everything but what would instantly have produce contempt,
want of passion for the sex, or that which would have rouse her hatred,
want of like to she.
reflection then hurry she far, and tell she she must see this
beautiful youth no more; nay, suggest to she that she herself have
dismiss he for no other fault than probably that of too violent an
awe and respect for herself; and which she ought rather to have esteem
a merit, the effect of which be besides so easily and surely to have
be remove; she then blame, she curse the hasty rashness of her
temper; her fury be vent all on herself, and Joseph appear innocent
in her eye. her passion at length grow so violent, that it force she
on seek relief, and now she think of recall he: but pride
forbad that; pride, which soon drive all soft passion from her soul,
and represent to she the meanness of he she be fond of. that thought
soon begin to obscure his beauty; contempt succeed next, and then
disdain, which presently introduce her hatred of the creature who have
give she so much uneasiness. these enemy of Joseph have no soon
take possession of her mind than they insinuate to she a thousand
thing in his disfavour; everything but dislike of her person; a thought
which, as it would have be intolerable to bear, she check the moment
it endeavour to arise. revenge come now to her assistance; and she
consider her dismission of he, stript, and without a character, with
the utmost pleasure. she riot in the several kind of misery which she
imagination suggest to she might be his fate; and, with a smile
compose of anger, mirth, and scorn, view he in the rag in which she
fancy have drest he.
Mrs Slipslop, be summon, attend her mistress, who have now in her
own opinion totally subdue this passion. whilst she be dress she
ask if that fellow have be turn away accord to her order.
Slipslop answer, she have tell her ladyship so (as indeed she
had).--"and how do he behave?" reply the lady. "truly, madam," cry
Slipslop, "in such a manner that infect everybody who see he. the
poor lad have but little wage to receive; for he constantly allow his
father and mother half his income; so that, when your ladyship's livery
be stript off, he have not wherewithal to buy a coat, and must have go
naked if one of the footman have not incommodate he with one; and
whilst he be stand in his shirt (and, to say truth, he be an
amorous figure), be tell your ladyship would not give he a
character, he sigh, and say he have do nothing willingly to offend;
that for his part, he should always give your ladyship a good character
wherever he go; and he pray God to bless you; for you be the good
of lady, though his enemy have set you against he. I wish you have
not turn he away; for I believe you have not a faithfuller servant in
the house."--"How come you then," reply the lady, "to advise I to
turn he away?"--"I, madam!" say Slipslop; "I be sure you will do I
the justice to say, I do all in my power to prevent it; but I see your
ladyship be angry; and it be not the business of we upper servant to
hinterfear on these occasion." "and be it not you, audacious wretch!"
cry the lady, "who make I angry? be it not your tittle-tattle, in
which I believe you belye the poor fellow, which incense I against
he? he may thank you for all that hath happen; and so may I for the
loss of a good servant, and one who probably have more merit than all of
you. poor fellow! I be charm with his goodness to his parent. why do
not you tell I of that, but suffer I to dismiss so good a creature
without a character? I see the reason of your whole behaviour now as
well as your complaint; you be jealous of the wench." "I jealous!"
say Slipslop; "I assure you, I look upon myself as his better; I be
not meat for a footman, I hope." these word throw the lady into a
violent passion, and she send Slipslop from her presence, who depart,
toss her nose, and cry, "Marry, come up! there be some people
more jealous than I, I believe." her lady affect not to hear the
word, though in reality she do, and understand they too. now ensue a
second conflict, so like the former, that it might savour of repetition
to relate it minutely. it may suffice to say that Lady Booby find good
reason to doubt whether she have so absolutely conquer her passion as
she have flatter herself; and, in order to accomplish it quite, take a
resolution, more common than wise, to retire immediately into the
country. the reader hath long ago see the arrival of Mrs Slipslop, whom
no pertness could make her mistress resolve to part with; lately, that
of Mr Pounce, her forerunner; and, lastly, that of the lady herself.
the morning after her arrival be Sunday, she go to church, to the
great surprize of everybody, who wonder to see her ladyship, be no
very constant church-woman, there so suddenly upon her journey. Joseph
be likewise there; and I have hear it be remark that she fix her
eye on he much more than on the parson; but this I believe to be only
a malicious rumour. when the prayer be end Mr Adams stand up, and
with a loud voice pronounce, "I publish the bann of marriage between
Joseph Andrews and Frances Goodwill, both of this parish," &c. whether
this have any effect on Lady Booby or no, who be then in her pew, which
the congregation could not see into, I could never discover: but
certain it be that in about a quarter of an hour she stand up, and
direct her eye to that part of the church where the woman sit, and
persist in look that way during the remainder of the sermon in so
scrutinize a manner, and with so angry a countenance, that most of
the woman be afraid she be offend at they. the moment she return
home she send for Slipslop into her chamber, and tell she she wonder
what that impudent fellow Joseph do in that parish? upon which
Slipslop give she an account of her meet Adams with he on the road,
and likewise the adventure with Fanny. at the relation of which the
lady often change her countenance; and when she have hear all, she
order Mr Adams into her presence, to whom she behave as the reader
will see in the next chapter.
CHAPTER II.
_a dialogue between Mr Abraham Adams and the Lady Booby._
Mr Adams be not far off, for he be drink her ladyship's health
below in a cup of her ale. he no soon come before she than she begin
in the follow manner: "I wonder, sir, after the many great
obligation you have have to this family" (with all which the reader hath
in the course of this history be minutely acquaint), "that you will
ungratefully show any respect to a fellow who hath be turn out of it
for his misdeed. nor doth it, I can tell you, sir, become a man of your
character, to run about the country with an idle fellow and wench.
indeed, as for the girl, I know no harm of she. Slipslop tell I she
be formerly breed up in my house, and behave as she ought, till she
hanker after this fellow, and he spoil she. Nay, she may still,
perhaps, do very well, if he will let she alone. you be, therefore,
do a monstrous thing in endeavour to procure a match between these
two people, which will be to the ruin of they both."--"Madam," say
Adams, "if your ladyship will but hear I speak, I protest I never hear
any harm of Mr Joseph Andrews; if I have, I should have correct he for
it; for I never have, nor will, encourage the fault of those under my
care. as for the young woman, I assure your ladyship I have as good an
opinion of she as your ladyship yourself or any other can have. she be
the sweetest-temper, honest, worthy young creature; indeed, as
to her beauty, I do not commend she on that account, though all man
allow she be the handsome woman, gentle or simple, that ever appear
in the parish."--"you be very impertinent," say she, "to talk such
fulsome stuff to I. it be mighty become truly in a clergyman to
trouble himself about handsome woman, and you be a delicate judge of
beauty, no doubt. a man who hath live all his life in such a parish as
this be a rare judge of beauty! ridiculous! beauty indeed! a country
wench a beauty! I shall be sick whenever I hear beauty mention again.
and so this wench be to stock the parish with beauty, I hope. but,
sir, our poor be numerous enough already; I will have no more vagabond
settle here."--"Madam," say Adams, "your ladyship be offend with I,
I protest, without any reason. this couple be desirous to consummate
long ago, and I dissuade they from it; nay, I may venture to say, I
believe I be the sole cause of their delay it."--"Well," say she,
"and you do very wisely and honestly too, notwithstanding she be the
great beauty in the parish."--"and now, madam," continue he, "I only
perform my office to Mr Joseph."--"Pray, donot mister such fellow to
I," cry the lady. "he," say the parson, "with the consent of Fanny,
before my face, put in the bann." "yes," answer the lady, "I suppose
the slut be forward enough; Slipslop tell I how her head run upon
fellow; that be one of her beauty, I suppose. but if they have put in
the bann, I desire you will publish they no more without my
order."--"madam," cry Adams, "if any one put in a sufficient
caution, and assign a proper reason against they, I be willing to
surcease."--"I tell you a reason," say she: "he be a vagabond, and he
shall not settle here, and bring a nest of beggar into the parish; it
will make we but little amend that they will be beauty."--"madam,"
answer Adams, "with the utmost submission to your ladyship, I have be
inform by lawyer Scout that any person who serve a year gain a
settlement in the parish where he serve."--"Lawyer Scout," reply the
lady, "be an impudent coxcomb; I will have no lawyer Scout interfere
with I. I repeat to you again, I will have no more incumbrance bring
on we: so I desire you will proceed no far."--"madam," return
Adams, "I would obey your ladyship in everything that be lawful; but
surely the party be poor be no reason against their marrying. God
forbid there should be any such law! the poor have little share enough
of this world already; it would be barbarous indeed to deny they the
common privilege and innocent enjoyment which nature indulge to the
animal creation."--"Since you understand yourself no well," cry the
lady, "nor the respect due from such as you to a woman of my
distinction, than to affront my ear by such loose discourse, I shall
mention but one short word; it be my order to you that you publish
these bann no more; and if you dare, I will recommend it to your
master, the doctor, to discard you from his service. I will, sir,
notwithstanding your poor family; and then you and the great beauty
in the parish may go and beg together."--"madam," answer Adams, "I
know not what your ladyship mean by the term master and service. I be
in the service of a Master who will never discard I for do my duty;
and if the doctor (for indeed I have never be able to pay for a
licence) think proper to turn I from my cure, God will provide I, I
hope, another. at least, my family, as well as myself, have hand; and
he will prosper, I doubt not, our endeavour to get our bread honestly
with they. whilst my conscience be pure, I shall never fear what man can
do unto I."--"I condemn my humility," say the lady, "for demean
myself to converse with you so long. I shall take other measure; for I
see you be a confederate with they. but the soon you leave I the
well; and I shall give order that my door may no long be open to
you. I will suffer no parson who run about the country with beauty to
be entertain here."--"Madam," say Adams, "I shall enter into no
person' door against their will; but I be assure, when you have
enquire far into this matter, you will applaud, not blame, my
proceeding; and so I humbly take my leave:" which he do with many bow,
or at least many attempt at a bow.
CHAPTER III.
_what pass between the lady and lawyer Scout._
in the afternoon the lady send for Mr Scout, whom she attack most
violently for intermeddle with her servant, which he deny, and
indeed with truth, for he have only assert accidentally, and perhaps
rightly, that a year's service gain a settlement; and so far he own
he might have formerly inform the parson and believe it be law. "I
be resolve," say the lady, "to have no discard servant of mine
settle here; and so, if this be your law, I shall send to another
lawyer." Scout say, "if she send to a hundred lawyer, not one or all
of they could alter the law. the utmost that be in the power of a
lawyer be to prevent the law's take effect; and that he himself could
do for her ladyship as well as any other; and I believe," say he,
"madam, your ladyship, not be conversant in these matter, hath
mistake a difference; for I assert only that a man who serve a year
be settle. now there be a material difference between be settle in
law and settle in fact; and as I affirm generally he be settle, and
law be preferable to fact, my settlement must be understand in law and
not in fact. and suppose, madam, we admit he be settle in law, what
use will they make of it? how doth that relate to fact? he be not
settle in fact; and if he be not settle in fact, he be not an
inhabitant; and if he be not an inhabitant, he be not of this parish;
and then undoubtedly he ought not to be publish here; for Mr Adams
hath tell I your ladyship's pleasure, and the reason, which be a very
good one, to prevent burden we with the poor; we have too many
already, and I think we ought to have an act to hang or transport half
of they. if we can prove in evidence that he be not settle in fact, it
be another matter. what I say to Mr Adams be on a supposition that he
be settle in fact; and indeed, if that be the case, I should
doubt."--"Don't tell I your fact and your if," say the lady; "I
donot understand your gibberish; you take too much upon you, and be
very impertinent, in pretend to direct in this parish; and you shall
be teach well, I assure you, you shall. but as to the wench, I be
resolve she shall not settle here; I will not suffer such beauty as
these to produce child for we to keep."--"beautie, indeed! your
ladyship be pleased to be merry," answer scout.--"mr Adams describe
she so to I," say the lady. "pray, what sort of dowdy be it, Mr
scout?"--"the ugly creature almost I ever beheld; a poor dirty drab,
your ladyship never see such a wretch."--"Well, but, dear Mr Scout, let
she be what she will, these ugly woman will bring child, you know; so
that we must prevent the marriage."--"true, madam," reply Scout, "for
the subsequent marriage co-operate with the law will carry law into
fact. when a man be marry he be settle in fact, and then he be not
removable. I will see Mr Adams, and I make no doubt of prevail with
he. his only objection be, doubtless, that he shall lose his fee; but
that be once make easy, as it shall be, I be confident no far
objection will remain. no, no, it be impossible; but your ladyship cannot
discommend his unwillingness to depart from his fee. every man ought to
have a proper value for his fee. as to the matter in question, if your
ladyship please to employ I in it, I will venture to promise you
success. the law of this land be not so vulgar to permit a mean fellow
to contend with one of your ladyship's fortune. we have one sure card,
which be, to carry he before Justice Frolick, who, upon hear your
ladyship's name, will commit he without any farther question. as for
the dirty slut, we shall have nothing to do with she; for, if we get rid
of the fellow, the ugly jade will--"--"take what measure you please,
good Mr Scout," answer the lady: "but I wish you could rid the parish
of both; for Slipslop tell I such story of this wench, that I abhor
the thought of she; and, though you say she be such an ugly slut, yet
you know, dear Mr Scout, these forward creature, who run after man,
will always find some as forward as themselves; so that, to prevent the
increase of beggar, we must get rid of she."--"your ladyship be very
much in the right," answer Scout; "but I be afraid the law be a little
deficient in give we any such power of prevention; however, the
justice will stretch it as far as he be able, to oblige your ladyship.
to say truth, it be a great blessing to the country that he be in the
commission, for he hath take several poor off our hand that the law
would never lay hold on. I know some justice who think as much of
commit a man to Bridewell as his lordship at 'size would of hang
he; but it would do a man good to see his worship, our justice, commit
a fellow to Bridewell, he take so much pleasure in it; and when once we
ha'um there, we seldom hear any more o'um. hebe either starve or eat up
by vermin in a month's time."--Here the arrival of a visitor put an end
to the conversation, and Mr Scout, have undertake the cause and
promise it success, depart.
this Scout be one of those fellow who, without any knowledge of the
law, or be breed to it, take upon they, in defiance of an act of
Parliament, to act as lawyer in the country, and be call so. they
be the pest of society, and a scandal to a profession, to which indeed
they do not belong, and which owe to such kind of rascallion the
ill-will which weak person bear towards it. with this fellow, to whom a
little before she would not have condescend to have speak, do a
certain passion for Joseph, and the jealousy and the disdain of poor
innocent Fanny, betray the Lady Booby into a familiar discourse, in
which she inadvertently confirm many hint with which Slipslop, whose
gallant he be, have pre-acquainted he; and whence he have take an
opportunity to assert those severe falsehood of little fanny which
possibly the reader might not have be well able to account for if we
have not think proper to give he this information.
CHAPTER IV.
_a short chapter, but very full of matter; particularly the arrival of
Mr Booby and his lady._
all that night, and the next day, the Lady Booby past with the utmost
anxiety; her mind be distract and her soul toss up and down by many
turbulent and opposite passion. she love, hat, pitied, scorn,
admire, despise the same person by fit, which change in a very short
interval. on Tuesday morning, which happen to be a holiday, she go
to church, where, to her surprize, Mr Adams publish the bann again
with as audible a voice as before. it be lucky for she that, as there
be no sermon, she have an immediate opportunity of return home to
vent her rage, which she could not have conceal from the congregation
five minute; indeed, it be not then very numerous, the assembly
consist of no more than Adams, his clerk, his wife, the lady, and one
of her servant. at her return she meet Slipslop, who accost she in
these words:--"O meam, what doth your ladyship think? to be sure, lawyer
Scout hath carry Joseph and Fanny both before the justice. all the
parish be in tear, and say they will certainly be hang; for nobody
know what it be for"--"i suppose they deserve it," say the lady.
"what! dost thou mention such wretch to me?"--"O dear madam," answer
Slipslop, "be it not a pity such a graceless young man should die a
virulent death? I hope the judge will take commensuration on his youth.
as for Fanny, I donot think it signify much what become of she; and
if poor Joseph hath do anything, I could venture to swear she traduce
he to it: few man ever come to a fragrant punishment, but by those
nasty creature, who be a scandal to our sect." the lady be no more
pleased at this news, after a moment's reflection, than Slipslop
herself; for, though she wish Fanny far enough, she do not desire the
removal of Joseph, especially with she. she be puzzle how to act or
what to say on this occasion, when a coach and six drive into the court,
and a servant acquaint she with the arrival of her nephew Booby and
his lady. she order they to be conduct into a drawing-room, whither
she presently repair, have compose her countenance as well as she
could, and be a little satisfied that the wedding would by these
mean be at least interrupt, and that she should have an opportunity
to execute any resolution she might take, for which she see herself
provide with an excellent instrument in Scout.
the Lady Booby apprehend her servant have make a mistake when he
mention Mr Booby's lady; for she have never hear of his marriage: but
how great be her surprize when, at she enter the room, her nephew
present his wife to she; say, "Madam, this be that charming Pamela,
of whom I be convinced you have hear so much." the lady receive she
with more civility than he expect; indeed with the utmost; for she be
perfectly polite, nor have any vice inconsistent with good-breeding. they
past some little time in ordinary discourse, when a servant come and
whisper Mr Booby, who presently tell the lady he must desert they a
little on some business of consequence; and, as their discourse during
his absence would afford little improvement or entertainment to the
reader, we will leave they for a while to attend Mr Booby.
CHAPTER V.
_contain justice business; curious precedent of deposition, and
other matter necessary to be peruse by all justice of the peace and
their clerk._
the young squire and his lady be no soon alight from their coach
than the servant begin to inquire after Mr Joseph, from whom they say
their lady have not hear a word, to her great surprize, since he have
leave Lady Booby's. upon this they be instantly inform of what have
lately happen, with which they hastily acquaint their master, who
take an immediate resolution to go himself, and endeavour to restore his
Pamela her brother, before she even know she have lose he.
the justice before whom the criminal be carry, and who live within
a short mile of the lady's house, be luckily Mr Booby's acquaintance,
by his have an estate in his neighbourhood. order therefore his
horse to his coach, he set out for the judgment-seat, and arrive when
the justice have almost finish his business. he be conduct into a
hall, where he be acquaint that his worship would wait on he in a
moment; for he have only a man and a woman to commit to Bridewell first.
as he be now convince he have not a minute to lose, he insist on the
servant's introduce he directly into the room where the justice be
then execute his office, as he call it. be bring thither, and
the first compliment be pass between the squire and his worship,
the former ask the latter what crime those two young people have be
guilty of? "no great crime," answer the justice; "I have only order
they to Bridewell for a month." "but what be their crime?" repeat the
squire. "Larceny, an't please your honour," say Scout. "ay," say the
justice, "a kind of felonious larcenous thing. I believe I must order
they a little correction too, a little stripping and whipping." (poor
Fanny, who have hitherto support all with the thought of Joseph's
company, tremble at that sound; but, indeed, without reason, for none
but the devil himself would have execute such a sentence on she.)
"still," say the squire, "I be ignorant of the crime--the fact I mean."
"why, there it be in peaper," answer the justice, show he a
deposition which, in the absence of his clerk, he have writ himself, of
which we have with great difficulty procure an authentic copy; and here
it follow _verbatim et literatim:_--
_the depusition of James Scout, layer, and Thomas Trotter,
yeoman, take before mee, one of his magesty's justasse of the
piece for Zumersetshire._
"these deponant saith, and first Thomas Trotter for himself
saith, that on the -- of this instant October, be
Sabbath-day, betwin the our of 2 and 4 in the afternoon, he
zeed Joseph Andrews and Francis Goodwill walk akross a certane
felde belunge to layer Scout, and out of the path which lede
thru the say felde, and there he zede Joseph Andrews with a
nife cut one hassel twig, of the value, as he believe, of
three half-pence, or thereabout; and he saith that the say
Francis Goodwill be likewise walk on the grass out of the
say path in the say felde, and do receive and karry in she
hand the said twig, and so be cumfarte, eade, and abatte
to the say Joseph therein. and the say James Scout for
himself say that he verily believe the say twig to be his
own proper twig," &c.
"Jesu!" say the squire, "would you commit two person to Bridewell for
a twig?" "yes," say the lawyer, "and with great lenity too; for if we
have call it a young tree, they would have be both hang." "Harkee,"
say the justice, take aside the squire; "I should not have be so
severe on this occasion, but Lady Booby desire to get they out of the
parish; so lawyer Scout will give the constable order to let they run
away, if they please: but it seem they intend to marry together, and
the lady hath no other mean, as they be legally settle there, to
prevent their bring an incumbrance on her own parish." "well," say
the squire, "I will take care my aunt shall be satisfied in this point;
and likewise I promise you, Joseph here shall never be any incumbrance
on she. I shall be oblige to you, therefore, if, instead of Bridewell,
you will commit they to my custody." "o! to be sure, sir, if you desire
it," answer the justice; and without more ado Joseph and Fanny be
deliver over to Squire Booby, whom Joseph very well know, but little
guess how nearly he be relate to he. the justice burn his
mittimus, the constable be send about his business, the lawyer make no
complaint for want of justice; and the prisoner, with exult heart,
give a thousand thank to his honour Mr Booby; who do not intend their
obligation to he should cease here; for, order his man to produce a
cloak-bag, which he have cause to be bring from Lady Booby's on
purpose, he desire the justice that he might have Joseph with he into
a room; where, order his servant to take out a suit of his own
clothe, with linnen and other necessary, he leave Joseph to dress
himself, who, not yet know the cause of all this civility, excuse
his accept such a favour as long as decently he could. Whilst Joseph
be dress, the squire repair to the justice, whom he find talk
with Fanny; for, during the examination, she have flop her hat over
her eye, which be also bath in tear, and have by that mean
conceal from his worship what might perhaps have render the arrival
of Mr Booby unnecessary, at least for herself. the justice no soon see
her countenance clear up, and her bright eye shin through her
tear, than he secretly curse himself for have once thought of
Bridewell for she. he would willingly have send his own wife thither, to
have have Fanny in her place. and, conceive almost at the same instant
desire and scheme to accomplish they, he employ the minute whilst
the squire be absent with Joseph in assure she how sorry he be for
have treat she so roughly before he know her merit; and tell she,
that since Lady Booby be unwilling that she should settle in her
parish, she be heartily welcome to his, where he promise she his
protection, add that he would take Joseph and she into his own
family, if she like it; which assurance he confirm with a squeeze by
the hand. she thank he very kindly, and say, "she would acquaint
Joseph with the offer, which he would certainly be glad to accept; for
that Lady Booby be angry with they both; though she do not know either
have do anything to offend she, but impute it to Madam Slipslop, who
have always be her enemy."
the squire now return, and prevent any farth continuance of this
conversation; and the justice, out of a pretended respect to his guest,
but in reality from an apprehension of a rival (for he know nothing of
his marriage), order Fanny into the kitchen, whither she gladly
retire; nor do the squire, who decline the trouble of explain the
whole matter, oppose it.
it would be unnecessary, if I be able, which indeed I be not, to
relate the conversation between these two gentleman, which roll, as
I have be inform, entirely on the subject of horse-racing. Joseph
be soon drest in the plain dress he could find, which be a blue
coat and breech, with a gold edging, and a red waistcoat with the
same: and as this suit, which be rather too large for the squire,
exactly fit he, so he become it so well, and look so genteel,
that no person would have doubt its being as well adapt to his
quality as his shape; nor have suspect, as one might, when my Lord
----, or Sir ----, or Mr ----, appear in lace or embroidery, that the
taylor's man wear those clothe home on his back which he should have
carry under his arm.
the squire now take leave of the justice; and, call for Fanny, make
she and Joseph, against their will, get into the coach with he, which
he then order to drive to Lady Booby's. it have move a few yard only,
when the squire ask Joseph if he know who that man be cross the
field; for, add he, I never see one take such stride before. Joseph
answer eagerly, "o, sir, it be parson Adams!" "o la, indeed, and so it
be," say Fanny; "poor man, he be come to do what he could for we.
well, he be the worthy, good-natured creature."--"Ay," say Joseph;
"God bless he! for there be not such another in the universe." "the
good creature live sure," cry Fanny. "be he?" say the squire; "then
I be resolve to have the good creature live in my coach;" and so
say, he order it to stop, whilst Joseph, at his request, hallow
to the parson, who, well know his voice, make all the haste
imaginable, and soon come up with they. he be desire by the master,
who could scarce refrain from laughter at his figure, to mount into the
coach, which he with many thank refuse, say he could walk by its
side, and hewould warrant he keep up with it; but he be at length
over-prevail on. the squire now acquaint Joseph with his marriage;
but he might have spar himself that labour; for his servant, whilst
Joseph be dress, have perform that office before. he continue to
express the vast happiness he enjoy in his sister, and the value he
have for all who belong to she. Joseph make many bow, and expr as
many acknowledgment: and parson Adams, who now first perceive Joseph's
new apparel, burst into tear with joy, and fall to rub his hand
and snap his finger as if he have be mad.
they be now arrive at the Lady Booby's, and the squire, desire they
to wait a moment in the court, walk in to his aunt, and call she
out from his wife, acquaint she with Joseph's arrival; say, "Madam,
as I have marry a virtuous and worthy woman, I be resolve to own her
relation, and show they all a proper respect; I shall think myself
therefore infinitely oblige to all mine who will do the same. it be
true, her brother hath be your servant, but he be now become my
brother; and I have one happiness, that neither his character, his
behaviour, or appearance, give I any reason to be ashamed of call
he so. in short, he be now below, dress like a gentleman, in which
light I intend he shall hereafter be see; and you will oblige I beyond
expression if you will admit he to be of our party; for I know it will
give great pleasure to my wife, though she will not mention it."
this be a stroke of fortune beyond the Lady Booby's hope or
expectation; she answer he eagerly, "Nephew, you know how easily I be
prevail on to do anything which Joseph Andrews desire--Phoo, I mean
which you desire I; and, as he be now your relation, I cannot refuse to
entertain he as such." the squire tell she he know his obligation to
she for her compliance; and go three step, return and tell she--he
have one more favour, which he believe she would easily grant, as she
have accord he the former. "there be a young woman--"--"nephew," say
she, "donot let my good-nature make you desire, as be too commonly the
case, to impose on I. nor think, because I have with so much
condescension agree to suffer your brother-in-law to come to my table,
that I will submit to the company of all my own servant, and all the
dirty trollop in the country." "Madam," answer the squire, "I believe
you never see this young creature. I never behold such sweetness and
innocence join with such beauty, and withal so genteel." "upon my soul
I willnot admit she," reply the lady in a passion; "the whole world
shallnot prevail on I; I resent even the desire as an affront, and--" the
squire, who know her inflexibility, interrupt she, by ask pardon,
and promise not to mention it more. he then return to Joseph, and
she to Pamela. he take Joseph aside, and tell he he would carry he to
his sister, but could not prevail as yet for Fanny. Joseph beg that
he might see his sister alone, and then be with his fanny; but the
squire, know the pleasure his wife would have in her brother's
company, would not admit it, tell Joseph there would be nothing in so
short an absence from Fanny, whilst he be assure of her safety;
add, he hop he could not so easily quit a sister whom he have not
see so long, and who so tenderly love he. Joseph immediately
comply; for indeed no brother could love a sister more; and,
recommend Fanny, who rejoice that she be not to go before Lady
Booby, to the care of Mr Adams, he attend the squire upstairs, whilst
Fanny repair with the parson to his house, where she think herself
secure of a kind reception.
CHAPTER VI.
_of which you be desire to read no more than you like._
the meeting between Joseph and Pamela be not without tear of joy on
both side; and their embrace be full of tenderness and affection.
they be, however, regard with much more pleasure by the nephew than
by the aunt, to whose flame they be fuel only; and this be increase
by the addition of dress, which be indeed not want to set off the
lively colour in which Nature have draw health, strength, comeliness,
and youth. in the afternoon Joseph, at their request, entertain they
with an account of his adventure: nor could Lady Booby conceal her
dissatisfaction at those part in which Fanny be concern, especially
when Mr Booby launch forth into such rapturous praise of her beauty.
she say, apply to her niece, that she wonder her nephew, who have
pretend to marry for love, should think such a subject proper to
amuse his wife with; add, that, for her part, she should be jealous
of a husband who speak so warmly in praise of another woman. Pamela
answer, indeed, she think she have cause; but it be an instance of
Mr Booby's aptness to see more beauty in woman than they be
mistress of. at which word both the woman fix their eye on two
look-glass; and Lady Booby reply, that man be, in the general,
very ill judge of beauty; and then, whilst both contemplate only
their own face, they pay a cross compliment to each other's charm.
when the hour of rest approach, which the lady of the house defer
as long as decently she could, she inform Joseph (whom for the future
we shall call Mr Joseph, he have as good a title to that appellation
as many other--I mean that inconteste one of good clothe) that she
have order a bed to be provide for he. he decline this favour to
his utmost; for his heart have long be with his fanny; but she
insist on his accept it, alledge that the parish have no proper
accommodation for such a person as he be now to esteem himself. the
squire and his lady both join with she, Mr Joseph be at last force
to give over his design of visit Fanny that evening; who, on her
side, as impatiently expect he till midnight, when, in complacence
to Mr Adams's family, who have sit up two hour out of respect to she,
she retire to bed, but not to sleep; the thought of her love keep she
waking, and his not return accord to his promise fill she with
uneasiness; of which, however, she could not assign any other cause
than merely that of be absent from he.
Mr Joseph rise early in the morning, and visit she in whom his soul
delight. she no soon hear his voice in the parson's parlour than
she leap from her bed, and, dress herself in a few minute, go
down to he. they pass two hour with inexpressible happiness
together; and then, have appoint Monday, by Mr Adams's permission,
for their marriage, Mr Joseph return, accord to his promise, to
breakfast at the Lady Booby's, with whose behaviour, since the evening,
we shall now acquaint the reader.
she be no soon retire to her chamber than she ask Slipslop "what
she think of this wonderful creature her nephew have married?"--
"Madam?" say Slipslop, not yet sufficiently understand what answer
she be to make. "I ask you," answer the lady, "what you think of the
dowdy, my niece, I think I be to call she?" Slipslop, want no further
hint, begin to pull she to piece, and so miserably deface she, that it
would have be impossible for any one to have know the person. the
lady give she all the assistance she could, and end with say, "I
think, Slipslop, you have do her justice; but yet, bad as she be, she
be an angel compare to this Fanny." Slipslop then fall on Fanny, whom
she hack and hew in the like barbarous manner, conclude with an
observation that there be always something in those low-life creature
which must eternally extinguish they from their better. "really," say
the lady, "I think there be one exception to your rule; I be certain you
may guess who I mean."--"Not I, upon my word, madam," say Slipslop. "I
mean a young fellow; sure you be the dull wretch," say the lady. "o
la! I be indeed. yes, truly, madam, he be an accession," answer
Slipslop. "ay, be he not, Slipslop?" return the lady. "be he not so
genteel that a prince might, without a blush, acknowledge he for his
son? his behaviour be such that would not shame the good education. he
borrow from his station a condescension in everything to his superior,
yet unattended by that mean servility which be call good behaviour in
such person. everything he doth hath no mark of the base motive of
fear, but visibly show some respect and gratitude, and carry with it
the persuasion of love. and then for his virtue: such piety to his
parent, such tender affection to his sister, such integrity in his
friendship, such bravery, such goodness, that, if he have be bear a
gentleman, his wife would have possess the most invaluable
blessing."--"To be sure, ma'am," say Slipslop. "but as he be," answer
the lady, "if he have a thousand more good quality, it must render a
woman of fashion contemptible even to be suspect of thinking of he;
yes, I should despise myself for such a thought."--"To be sure, ma'am,"
say Slipslop. "and why to be sure?" reply the lady; "thou art always
one's echo. be he not more worthy of affection than a dirty country
clown, though bear of a family as old as the flood? or an idle worthless
rake, or little puisny beau of quality? and yet these we must condemn
ourselves to, in order to avoid the censure of the world; to shun the
contempt of other, we must ally ourselves to those we despise; we must
prefer birth, title, and fortune, to real merit. it be a tyranny of
custom, a tyranny we must comply with; for we people of fashion be the
slave of custom."--"Marry come up!" say Slipslop, who now know well
which party to take. "if I be a woman of your ladyship's fortune and
quality, I would be a slave to nobody."--"Me," say the lady; "I be
speak if a young woman of fashion, who have see nothing of the world,
should happen to like such a fellow.--me, indeed! I hope thou dost not
imagine--"--"No, ma'am, to be sure," cry Slipslop. "no! what no?"
cry the lady. "thou art always ready to answer before thou hast hear
one. so far I must allow he be a charming fellow. I, indeed! no,
Slipslop, all thought of man be over with I. I have lose a husband
who--but if I should reflect I should run mad. my future ease must
depend upon forgetfulness. Slipslop, let I hear some of thy nonsense,
to turn my thought another way. what dost thou think of Mr
andrews?"--"why, I think," say Slipslop, "he be the handsome, most
properest man I ever see; and if I be a lady of the great degree it
would be well for some folk. your ladyship may talk of custom, if you
please: but I be confidous there be no more comparison between young Mr
Andrews and most of the young gentleman who come to your ladyship's
house in London; a parcel of whipper-snapper spark: I would soon
marry our old parson Adams. never tell I what people say, whilst I be
happy in the arm of he I love. some folk rail against other folk
because other folk have what some folk would be glad of."--"And so,"
answer the lady, "if you be a woman of condition, you would really
marry Mr Andrews?"--"Yes, I assure your ladyship," reply Slipslop, "if
he would have I."--"fool, idiot!" cry the lady; "if he would have a
woman of fashion! be that a question?"--"no, truly, madam," say
Slipslop, "I believe it would be none if Fanny be out of the way; and I
be confidous, if I be in your ladyship's place, and like Mr Joseph
Andrews, she should not stay in the parish a moment. I be sure lawyer
Scout would send her packing if your ladyship would but say the word."
this last speech of Slipslop raise a tempest in the mind of her
mistress. she fear Scout have betray she, or rather that she have
betray herself. after some silence, and a double change of her
complexion, first to pale and then to red, she thus speak: "I be
astonish at the liberty you give your tongue. would you insinuate that
I employ Scout against this wench on account of the fellow?"--"La,
ma'am," say Slipslop, fright out of her wit, "I assassinate such a
thing!"--"i think you dare not," answer the lady; "I believe my
conduct may defy malice itself to assert so curse a slander. if I have
ever discover any wantonness, any lightness in my behaviour; if I have
follow the example of some whom thou hast, I believe, see, in
allow myself indecent liberty, even with a husband; but the dear
man who be go" (here she begin to sob), "be he alive again" (then she
produce tear), "could not upbraid I with any one act of tenderness or
passion. no, Slipslop, all the time I cohabit with he he never
obtain even a kiss from I without my express reluctance in the
grant it. I be sure he himself never suspect how much I love he.
since his death, thou know, though it be almost six week (it want
but a day) ago, I have not admit one visitor till this fool my nephew
arrive. I have confine myself quite to one party of friend. and can
such a conduct as this fear to be arraign? to be accuse, not only of
a passion which I have always despise, but of fix it on such an
object, a creature so much beneath my notice!"--"upon my word, ma'am,"
say Slipslop, "I do not understand your ladyship; nor know I anything
of the matter."--"I believe indeed thou dost not understand I. those
be delicacy which exist only in superior mind; thy coarse idea
cannot comprehend they. thou art a low creature, of the Andrews breed, a
reptile of a low order, a weed that grow in the common garden of the
creation."--"I assure your ladyship," say Slipslop, whose passion be
almost of as high an order as her lady's, "I have no more to do with
Common Garden than other folk. really, your ladyship talk of servant
as if they be not bear of the christian specious. servant have flesh
and blood as well as quality; and Mr Andrews himself be a proof that
they have as good, if not well. and for my own part, I cannot perceive
my dears[a] be coarser than other people's; and I be sure, if Mr
Andrews be a dear of mine, I should not be ashamed of he in company
with gentleman; for whoever hath see he in his new clothe must
confess he look as much like a gentleman as anybody. Coarse, quotha! I
cannot bear to hear the poor young fellow run down neither; for I will
say this, I never hear he say an ill word of anybody in his life. I be
sure his coarseness doth not lie in his heart, for he be the
well-natured man in the world; and as for his skin, it be no coarser
than other people's, I be sure. his bosom, when a boy, be as white as
drive snow; and, where it be not cover with hair, be so still.
ifakin! if I be Mrs Andrews, with a hundred a year, I should not envy
the good she who wear a head. a woman that could not be happy with such
a man ought never to be so; for if he cannot make a woman happy, I never
yet behold the man who could. I say again, I wish I be a great lady for
his sake. I believe, when I have make a gentleman of he, hewould behave so
that nobody should deprecate what I have do; and I fancy few would
venture to tell he he be no gentleman to his face, nor to mine
neither." at which word, take up the candle, she ask her mistress,
who have be some time in her bed, if she have any farth command? who
mildly answer, she have none; and, tell she she be a comical
creature, bid her good-night.
[a] mean perhaps idea.
CHAPTER VII.
_philosophical reflection, the like not to be find in any light
french romance. Mr Booby's grave advice to Joseph, and Fanny's
encounter with a beau._
Habit, my good reader, hath so vast a prevalence over the human mind,
that there be scarce anything too strange or too strong to be assert
of it. the story of the miser, who, from long accustom to cheat
other, come at last to cheat himself, and with great delight and
triumph pick his own pocket of a guinea to convey to his hoard, be not
impossible or improbable. in like manner it fare with the practiser of
deceit, who, from have long deceive their acquaintance, gain at last
a power of deceive themselves, and acquire that very opinion (however
false) of their own ability, excellency, and virtue, into which
they have for year perhaps endeavour to betray their neighbour. now,
reader, to apply this observation to my present purpose, thou must know,
that as the passion generally call love exercise most of the talent
of the female or fair world, so in this they now and then discover a
small inclination to deceit; for which thou wilt not be angry with the
beautiful creature when thou hast consider that at the age of seven,
or something early, miss be instruct by her mother that master be a
very monstrous kind of animal, who will, if she suffer he to come too
near she, infallibly eat she up and grind she to piece: that, so far
from kiss or toy with he of her own accord, she must not admit
he to kiss or toy with she: and, lastly, that she must never have any
affection towards he; for if she should, all her friend in petticoat
would esteem she a traitress, point at she, and hunt she out of their
society. these impression, be first receive, be far and deep
inculcate by their school-mistress and companion; so that by the age
of ten they have contract such a dread and abhorrence of the
above-name monster, that whenever they see he they fly from he as the
innocent hare doth from the greyhound. hence, to the age of fourteen or
fifteen, they entertain a mighty antipathy to master; they resolve, and
frequently profess, that they will never have any commerce with he, and
entertain fond hope of pass their life out of his reach, of the
possibility of which they have so visible an example in their good
maiden aunt. but when they arrive at this period, and have now pass
their second climacteric, when their wisdom, grow riper, begin to see
a little far, and, from almost daily fall in master's way, to
apprehend the great difficulty of keep out of it; and when they
observe he look often at they, and sometimes very eagerly and earnestly
too (for the monster seldom take any notice of they till at this age),
they then begin to think of their danger; and, as they perceive they
cannot easily avoid he, the wise part bethink themselves of provide
by other mean for their security. they endeavour, by all method they
can invent, to render themselves so amiable in his eye, that he may
have no inclination to hurt they; in which they generally succeed so
well, that his eye, by frequent languishing, soon lessen their idea of
his fierceness, and so far abate their fear, that they venture to
parley with he; and when they perceive he so different from what he
hath be describe, all gentleness, softness, kindness, tenderness,
fondness, their dreadful apprehension vanish in a moment; and now (it
be usual with the human mind to skip from one extreme to its
opposite, as easily, and almost as suddenly, as a bird from one bough to
another) love instantly succeed to fear: but, as it happen to person
who have in their infancy be thoroughly frightened with certain
no-person call ghost, that they retain their dread of those being
after they be convince that there be no such thing, so these young
lady, though they no long apprehend devouring, cannot so entirely
shake off all that hath be instill into they; they still entertain
the idea of that censure which be so strongly imprint on their tender
mind, to which the declaration of abhorrence they every day hear from
their companion greatly contribute. to avoid this censure, therefore,
be now their only care; for which purpose they still pretend the same
aversion to the monster: and the more they love he, the more ardently
they counterfeit the antipathy. by the continual and constant practice
of which deceit on other, they at length impose on themselves, and
really believe they hate what they love. thus, indeed, it happen to
Lady Booby, who love Joseph long before she know it; and now love he
much more than she suspect. she have indeed, from the time of his
sister's arrival in the quality of her niece, and from the instant she
view he in the dress and character of a gentleman, begin to conceive
secretly a design which love have conceal from herself till a dream
betray it to she.
she have no soon rise than she send for her nephew. when he come to
she, after many compliment on his choice, she tell he, "he might
perceive, in her condescension to admit her own servant to her table,
that she look on the family of Andrews as his relation, and indeed
her; that, as he have marry into such a family, it become he to
endeavour by all method to raise it as much as possible. at length she
advise he to use all his heart to dissuade Joseph from his intended
match, which would still enlarge their relation to meanness and poverty;
conclude that, by a commission in the army, or some other genteel
employment, he might soon put young Mr Andrews on the foot of a
gentleman; and, that be once do, his accomplishment might quickly
gain he an alliance which would not be to their discredit."
her nephew heartily embrace this proposal, and, find Mr Joseph with
his wife, at his return to her chamber, he immediately begin thus: "my
love to my dear Pamela, brother, will extend to all her relation; nor
shall I show they less respect than if I have marry into the family of
a duke. I hope I have give you some early testimony of this, and
shall continue to give you daily more. you will excuse I therefore,
brother, if my concern for your interest make I mention what may be,
perhaps, disagreeable to you to hear: but I must insist upon it, that,
if you have any value for my alliance or my friendship, you will decline
any thought of engage far with a girl who be, as you be a
relation of mine, so much beneath you. I know there may be at first some
difficulty in your compliance, but that will daily diminish; and you
will in the end sincerely thank I for my advice. I own, indeed, the
girl be handsome; but beauty alone be a poor ingredient, and will make
but an uncomfortable marriage."--"sir," say Joseph, "I assure you her
beauty be her least perfection; nor do I know a virtue which that young
creature be not possesst of."--"a to her virtue," answer Mr Booby,
"you can be yet but a slender judge of they; but, if she have never so
many, you will find she equal in these among her superior in birth and
fortune, which now you be to esteem on a footing with yourself; at
least I will take care they shall shortly be so, unless you prevent I
by degrade yourself with such a match, a match I have hardly patience
to think of, and which would break the heart of your parent, who now
rejoice in the expectation of see you make a figure in the
world."--"i know not," reply Joseph, "that my parent have any power
over my inclination; nor be I oblige to sacrifice my happiness to
their whim or ambition: besides, I shall be very sorry to see that the
unexpected advancement of my sister should so suddenly inspire they with
this wicked pride, and make they despise their equal. I be resolve on
no account to quit my dear Fanny; no, though I could raise she as high
above her present station as you have raise my sister."--"Your sister,
as well as myself," say Booby, "be greatly oblige to you for the
comparison: but, sir, she be not worthy to be compare in beauty to my
Pamela; nor hath she half her merit. and besides, sir, as you civilly
throw my marriage with your sister in my tooth, I must teach you the
wide difference between we: my fortune enable I to please myself; and
it would have be as overgrow a folly in I to have omit it as in
you to do it."--"my fortune enable I to please myself likewise," say
Joseph; "for all my pleasure be center in Fanny; and whilst I have
health I shall be able to support she with my labour in that station to
which she be bear, and with which she be content."--"brother," say
Pamela, "Mr Booby advise you as a friend; and no doubt my papa and
mamma will be of his opinion, and will have great reason to be angry
with you for destroy what his goodness hath do, and throw down
our family again, after he hath raise it. it would become you well,
brother, to pray for the assistance of grace against such a passion than
to indulge it."--"sure, sister, you be not in earnest; I be sure she be
your equal, at least."--"She be my equal," answer Pamela; "but I be
no long Pamela Andrews; I be now this gentleman's lady, and, as such,
be above her.--I hope I shall never behave with an unbecoming pride:
but, at the same time, I shall always endeavour to know myself, and
question not the assistance of grace to that purpose." they be now
summon to breakfast, and thus end their discourse for the present,
very little to the satisfaction of any of the party.
Fanny be now walk in an avenue at some distance from the house,
where Joseph have promise to take the first opportunity of come to
she. she have not a shilling in the world, and have subsist ever since
her return entirely on the charity of parson Adams. a young gentleman,
attend by many servant, come up to she, and ask she if that be not
the Lady Booby's house before he? this, indeed, he well know; but have
frame the question for no other reason than to make she look up, and
discover if her face be equal to the delicacy of her shape. he no
soon see it than he be strike with amazement. he stopt his horse, and
swear she be the most beautiful creature he ever behold. then,
instantly alight and deliver his horse to his servant, he rapt out
half-a-dozen oath that he would kiss she; to which she at first
submit, beg he would not be rude; but he be not satisfied with
the civility of a salute, nor even with the rude attack he could make
on her lip, but catch she in his arm, and endeavour to kiss her
breast, which with all her strength she resist, and, as our spark be
not of the Herculean race, with some difficulty prevent. the young
gentleman, be soon out of breath in the struggle, quit she, and,
remount his horse, call one of his servant to he, whom he order
to stay behind with she, and make she any offer whatever to prevail on
she to return home with he in the evening; and to assure she he would
take she into keeping. he then ride on with his other servant, and
arrive at the lady's house, to whom he be a distant relation, and be
come to pay a visit.
the trusty fellow, who be employ in an office he have be long
accustomed to, discharge his part with all the fidelity and dexterity
imaginable, but to no purpose. she be entirely deaf to his offer, and
reject they with the utmost disdain. at last the pimp, who have perhaps
more warm blood about he than his master, begin to sollicit for
himself; he tell she, though he be a servant, he be a man of some
fortune, which he would make her mistress of; and this without any
insult to her virtue, for that he would marry she. she answer, if his
master himself, or the great lord in the land, would marry she, she
would refuse he. at last, be weary with persuasion, and on fire
with charm which would have almost kindle a flame in the bosom of an
ancient philosopher or modern divine, he fasten his horse to the
ground, and attack she with much more force than the gentleman have
exert. poor Fanny would not have be able to resist his rudeness a
short time, but the deity who preside over chaste love send she Joseph
to her assistance. he no soon come within sight, and perceive she
struggle with a man, than, like a cannon-ball, or like lightning, or
anything that be swifter, if anything be, he run towards she, and,
come up just as the ravisher have tear her handkerchief from her
breast, before his lip have touch that seat of innocence and bliss, he
deal he so lusty a blow in that part of his neck which a rope would
have become with the utmost propriety, that the fellow stagger
backwards, and, perceive he have to do with something rough than the
little, tender, tremble hand of Fanny, he quit she, and, turn
about, see his rival, with fire flash from his eye, again ready to
assail he; and, indeed, before he could well defend himself, or return
the first blow, he receive a second, which, have it fall on that part
of the stomach to which it be direct, would have be probably the
last he would have have any occasion for; but the ravisher, lift up
his hand, drive the blow upwards to his mouth, whence it dislodge three
of his tooth; and now, not conceive any extraordinary affection for
the beauty of Joseph's person, nor be extremely pleased with this
method of salutation, he collect all his force, and aim a blow at
Joseph's breast, which he artfully parry with one fist, so that it
lose its force entirely in air; and, step one foot backward, he
dart his fist so fiercely at his enemy, that, have he not catch it in
his hand (for he be a boxer of no inferior fame), it must have tumble
he on the ground. and now the ravisher meditate another blow, which he
aim at that part of the breast where the heart be lodge; Joseph do
not catch it as before, yet so prevent its aim that it fall directly
on his nose, but with abate force. Joseph then, move both fist and
foot forwards at the same time, throw his head so dexterously into the
stomach of the ravisher that he fall a lifeless lump on the field, where
he lie many minute breathless and motionless.
when Fanny see her Joseph receive a blow in his face, and blood run
in a stream from he, she begin to tear her hair and invoke all human
and divine power to his assistance. she be not, however, long under
this affliction before Joseph, have conquer his enemy, run to she,
and assure she he be not hurt; she then instantly fall on her knee,
and thank God that he have make Joseph the mean of her rescue, and at
the same time preserve he from be injure in attempt it. she
offer, with her handkerchief, to wipe his blood from his face; but he,
see his rival attempt to recover his leg, turn to he, and
ask he if he have enough? to which the other answer he have; for he
believe he have fight with the devil instead of a man; and, loosen
his horse, say he should not have attempt the wench if he have know
she have be so well provide for.
Fanny now beg Joseph to return with she to parson Adams, and to
promise that he would leave she no more. these be proposition so
agreeable to Joseph, that, have he hear they, he would have give an
immediate assent; but indeed his eye be now his only sense; for you
may remember, reader, that the ravisher have tear her handkerchief from
Fanny's neck, by which he have discover such a sight, that Joseph hath
declare all the statue he ever beheld be so much inferior to it in
beauty, that it be more capable of convert a man into a statue than
of be imitate by the great master of that art. this modest
creature, whom no warmth in summer could ever induce to expose her
charm to the wanton sun, a modesty to which, perhaps, they owe their
inconceivable whiteness, have stand many minute bare-neck in the
presence of Joseph before her apprehension of his danger and the horror
of see his blood would suffer she once to reflect on what concern
herself; till at last, when the cause of her concern have vanish, an
admiration at his silence, together with observe the fix position
of his eye, produce an idea in the lovely maid which bring more
blood into her face than have flow from Joseph's nostril. the snowy
hue of her bosom be likewise change to vermilion at the instant when
she clap her handkerchief round her neck. Joseph see the uneasiness
she suffer, and immediately remove his eye from an object, in
surveying which he have feel the great delight which the organ of
sight be capable of conveying to his soul;--so great be his fear of
offend she, and so truly do his passion for her deserve the noble
name of love.
Fanny, be recover from her confusion, which be almost equal by
what Joseph have feel from observe it, again mention her request;
this be instantly and gladly comply with; and together they cross
two or three field, which bring they to the habitation of Mr Adams.
CHAPTER VIII.
_a discourse which happen between Mr Adams, Mrs Adams, Joseph, and
Fanny; with some behaviour of Mr Adams which will be call by some few
reader very low, absurd, and unnatural._
the parson and his wife have just end a long dispute when the lover
come to the door. indeed, this young couple have be the subject of the
dispute; for Mrs Adams be one of those prudent people who never do
anything to injure their family, or, perhaps, one of those good
mother who would even stretch their conscience to serve their child.
she have long entertain hope of see her eld daughter succeed Mrs
Slipslop, and of make her second son an exciseman by Lady Booby's
interest. these be expectation she could not endure the thought of
quitting, and be, therefore, very uneasy to see her husband so resolute
to oppose the lady's intention in Fanny's affair. she tell he, "it
behove every man to take the first care of his family; that he have a
wife and six child, the maintaining and provide for whom would be
business enough for he without intermeddle in other folk' affair;
that he have always preach up submission to superior, and would do ill
to give an example of the contrary behaviour in his own conduct; that if
Lady Booby do wrong she must answer for it herself, and the sin would
not lie at their door; that Fanny have be a servant, and breed up in the
lady's own family, and consequently she must have know more of she than
they do, and it be very improbable, if she have behave herself well,
that the lady would have be so bitterly her enemy; that perhaps he be
too much inclined to think well of she because she be handsome, but
handsome woman be often no well than they should be; that g-- make
ugly woman as well as handsome one; and that if a woman have virtue it
signify nothing whether she have beauty or no." for all which reason
she conclude he should oblige the lady, and stop the future publication
of the bann. but all these excellent argument have no effect on the
parson, who persist in do his duty without regard the
consequence it might have on his worldly interest. he endeavour to
answer she as well as he could; to which she have just finish her reply
(for she have always the last word everywhere but at church) when Joseph
and Fanny enter their kitchen, where the parson and his wife then sit
at breakfast over some bacon and cabbage. there be a coldness in the
civility of Mrs Adams which person of accurate speculation might have
observe, but escape her present guest; indeed, it be a good deal
cover by the heartiness of Adams, who no soon hear that Fanny have
neither eat nor drank that morning than he present she a bone of bacon
he have just be gnaw, be the only remain of his provision, and
then run nimbly to the tap, and produce a mug of small beer, which he
call ale; however, it be the good in his house. Joseph, address
himself to the parson, tell he the discourse which have past between
Squire Booby, his sister, and himself concern Fanny; he then
acquaint he with the danger whence he have rescue she, and
communicate some apprehension on her account. he conclude that he
should never have an easy moment till Fanny be absolutely his, and
beg that he might be suffer to fetch a licence, say he could
easily borrow the money. the parson answer, that he have already give
his sentiment concern a licence, and that a very few day would make
it unnecessary. "Joseph," say he, "I wish this haste doth not arise
rather from your impatience than your fear; but, as it certainly spring
from one of these cause, I will examine both. of each of these
therefore in their turn; and first for the first of these, namely,
impatience. now, child, I must inform you that, if in your purposed
marriage with this young woman you have no intention but the indulgence
of carnal appetite, you be guilty of a very heinous sin. marriage be
ordain for nobler purpose, as you will learn when you hear the
service provide on that occasion read to you. Nay, perhaps, if you be
a good lad, I, child, shall give you a sermon gratis, wherein I shall
demonstrate how little regard ought to be have to the flesh on such
occasion. the text will be Matthew the 5th, and part of the 28th
verse--_whosoever looketh on a woman, so as to lust after she_. the
latter part I shall omit, as foreign to my purpose. indeed, all such
brutal lust and affection be to be greatly subdue, if not totally
eradicate, before the vessel can be say to be consecrate to honour.
to marry with a view of gratify those inclination be a prostitution
of that holy ceremony, and must entail a curse on all who so lightly
undertake it. if, therefore, this haste arise from impatience, you be
to correct, and not give way to it. now, as to the second head which I
propose to speak to, namely, fear: it argue a diffidence, highly
criminal, of that Power in which alone we should put our trust, see
we may be well assure that he be able, not only to defeat the design
of our enemy, but even to turn their heart. instead of take,
therefore, any unjustifiable or desperate mean to rid ourselves of
fear, we should resort to prayer only on these occasion; and we may be
then certain of obtain what be good for we. when any accident
threaten we we be not to despair, nor, when it overtake we, to
grieve; we must submit in all thing to the will of Providence, and set
our affection so much on nothing here that we cannot quit it without
reluctance. you be a young man, and can know but little of this world;
I be old, and have see a great deal. all passion be criminal in
their excess; and even love itself, if it be not subservient to our
duty, may render we blind to it. have Abraham so love his son Isaac as
to refuse the sacrifice require, be there any of we who would not
condemn he? Joseph, I know your many good quality, and value you for
they; but, as I be to render an account of your soul, which be commit
to my cure, I cannot see any fault without remind you of it. you be
too much inclined to passion, child, and have set your affection so
absolutely on this young woman, that, if g-- require she at your hand,
I fear you would reluctantly part with she. now, believe I, no
Christian ought so to set his heart on any person or thing in this
world, but that, whenever it shall be require or take from he in any
manner by Divine Providence, he may be able, peaceably, quietly, and
contentedly to resign it." at which word one come hastily in, and
acquaint Mr Adams that his young son be drown. he stand silent a
moment, and soon begin to stamp about the room and deplore his loss with
the bitter agony. Joseph, who be overwhelmed with concern likewise,
recover himself sufficiently to endeavour to comfort the parson; in
which attempt he use many argument that he have at several time
remember out of his own discourse, both in private and public (for he
be a great enemy to the passion, and preach nothing more than the
conquest of they by reason and grace), but he be not at leisure now to
hearken to his advice. "child, child," say he, "do not go about
impossibility. have it be any other of my child I could have bear
it with patience; but my little prattler, the darling and comfort of my
old age--the little wretch, to be snatch out of life just at his
entrance into it; the sweet, well-temper boy, who never do a thing
to offend I. it be but this morning I give he his first lesson in
_Que Genus_. this be the very book he learn; poor child! it be of no
further use to thee now. he would have make the good scholar, and have
be an ornament to the church;--such part and such goodness never meet
in one so young." "and the handsome lad too," say Mrs Adams,
recover from a swoon in Fanny's arm. "my poor Jacky, shall I never
see thee more?" cry the parson. "yes, surely," say Joseph, "and in a
well place; you will meet again, never to part more." I believe the
parson do not hear these word, for he pay little regard to they, but
go on lamenting, whilst the tear trickle down into his bosom. at
last he cry out, "where be my little darling?" and be sallye out,
when to his great surprize and joy, in which I hope the reader will
sympathize, he meet his son in a wet condition indeed, but alive and
run towards he. the person who bring the news of his misfortune
have be a little too eager, as people sometimes be, from, I believe,
no very good principle, to relate ill news; and, see he fall into
the river, instead of run to his assistance, directly run to
acquaint his father of a fate which he have conclude to be inevitable,
but whence the child be relieve by the same poor pedlar who have
relieve his father before from a less distress. the parson's joy be
now as extravagant as his grief have be before; he kiss and embrace
his son a thousand time, and dance about the room like one frantic;
but as soon as he discover the face of his old friend the pedlar, and
hear the fresh obligation he have to he, what be his sensation? not
those which two courtier feel in one another's embrace; not those with
which a great man receive the vile treacherous engine of his wicked
purpose, not those with which a worthless young brother wish his
eld joy of a son, or a man congratulate his rival on his obtaining a
mistress, a place, or an honour.--No, reader; he feel the ebullition,
the overflowing of a full, honest, open heart, towards the person who
have confer a real obligation, and of which, if thou canst not
conceive an idea within, I will not vainly endeavour to assist thee.
when these tumult be over, the parson, take Joseph aside, proceed
thus--"No, Joseph, do not give too much way to thy passion, if thou
dost expect happiness." the patience of Joseph, nor perhaps of Job,
could bear no long; he interrupt the parson, say, "it be easy
to give advice than take it; nor do he perceive he could so entirely
conquer himself, when he apprehend he have lose his son, or when he
find he recover."--"boy," reply Adams, raise his voice, "it doth
not become green head to advise grey hairs.--Thou art ignorant of the
tenderness of fatherly affection; when thou art a father thou wilt be
capable then only of know what a father can feel. no man be oblige
to impossibility; and the loss of a child be one of those great trial
where our grief may be allow to become immoderate."--"Well, sir,"
cry Joseph, "and if I love a mistress as well as you your child,
surely her loss would grieve I equally."--"Yes, but such love be
foolishness and wrong in itself, and ought to be conquer," answer
Adams; "it savour too much of the flesh."--"Sure, sir," say Joseph,
"it be not sinful to love my wife, no, not even to doat on she to
distraction!"--"indeed but it be," say Adams. "every man ought to love
his wife, no doubt; we be command so to do; but we ought to love she
with moderation and discretion."--"I be afraid I shall be guilty of some
sin in spite of all my endeavour," say Joseph; "for I shall love
without any moderation, I be sure."--"you talk foolishly and
childishly," cry adams.--"indee," say Mrs Adams, who have listen to
the latter part of their conversation, "you talk more foolishly yourself.
I hope, my dear, you will never preach any such doctrine as that
husband can love their wife too well. if I know you have such a sermon
in the house I be sure I would burn it, and I declare, if I have not be
convince you have love I as well as you could, I can answer for
myself, I should have hat and despise you. Marry come up! fine
doctrine, indeed! a wife hath a right to insist on her husband's love
she as much as ever he can; and he be a sinful villain who doth not.
Doth he not promise to love she, and to comfort she, and to cherish she,
and all that? I be sure I remember it all as well as if I have repeat
it over but yesterday, and shall never forget it. besides, I be certain
you do not preach as you practise; for you have be a love and a
cherish husband to I; thatbe the truth on't; and why you should
endeavour to put such wicked nonsense into this young man's head I
cannot devise. donot hearken to he, Mr Joseph; be as good a husband as
you be able, and love your wife with all your body and soul too." here
a violent rap at the door put an end to their discourse, and produce a
scene which the reader will find in the next chapter.
CHAPTER IX.
_a visit which the polite Lady Booby and her polite friend pay to
the parson._
the Lady Booby have no soon have an account from the gentleman of his
meeting a wonderful beauty near her house, and perceive the rapture
with which he speak of she, than, immediately conclude it must be
Fanny, she begin to meditate a design of bring they well
acquaint; and to entertain hope that the fine clothe, present, and
promise of this youth, would prevail on she to abandon Joseph: she
therefore propose to her company a walk in the field before dinner,
when she lead they towards Mr Adams's house; and, as she approach it,
tell they if they please she would divert they with one of the most
ridiculous sight they have ever see, which be an old foolish parson,
who, she say, laugh, keep a wife and six brat on a salary of about
twenty pound a year; add, that there be not such another ragged
family in the parish. they all readily agree to this visit, and arrive
whilst Mrs Adams be declaim as in the last chapter. Beau Didapper,
which be the name of the young gentleman we have see rid towards
Lady Booby's, with his cane mimic the rap of a London footman at the
door. the people within, namely, Adams, his wife and three child,
Joseph, Fanny, and the pedlar, be all throw into confusion by this
knock, but Adams go directly to the door, which be open, the Lady
Booby and her company walk in, and be receive by the parson with
about two hundred bow, and by his wife with as many curtsy; the
latter tell the lady "she be ashamed to be see in such a pickle,
and that her house be in such a litter; but that if she have expect
such an honour from her ladyship she should have find she in a well
manner." the parson make no apology, though he be in his half-cassock
and a flannel nightcap. he say "they be heartily welcome to his poor
cottage," and turn to Mr Didapper, cry out, "_Non mea renidet in
domo lacunar_." the beau answer, "he do not understand Welsh;" at
which the parson star and make no reply.
Mr Didapper, or beau Didapper, be a young gentleman of about four foot
five inch in height. he wear his own hair, though the scarcity of it
might have give he sufficient excuse for a periwig. his face be thin
and pale; the shape of his body and leg none of the good, for he have
very narrow shoulder and no calf; and his gait might more properly be
call hop than walk. the qualification of his mind be well
adapt to his person. we shall handle they first negatively. he be not
entirely ignorant; for he could talk a little french and sing two or
three italian song; he have live too much in the world to be bashful,
and too much at court to be proud: he seem not much inclined to
avarice, for he be profuse in his expense; nor have he all the feature
of prodigality, for he never give a shilling: no hater of woman, for he
always dangle after they; yet so little subject to lust, that he have,
among those who know he well, the character of great moderation in his
pleasure; no drinker of wine; nor so addict to passion but that a hot
word or two from an adversary make he immediately cool.
now, to give he only a dash or two on the affirmative side: though he
be bear to an immense fortune, he choose, for the pitiful and dirty
consideration of a place of little consequence, to depend entirely on
the will of a fellow whom they call a great man; who treat he with
the utmost disrespect, and exact of he a plenary obedience to his
command, which he implicitly submit to, at the expense of his
conscience, his honour, and of his country, in which he have himself so
very large a share. and to finish his character; as he be entirely well
satisfied with his own person and part, so he be very apt to ridicule
and laugh at any imperfection in another. such be the little person, or
rather thing, that hop after Lady Booby into Mr Adams's kitchen.
the parson and his company retreat from the chimney-side, where they
have be seat, to give room to the lady and her. instead of return
any of the curtsy or extraordinary civility of Mrs Adams, the lady,
turn to Mr Booby, cry out, "_Quelle Bete! Quel Animal!_" and
presently after discover Fanny (for she do not need the circumstance
of her stand by Joseph to assure the identity of her person), she
ask the beau "whether he do not think she a pretty girl?"--"begad,
madam," answer he, "'tis the very same I meet." "I do not imagine,"
reply the lady, "you have so good a taste."--"because I never like
you, I warrant," cry the beau. "ridiculous!" say she: "you know you
be always my aversion." "I would never mention aversion," answer the
beau, "with that face[A]; dear Lady Booby, wash your face before you
mention aversion, I beseech you." he then laugh, and turn about to
coquet it with Fanny.
[a] lest this should appear unnatural to some reader, we think proper
to acquaint they, that it be take verbatim from very polite
conversation.
Mrs Adams have be all this time beg and pray the lady to sit
down, a favour which she at last obtain. the little boy to whom the
accident have happen, still keep his place by the fire, be chid by
his mother for not be more mannerly: but Lady Booby take his part,
and, commend his beauty, tell the parson he be his very picture. she
then, see a book in his hand, ask "if he could read?"--"yes," cry
Adams, "a little Latin, madam: he be just get into Quae Genus."--"a fig
for quere genius!" answer she; "let I hear he read a little
English."--"Lege, Dick, lege," say Adams: but the boy make no answer,
till he see the parson knit his brow, and then cry, "I donot
understand you, father."--"How, boy!" say Adams; "what doth lego make
in the imperative mood? Legito, doth it not?"--"ye," answer
Dick.--"And what besides ?" say the father. "lege," quoth the son,
after some hesitation. "a good boy," say the father: "and now, child,
what be the English of lego?"--to which the boy, after long puzzle,
answer, he could not tell. "how!" cry Adams, in a passion;--"what,
hath the water wash away your learning? why, what be Latin for the
English verb read? consider before you speak." the child consider some
time, and then the parson cry twice or thrice, "Le--, Le--." Dick
answer, "Lego."--"very well;--and then what be the English," say the
parson, "of the verb lego?"--"To read," cry Dick.--"Very well," say
the parson; "a good boy: you can do well if you will take pains.--i
assure your ladyship he be not much above eight year old, and be out of
his Propria quae Maribus already.--Come, Dick, read to she
ladyship;"--which she again desire, in order to give the beau time and
opportunity with Fanny, Dick begin as in the following chapter.
CHAPTER X.
_the history of two friend, which may afford an useful lesson to all
those person who happen to take up their residence in married
family._
"Leonard and Paul be two friend."--"pronounce it Lennard, child,"
cry the parson.--"pray, Mr Adams," say Lady Booby, "let your son read
without interruption." Dick then proceed. "Lennard and Paul be two
friend, who, have be educate together at the same school,
commence a friendship which they preserve a long time for each other.
it be so deeply fix in both their mind, that a long absence, during
which they have maintain no correspondence, do not eradicate nor
lessen it: but it revive in all its force at their first meeting, which
be not till after fifteen year' absence, most of which time Lennard
have spend in the East Indi-es."--"pronounce it short, Indies," say
Adams.--"Pray? sir, be quiet," say the lady.--The boy repeated--"in the
East Indies, whilst Paul have serve his king and country in the army. in
which different service they have find such different success, that
Lennard be now marry, and retire with a fortune of thirty thousand
pound; and Paul be arrive to the degree of a lieutenant of foot; and
be not worth a single shilling.
"the regiment in which Paul be station happen to be order into
quarter within a small distance from the estate which Lennard have
purchase, and where he be settle. this latter, who be now become a
country gentleman, and a justice of peace, come to attend the quarter
session in the town where his old friend be quarter, soon after his
arrival. some affair in which a soldier be concern occasion Paul to
attend the justice. Manhood, and time, and the change of climate have so
much altered Lennard, that Paul do not immediately recollect the
feature of his old acquaintance: but it be otherwise with Lennard. he
know Paul the moment he see he; nor could he contain himself from
quit the bench, and run hastily to embrace he. Paul stand at
first a little surprized; but have soon sufficient information from his
friend, whom he no soon remember than he return his embrace with a
passion which make many of the spectator laugh, and give to some few a
much high and more agreeable sensation.
"not to detain the reader with minute circumstance, Lennard insist on
his friend's return with he to his house that evening; which request
be comply with, and leave for a month's absence for Paul obtain of
the command officer.
"if it be possible for any circumstance to give any addition to the
happiness which Paul propose in this visit, he receive that additional
pleasure by find, on his arrival at his friend's house, that his lady
be an old acquaintance which he have formerly contract at his
quarter, and who have always appear to be of a most agreeable temper;
a character she have ever maintain among her intimate, be of that
number, every individual of which be call quite the good sort of woman
in the world.
"but, good as this lady be, she be still a woman; that be to say, an
angel, and not an angel."--"you must mistake, child," cry the parson,
"for you read nonsense."--"It be so in the book," answer the son. Mr
Adams be then silence by authority, and Dick proceeded--"For though
her person be of that kind to which man attribute the name of angel,
yet in her mind she be perfectly woman. of which a great degree of
obstinacy give the most remarkable and perhaps most pernicious instance.
"a day or two pass after Paul's arrival before any instance of this
appear; but it be impossible to conceal it long. both she and her
husband soon lose all apprehension from their friend's presence, and
fall to their dispute with as much vigour as ever. these be still
pursue with the utmost ardour and eagerness, however trifle the
cause be whence they first arise. Nay, however incredible it may
seem, the little consequence of the matter in debate be frequently
give as a reason for the fierceness of the contention, as thus: 'if you
love I, sure you would never dispute with I such a trifle as this.'
the answer to which be very obvious; for the argument would hold equally
on both side, and be constantly retort with some addition, as--'I be
sure I have much more reason to say so, who be in the right.' during all
these dispute, Paul always keep strict silence, and preserve an even
countenance, without show the least visible inclination to either
party. one day, however, when madam have leave the room in a violent fury,
Lennard could not refrain from refer his cause to his friend. be
ever anything so unreasonable, say he, as this woman? what shall I do
with she? I doat on she to distraction; nor have I any cause to complain
of, more than this obstinacy in her temper; whatever she assert, she
will maintain against all the reason and conviction in the world. pray
give I your advice.--first, say Paul, I will give my opinion, which
be, flatly, that you be in the wrong; for, suppose she be in the
wrong, be the subject of your contention any way material? what
signify it whether you be marry in a red or a yellow waistcoat? for
that be your dispute. now, suppose she be mistaken; as you love she
you say so tenderly, and I believe she deserve it, would it not have
be wise to have yield, though you certainly know yourself in the
right, than to give either she or yourself any uneasiness. for my own
part, if ever I marry, I be resolve to enter into an agreement with my
wife, that in all dispute (especially about trifle) that party who be
most convinced they be right shall always surrender the victory; by
which mean we shall both be forward to give up the cause. I own, say
Lennard, my dear friend, shake he by the hand, there be great truth
and reason in what you say; and I will for the future endeavour to
follow your advice. they soon after break up the conversation, and
Lennard, go to his wife, ask her pardon, and tell she his friend
have convince he he have be in the wrong. she immediately begin a vast
encomium on Paul, in which he second she, and both agree he be the
worthy and wise man upon earth. when next they meet, which be at
supper, though she have promise not to mention what her husband tell
she, she could not forbear cast the kind and most affectionate
look on Paul, and ask he, with the sweetest voice, whether she
should help he to some potted woodcock? potted partridge, my dear, you
mean, say the husband. my dear, say she, I ask your friend if he will
eat any potted woodcock; and I be sure I must know, who pot it. I
think I should know too, who shoot they, reply the husband, and I be
convince that I have not see a woodcock this year; however, though I
know I be in the right, I submit, and the potted partridge be pot
woodcock if you desire to have it so. it be equal to I, say she,
whether it be one or the other; but you would persuade one out of one's
sens; to be sure, you be always in the right in your own opinion; but
your friend, I believe, know which he be eat. Paul answer nothing,
and the dispute continue, as usual, the great part of the evening.
the next morning the lady, accidentally meet Paul, and be
convince he be her friend, and of her side, accost he thus:--i be
certain, sir, you have long since wonder at the unreasonableness of my
husband. he be indeed, in other respect, a good sort of man, but so
positive, that no woman but one of my comply temper could possibly
live with he. why, last night, now, be ever any creature so
unreasonable? I be certain you must condemn he. pray, answer I, be he
not in the wrong? Paul, after a short silence, speak as follow: I be
sorry, madam, that, as good manner oblige I to answer against my
will, so an adherence to truth force I to declare myself of a
different opinion. to be plain and honest, you be entirely in the
wrong; the cause I own not worth disputing, but the bird be undoubtedly
a partridge. o sir! reply the lady, I cannot possibly help your taste.
Madam, return Paul, that be very little material; for, have it be
otherwise, a husband might have expect submission.--Indeed! sir, say
she, I assure you!--Yes, madam, cry he, he might, from a person of
your excellent understanding; and pardon I for say, such a
condescension would have show a superiority of sense even to your
husband himself.--But, dear sir, say she, why should I submit when I be
in the right?--for that very reason, answer he; it would be the
great instance of affection imaginable; for can anything be a great
object of our compassion than a person we love in the wrong? ay, but I
should endeavour, say she, to set he right. pardon I, madam, answer
Paul: I will apply to your own experience if you ever find your
argument have that effect. the more our judgment err, the less we be
willing to own it: for my own part, I have always observe the person
who maintain the bad side in any contest be the warm. why, say
she, I must confess there be truth in what you say, and I will endeavour
to practise it. the husband then come in, Paul depart. and Leonard,
approach his wife with an air of good humour, tell she he be sorry
for their foolish dispute the last night; but he be now convinced of
his error. she answer, smile, she believe she owe his
condescension to his complacence; that she be ashamed to think a word
have pass on so silly an occasion, especially as she be satisfy she
have be mistake. a little contention follow, but with the utmost
good-will to each other, and be conclude by she assert that Paul
have thoroughly convince she she have be in the wrong. upon which they
both unite in the praise of their common friend.
"Paul now pass his time with great satisfaction, these dispute be
much less frequent, as well as short than usual; but the devil, or
some unlucky accident in which perhaps the devil have no hand, shortly
put an end to his happiness. he be now eternally the private referee of
every difference; in which, after have perfectly, as he think,
establish the doctrine of submission, he never scruple to assure both
privately that they be in the right in every argument, as before he
have follow the contrary method. one day a violent litigation happen
in his absence, and both party agree to refer it to his decision. the
husband profess himself sure the decision would be in his favour; the
wife answer, he might be mistake; for she believe his friend be
convince how seldom she be to blame; and that if he know all--the
husband reply, my dear, I have no desire of any retrospect; but I
believe, if you know all too, you would not imagine my friend so
entirely on your side. Nay, say she, since you provoke I, I will
mention one instance. you may remember our dispute about send Jackey
to school in cold weather, which point I give up to you from mere
compassion, know myself to be in the right; and Paul himself tell I
afterwards he think I so. my dear, reply the husband, I will not
scruple your veracity; but I assure you solemnly, on my applying to he,
he give it absolutely on my side, and say he would have act in the
same manner. they then proceed to produce numberless other instance,
in all which Paul have, on vow of secresy, give his opinion on both
side. in the conclusion, both believe each other, they fall severely
on the treachery of Paul, and agree that he have be the occasion of
almost every dispute which have fall out between they. they then become
extremely loving, and so full of condescension on both side, that they
vye with each other in censure their own conduct, and jointly vent
their indignation on Paul, whom the wife, fear a bloody consequence,
earnestly entreat her husband to suffer quietly to depart the next
day, which be the time fix for his return to quarter, and then drop
his acquaintance.
"however ungenerous this behaviour in Lennard may be esteem, his wife
obtain a promise from he (though with difficulty) to follow her
advice; but they both express such unusual coldness that day to Paul,
that he, who be quick of apprehension, take Lennard aside, press
he so home, that he at last discover the secret. Paul acknowledge
the truth, but tell he the design with which he have do it.--to which
the other answer, he would have act more friendly to have let he
into the whole design; for that he might have assure himself of his
secresy. Paul reply, with some indignation, he have give he a
sufficient proof how capable he be of conceal a secret from his
wife. Lennard return with some warmth--he have more reason to upbraid
he, for that he have cause most of the quarrel between they by his
strange conduct, and might (if they have not discover the affair to
each other) have be the occasion of their separation. Paul then
said"--but something now happen which put a stop to Dick's reading,
and of which we shall treat in the next chapter.
CHAPTER XI.
_in which the history be continue._
Joseph Andrews have bear with great uneasiness the impertinence of beau
Didapper to Fanny, who have be talk pretty freely to she, and
offer her settlement; but the respect to the company have restrain
he from interfere whilst the beau confine himself to the use of his
tongue only; but the say beau, watch an opportunity whilst the
lady' eye be dispose another way, offer a rudeness to she with
his hand; which Joseph no soon perceive than he present he with
so sound a box on the ear, that it convey he several pace from where
he stand. the lady immediately scream out, rise from their chair;
and the beau, as soon as he recover himself, draw his hanger: which
Adams observe, snatch up the lid of a pot in his left hand, and,
cover himself with it as with a shield, without any weapon of offence
in his other hand, stept in before Joseph, and expose himself to the
enrage beau, who threaten such perdition and destruction, that it
fright the woman, who be all get in a huddle together, out of their
wit, even to hear his denunciation of vengeance. Joseph be of a
different complexion, and beg Adams to let his rival come on; for he
have a good cudgel in his hand, and do not fear he. Fanny now faint
into Mrs Adams's arm, and the whole room be in confusion, when Mr
Booby, pass by Adams, who lie snug under the pot-lid, come up to
Didapper, and insist on his sheathe the hanger, promise he should
have satisfaction; which Joseph declare he would give he, and fight
he at any weapon whatever. the beau now sheathe his hanger, and take
out a pocket-glass, and vow vengeance all the time, re-adjusted his
hair; the parson deposit his shield; and Joseph, run to Fanny,
soon bring she back to life. Lady Booby chid Joseph for his insult on
Didapper; but he answer, he would have attack an army in the same
cause. "what cause?" say the lady. "Madam," answer Joseph, "he be
rude to that young woman."--"what," say the lady, "I suppose he would
have kiss the wench; and be a gentleman to be strike for such an
offer? I must tell you, Joseph, these air do not become you."--"madam,"
say Mr Booby, "I see the whole affair, and I do not commend my brother;
for I cannot perceive why he should take upon he to be this girl's
champion."--"i can commend he," say Adams: "he be a brave lad; and it
become any man to be the champion of the innocent; and he must be the
base coward who would not vindicate a woman with whom he be on the
brink of marriage."--"sir," say Mr Booby, "my brother be not a proper
match for such a young woman as this."--"No," say Lady Booby; "nor do
you, Mr Adams, act in your proper character by encourage any such
doing; and I be very much surprize you should concern yourself in it.
I think your wife and family your properer care."--"Indeed, madam, your
ladyship say very true," answer Mrs Adams: "he talk a pack of
nonsense, that the whole parish be his child. I be sure I donot
understand what he mean by it; it would make some woman suspect he have
go astray, but I acquit he of that; I can read Scripture as well as
he, and I never find that the parson be oblige to provide for other
folk' child; and besides, he be but a poor curate, and hath little
enough, as your ladyship know, for I and mine."--"you say very well,
Mrs Adams," quoth the Lady Booby, who have not speak a word to she before;
"you seem to be a very sensible woman; and I assure you, your husband be
act a very foolish part, and oppose his own interest, see my
nephew be violently set against this match: and indeed I cannot blame
he; it be by no mean one suitable to our family." in this manner the
lady proceed with Mrs Adams, whilst the beau hop about the room,
shake his head, partly from pain and partly from anger; and Pamela be
chide Fanny for her assurance in aim at such a match as her
brother. poor Fanny answer only with her tear, which have long since
begin to wet her handkerchief; which Joseph perceiving, take she by the
arm, and wrap it in his carry she off, swear he would own no
relation to any one who be an enemy to she he love more than all the
world. he go out with Fanny under his left arm, brandish a cudgel
in his right, and neither Mr Booby nor the beau think proper to oppose
he. Lady Booby and her company make a very short stay behind he; for
the lady's bell now summon they to dress; for which they have just time
before dinner.
Adams seem now very much deject, which his wife perceive, begin to
apply some matrimonial balsam. she tell he he have reason to be
concern, for that he have probably ruin his family with his trick
almost; but perhaps he be grieve for the loss of his two child,
Joseph and Fanny. his eld daughter go on: "indeed, father, it be
very hard to bring stranger here to eat your child's bread out of
their mouth. you have keep they ever since they come home; and, for
anything I see to the contrary, may keep they a month long; be you
oblige to give her meat, tho'f she be never so handsome? but I donot
see she be so much handsomer than other people. if people be to be
keep for their beauty, she would scarce fare well than her neighbour,
I believe. as for Mr Joseph, I have nothing to say; he be a young man of
honest principle, and will pay some time or other for what he hath; but
for the girl--why doth she not return to her place she run away from? I
would not give such a vagabond slut a halfpenny though I have a million
of money; no, though she be starve." "indeed but I would," cry
little Dick; "and, father, rather than poor Fanny shall be starve, I
will give she all this bread and cheese"--(offere what he hold in his
hand). Adams smile on the boy, and tell he he rejoice to see he be a
Christian; and that if he have a halfpenny in his pocket, he would have
give it he; tell he it be his duty to look upon all his
neighbour as his brother and sister, and love they accordingly. "yes,
papa," say he, "I love she well than my sister, for she be handsomer
than any of they." "be she so, saucebox?" say the sister, give he a
box on the ear; which the father would probably have resent, have not
Joseph, Fanny, and the pedlar at that instant return together. Adams
bid his wife prepare some food for their dinner; she say, "truly she
could not, she have something else to do." Adams rebuke she for
dispute his command, and quote many text of scripture to prove
"that the husband be the head of the wife, and she be to submit and
obey." the wife answer, "it be blasphemy to talk scripture out of
church; that such thing be very proper to be say in the pulpit, but
that it be profane to talk they in common discourse." Joseph tell Mr
Adams "he be not come with any design to give he or Mrs Adams any
trouble; but to desire the favour of all their company to the George (an
ale-house in the parish), where he have bespeak a piece of bacon and
green for their dinner." Mrs Adams, who be a very good sort of woman,
only rather too strict in oeconomie, readily accept this invitation,
as do the parson himself by her example; and away they all walk
together, not omit little Dick, to whom Joseph give a shilling when
he hear of his intend liberality to Fanny.
CHAPTER XII.
_where the good-natured reader will see something which will give he no
great pleasure._
the pedlar have be very inquisitive from the time he have first hear
that the great house in this parish belong to the Lady Booby, and have
learn that she be the widow of Sir Thomas, and that Sir Thomas have
buy Fanny, at about the age of three or four year, of a travel
woman; and, now their homely but hearty meal be end, he tell Fanny
he believe he could acquaint she with her parent. the whole company,
especially she herself, start at this offer of the pedlar's. he then
proceed thus, while they all lend their strictest attention:--"though
I be now content with this humble way of get my livelihood, I be
formerly a gentleman; for so all those of my profession be call. in
a word, I be a drummer in an irish regiment of foot. whilst I be in
this honourable station I attend an officer of our regiment into
England a-recruiting. in our march from Bristol to Froome (for since
the decay of the woollen trade the clothing town have furnish the
army with a great number of recruit) we overtake on the road a woman,
who seem to be about thirty year old or thereabout, not very
handsome, but well enough for a soldier. as we come up to she, she
mend her pace, and fall into discourse with our lady (for every
man of the party, namely, a serjeant, two private man, and a drum, be
provide with their woman except myself), she continue to travel on
with we. I, perceive she must fall to my lot, advance presently to
she, make love to she in our military way, and quickly succeed to my
wish. we strike a bargain within a mile, and live together as man
and wife to her die day." "I suppose," say Adams, interrupt he,
"you be marry with a licence; for I donot see how you could
contrive to have the bann publish while you be march from place
to place." "no, sir," say the pedlar, "we take a licence to go to bed
together without any bann." "ay! ay!" say the parson; "_ex
necessitate_, a licence may be allowable enough; but surely, surely,
the other be the more regular and eligible way." the pedlar proceed
thus: "she return with I to our regiment, and remove with we from
quarter to quarter, till at last, whilst we lay at Galloway, she fall
ill of a fever and die. when she be on her death-bed she call I to
she, and, cry bitterly, declare she could not depart this world
without discover a secret to I, which, she say, be the only sin
which sit heavy on her heart. she say she have formerly travel in a
company of gypsy, who have make a practice of steal away child;
that for her own part, she have be only once guilty of the crime;
which, she say, she lament more than all the rest of her sin, since
probably it might have occasion the death of the parent; for, add
she, it be almost impossible to describe the beauty of the young
creature, which be about a year and a half old when I kidnap it. we
keep she (for she be a girl) above two year in our company, when I
sell she myself, for three guinea, to Sir Thomas Booby, in
Somersetshire. now, you know whether there be any more of that name in
this county." "yes," say Adams, "there be several Boobys who be
squire, but I believe no baronet now alive; besides, it answer so
exactly in every point, there be no room for doubt; but you have forget
to tell we the parent from whom the child be steal." "their name,"
answer the pedlar, "be Andrews. they live about thirty mile from
the squire; and she tell I that I might be sure to find they out by
one circumstance; for that they have a daughter of a very strange name,
Pamela, or pam_e_la; some pronounce it one way, and some the other."
Fanny, who have change colour at the first mention of the name, now
faint away; Joseph turn pale, and poor Dicky begin to roar; the
parson fall on his knee, and ejaculate many thanksgiving that this
discovery have be make before the dreadful sin of incest be
commit; and the pedlar be strike with amazement, not be able to
account for all this confusion; the cause of which be presently open
by the parson's daughter, who be the only unconcerned person (for the
mother be chafe Fanny's temple, and take the utmost care of she):
and, indeed, Fanny be the only creature whom the daughter would not
have pity in her situation; wherein, though we compassionate her
ourselves, we shall leave she for a little while, and pay a short visit
to Lady Booby.
CHAPTER XIII.
_the history, return to the Lady Booby, give some account of the
terrible conflict in her breast between love and pride; with what
happen on the present discovery._
the lady sit down with her company to dinner, but eat nothing. as soon
as her cloth be remove she whisper Pamela that she be take a
little ill, and desire she to entertain her husband and beau Didapper.
she then go up into her chamber, send for Slipslop, throw herself on
the bed in the agony of love, rage, and despair; nor could she conceal
these boiling passion long without burst. Slipslop now approach
her bed, and ask how her ladyship do; but, instead of reveal she
disorder, as she intend, she enter into a long encomium on the
beauty and virtue of Joseph Andrews; end, at last, with express
her concern that so much tenderness should be throw away on so
despicable an object as Fanny. Slipslop, well know how to humour her
mistress's frenzy, proceed to repeat, with exaggeration, if possible,
all her mistress have say, and conclude with a wish that Joseph have
be a gentleman, and that she could see her lady in the arm of such a
husband. the lady then start from the bed, and, take a turn or two
across the room, cry out, with a deep sigh, "sure he would make any
woman happy!"--"your ladyship," say she, "would be the happy woman
in the world with he. a fig for custom and nonsense! what 'vail what
people say? shall I be afraid of eat sweetmeat because people may
say I have a sweet tooth? if I have a mind to marry a man, all the world
should not hinder I. your ladyship hath no parent to tutelar your
infection; besides, he be of your ladyship's family now, and as good a
gentleman as any in the country; and why should not a woman follow her
mind as well as man? why should not your ladyship marry the brother as
well as your nephew the sister. I be sure, if it be a fragrant crime, I
would not persuade your ladyship to it."--"but, dear Slipslop," answer
the lady, "if I could prevail on myself to commit such a weakness, there
be that curse Fanny in the way, whom the idiot--o how I hate and
despise him!"--"She! a little ugly mynx," cry Slipslop; "leave she to
I. I suppose your ladyship hath hear of Joseph's fitting with one of
Mr Didapper's servant about she; and his master hath order they to
carry she away by force this evening. Iwill take care they shall not want
assistance. I be talk with this gentleman, who be below, just when
your ladyship send for I."--"Go back," say the Lady Booby, "this
instant, for I expect Mr Didapper will soon be go. do all you can;
for I be resolve this wench shall not be in our family: I will
endeavour to return to the company; but let I know as soon as she be
carry off." Slipslop go away; and her mistress begin to arraign her
own conduct in the follow manner:--
"what be I do? how do I suffer this passion to creep imperceptibly
upon I? how many day be past since I could have submit to ask
myself the question?--marry a footman! distraction! can I afterwards
bear the eye of my acquaintance? but I can retire from they; retire
with one in whom I propose more happiness than the world without he
can give I! retire-to feed continually on beauty which my inflame
imagination sicken with eagerly gaze on; to satisfy every appetite,
every desire, with their utmost wish. ha! and do I doat thus on a
footman? I despise, I detest my passion.--Yet why? be he not generous,
gentle, kind?--kind! to whom? to the mean wretch, a creature below my
consideration. Doth he not--yes, he doth prefer she. curse his beauty,
and the little low heart that possess they; which can basely descend
to this despicable wench, and be ungratefully deaf to all the honour I
do he. and can I then love this monster? no, I will tear his image from
my bosom, tread on he, spurn he. I will have those pitiful charm,
which now I despise, mangle in my sight; for I will not suffer the
little jade I hate to riot in the beauty I contemn. no; though I
despise he myself, though I would spurn he from my foot, be he to
languish at they, no other should taste the happiness I scorn. why do I
say happiness? to I it would be misery. to sacrifice my reputation, my
character, my rank in life, to the indulgence of a mean and a vile
appetite! how I det the thought! how much more exquisite be the
pleasure result from the reflection of virtue and prudence than the
faint relish of what flow from vice and folly! whither do I suffer
this improper, this mad passion to hurry I, only by neglect to
summon the aid of reason to my assistance? Reason, which hath now set
before I my desire in their proper colour, and immediately help I
to expel they. yes, I thank Heaven and my pride, I have now perfectly
conquer this unworthy passion; and if there be no obstacle in its
way, my pride would disdain any pleasure which could be the consequence
of so base, so mean, so vulgar--" Slipslop return at this instant in a
violent hurry, and with the utmost eagerness cry out, "o madam! I have
strange news. Tom the footman be just come from the George; where, it
seem, Joseph and the rest of they be a jinketting; and he say there
be a strange man who hath discover that Fanny and Joseph be brother
and sister."--"How, Slipslop?" cry the lady, in a surprize.--"i have
not time, madam," cry Slipslop, "to enquire about particle, but Tom
say it be most certainly true."
this unexpected account entirely obliterate all those admirable
reflection which the supreme power of reason have so wisely make just
before. in short, when despair, which have more share in produce the
resolution of hatred we have see take, begin to retreat, the lady
hesitate a moment, and then, forget all the purport of her
soliloquy, dismiss her woman again, with order to bid Tom attend she
in the parlour, whither she now hasten to acquaint Pamela with the
news. Pamela say she could not believe it; for she have never hear that
her mother have lose any child, or that she have ever have any more than
Joseph and herself. the lady fly into a violent rage with she, and
talk of upstart and disown relation who have so lately be on a
level with she. Pamela make no answer; but her husband, take up her
cause, severely reprimand his aunt for her behaviour to his wife: he
tell she, if it have be early in the evening she should not have
staid a moment long in her house; that he be convince, if this young
woman could be prove her sister, she would readily embrace she as such,
and he himself would do the same. he then desire the fellow might be
send for, and the young woman with he, which Lady Booby immediately
order; and, think proper to make some apology to Pamela for what
she have say, it be readily accept, and all thing reconcile.
the pedlar now attend, as do Fanny and Joseph, who would not quit
she; the parson likewise be induce, not only by curiosity, of which he
have no small portion, but his duty, as he apprehend it, to follow
they; for he continue all the way to exhort they, who be now break
their heart, to offer up thanksgiving, and be joyful for so miraculous
an escape.
when they arrive at Booby-Hall they be presently call into the
parlour, where the pedlar repeat the same story he have tell before,
and insist on the truth of every circumstance; so that all who hear
he be extremely well satisfied of the truth, except Pamela, who
imagine, as she have never hear either of her parent mention such an
accident, that it must be certainly false; and except the Lady Booby,
who suspect the falsehood of the story from her ardent desire that it
should be true; and Joseph, who fear its truth, from his earnest
wish that it might prove false.
Mr Booby now desire they all to suspend their curiosity and absolute
belief or disbelief till the next morning, when he expect old Mr
Andrews and his wife to fetch himself and Pamela home in his coach, and
then they might be certain of certainly know the truth or falsehood
of this relation; in which, he say, as there be many strong
circumstance to induce their credit, so he could not perceive any
interest the pedlar could have in invent it, or in endeavour to
impose such a falsehood on they.
the Lady Booby, who be very little use to such company, entertain
they all--_viz_. her nephew, his wife, her brother and sister, the beau,
and the parson, with great good humour at her own table. as to the
pedlar, she order he to be make as welcome as possible by her
servant. all the company in the parlour, except the disappoint
lover, who sit sullen and silent, be full of mirth; for Mr Booby have
prevail on Joseph to ask Mr Didapper's pardon, with which he be
perfectly satisfied. many joke pass between the beau and the parson,
chiefly on each other's dress; these afford much diversion to the
company. Pamela chide her brother Joseph for the concern which he exprest
at discover a new sister. she say, if he love Fanny as he ought,
with a pure affection, he have no reason to lament be relate to
her.--Upon which Adams begin to discourse on platonic love; whence he
make a quick transition to the joy in the next world, and conclude
with strongly assert that there be no such thing as pleasure in
this. at which Pamela and her husband smile on one another.
this happy pair propose to retire (for no other person give the least
symptom of desire rest), they all repair to several bed provide
for they in the same house; nor be Adams himself suffer to go home,
it be a stormy night. Fanny indeed often beg she might go home
with the parson; but her stay be so strongly insist on, that she at
last, by Joseph's advice, consent.
CHAPTER XIV.
_contain several curious night-adventure, in which Mr Adams fall
into many hair-breadth 'scape, partly owe to his goodness, and partly
to his inadvertency._
about an hour after they have all separate (it be now past three in
the morning), beau Didapper, whose passion for Fanny permit he not
to close his eye, but have employ his imagination in contrivance how
to satisfy his desire, at last hit on a method by which he hop to
effect it. he have order his servant to bring he word where Fanny lay,
and have receive his information; he therefore arise, put on his
breech and nightgown, and steal softly along the gallery which lead to
her apartment; and, be come to the door, as he imagine it, he open
it with the least noise possible and enter the chamber. a savour now
invade his nostril which he do not expect in the room of so sweet a
young creature, and which might have probably have no good effect on a
cool lover. however, he grope out the bed with difficulty, for there
be not a glimpse of light, and, open the curtain, he whisper in
Joseph's voice (for he be an excellent mimic), "Fanny, my angel! I be
come to inform thee that I have discover the falsehood of the story we
last night hear. I be no long thy brother, but the lover; nor will I
be delay the enjoyment of thee one moment long. you have sufficient
assurance of my constancy not to doubt my marry you, and it would be
want of love to deny I the possession of thy charm."--So say, he
disencumber himself from the little clothe he have on, and, leap
into bed, embrace his angel, as he conceive she, with great rapture.
if he be surprize at receive no answer, he be no less pleased to
find his hug return with equal ardour. he remain not long in this
sweet confusion; for both he and his paramour presently discover their
error. indeed it be no other than the accomplished Slipslop whom he have
engage; but, though she immediately know the person whom she have
mistake for Joseph, he be at a loss to guess at the representative of
Fanny. he have so little see or take notice of this gentlewoman, that
light itself would have afford he no assistance in his conjecture.
Beau Didapper no soon have perceive his mistake than he attempt to
escape from the bed with much great haste than he have make to it; but
the watchful Slipslop prevent he. for that prudent woman, be
disappoint of those delicious offering which her fancy have promise
her pleasure, resolve to make an immediate sacrifice to her virtue.
indeed she want an opportunity to heal some wound, which her late
conduct have, she fear, give her reputation; and, as she have a
wonderful presence of mind, she conceive the person of the unfortunate
beau to be luckily throw in her way to restore her lady's opinion of
her impregnable chastity. at that instant, therefore, when he offer to
leap from the bed, she catch fast hold of his shirt, at the same time
roar out, "o thou villain! who hast attack my chastity, and, I
believe, ruin I in my sleep; I will swear a rape against thee, I will
prosecute thee with the utmost vengeance." the beau attempt to get
loose, but she hold he fast, and when he struggle she cry out
"murder! murder! rape! robbery! ruin!" at which word, parson Adams, who
lie in the next chamber, wakeful, and meditate on the pedlar's
discovery, jump out of bed, and, without stay to put a rag of
clothe on, hasten into the apartment whence the cry proceed. he
make directly to the bed in the dark, where, lay hold of the beau's
skin (for Slipslop have tear his shirt almost off), and find his skin
extremely soft, and hear he in a low voice beg Slipslop to let
he go, he no long doubt but this be the young woman in danger of
ravish, and immediately fall on the bed, and lay hold on
Slipslop's chin, where he find a rough beard, his belief be confirm;
he therefore rescue the beau, who presently make his escape, and then,
turn towards Slipslop, receive such a cuff on his chop, that, his
wrath kindling instantly, he offer to return the favour so stoutly,
that have poor Slipslop receive the fist, which in the dark pass by
she and fall on the pillow, she would most probably have give up the
ghost. Adams, miss his blow, fall directly on Slipslop, who cuff
and scratch as well as she could; nor be he behindhand with she in
his endeavour, but happily the darkness of the night befriend she.
she then cry she be a woman; but Adams answer, she be rather the
devil, and if she be he would grapple with he; and, be again
irritate by another stroke on his chop, he give she such a remembrance
in the gut, that she begin to roar loud enough to be hear all over the
house. Adams then, seize she by the hair (for her double-clout have
fall off in the scuffle), pin her head down to the bolster, and
then both call for light together. the Lady Booby, who be as wakeful
as any of her guest, have be alarm from the beginning; and, be a
woman of a bold spirit, she slipt on a nightgown, petticoat, and
slipper, and take a candle, which always burn in her chamber, in she
hand, she walk undauntedly to Slipslop's room; where she enter just
at the instant as Adams have discover, by the two mountain which
Slipslop carry before she, that he be concern with a female. he
then conclude she to be a witch, and say he fancy those breast give
suck to a legion of devil. Slipslop, see Lady Booby enter the room,
cry help! or I be ravish, with a most audible voice: and Adams,
perceive the light, turn hastily, and see the lady (as she do he)
just as she come to the foot of the bed; nor do her modesty, when she
find the naked condition of Adams, suffer she to approach far. she
then begin to revile the parson as the wicked of all man, and
particularly rail at his impudence in chuse her house for the scene
of his debauchery, and her own woman for the object of his bestiality.
Poor Adams have before discover the countenance of his bedfellow, and,
now first recollect he be naked, he be no less confounded than Lady
Booby herself, and immediately whipt under the bedclothe, whence the
chaste Slipslop endeavour in vain to shut he out. then put forth
his head, on which, by way of ornament, he wear a flannel nightcap, he
protest his innocence, and ask ten thousand pardon of Mrs Slipslop
for the blow he have strike she, vow he have mistake she for a witch.
Lady Booby, then cast her eye on the ground, observe something
sparkle with great lustre, which, when she have take it up, appear to
be a very fine pair of diamond button for the sleeve. a little far
she see lie the sleeve itself of a shirt with laced ruffle. "Heyday!"
say she, "what be the meaning of this?" "o, madam," say Slipslop, "I
donot know what hath happen, I have be so terrified. here may have
be a dozen man in the room." "to whom belong this laced shirt and
jewel?" say the lady. "undoubtedly," cry the parson, "to the young
gentleman whom I mistook for a woman on come into the room, whence
proceed all the subsequent mistake; for if I have suspect he for a
man, I would have seize he, have he be another Hercules, though,
indeed, he seem rather to resemble Hylas." he then give an account of
the reason of his rise from bed, and the rest, till the lady come into
the room; at which, and the figure of Slipslop and her gallant, whose
head only be visible at the opposite corner of the bed, she could
not refrain from laughter; nor do Slipslop persist in accuse the
parson of any motion towards a rape. the lady therefore desire he to
return to his bed as soon as she be depart, and then order
Slipslop to rise and attend she in her own room, she return herself
thither. when she be go, Adams renew his petition for pardon to
Mrs Slipslop, who, with a most christian temper, not only forgave, but
begin to move with much courtesy towards he, which he take as a hint
to begin, immediately quit the bed, and make the good of his way
towards his own; but unluckily, instead of turn to the right, he
turn to the left, and go to the apartment where Fanny lie, who (as
the reader may remember) have not sleep a wink the precede night, and
who be so hagge out with what have happen to she in the day, that,
notwithstanding all thought of her Joseph, she be fall into so
profound a sleep, that all the noise in the adjoining room have not be
able to disturb she. Adams grope out the bed, and, turn the clothe
down softly, a custom Mrs Adams have long accustom he to, creep in,
and deposit his carcase on the bed-post, a place which that good woman
have always assign he.
as the cat or lap-dog of some lovely nymph, for whom ten thousand lover
languish, lie quietly by the side of the charming maid, and, ignorant
of the scene of delight on which they repose, meditate the future
capture of a mouse, or surprisal of a plate of bread and butter: so
Adams lie by the side of Fanny, ignorant of the paradise to which he be
so near; nor could the emanation of sweet which flow from her breath
overpower the fume of tobacco which play in the parson's nostril.
and now sleep have not overtake the good man, when Joseph, who have
secretly appoint Fanny to come to she at the break of day, rap
softly at the chamber-door, which when he have repeat twice, Adams
cry, "come in, whoever you be." Joseph think he have mistake the
door, though she have give he the most exact direction; however,
know his friend's voice, he open it, and see some female vestment
lie on a chair. fanny wake at the same instant, and stretch out
her hand on Adams's beard, she cry out,--"O heavens! where be I?"
"bless I! where be I?" say the parson. then Fanny scream, Adams
leapt out of bed, and Joseph stand, as the tragedians call it, like the
statue of Surprize. "how come she into my room?" cry Adams. "how come
you into her?" cry Joseph, in an astonishment. "I know nothing of the
matter," answer Adams, "but that she be a vestal for I. as I be a
Christian, I know not whether she be a man or woman. he be an infidel
who doth not believe in witchcraft. they as surely exist now as in the
day of Saul. my clothe be bewitch away too, and Fanny's bring
into their place." for he still insist he be in his own apartment;
but Fanny deny it vehemently, and say his attempt to persuade
Joseph of such a falsehood convince she of his wicked design. "how!"
say Joseph in a rage, "hath he offer any rudeness to you?" she
answer--she could not accuse he of any more than villanously steal
to bed to she, which she think rudeness sufficient, and what no man
would do without a wicked intention.
Joseph's great opinion of Adams be not easily to be stagger, and when
he hear from Fanny that no harm have happen he grow a little cool;
yet still he be confound, and, as he know the house, and that the
woman's apartment be on this side Mrs Slipslop's room, and the man's
on the other, he be convince that he be in Fanny's chamber. assure
Adams therefore of this truth, he beg he to give some account how he
come there. Adams then, stand in his shirt, which do not offend
Fanny, as the curtain of the bed be draw, relate all that have
happen; and when he have end Joseph tell him,--it be plain he have
mistake by turn to the right instead of the left. "Odso!" cry
Adams, "thatbe true: as sure as sixpence, you have hit on the very
thing." he then traverse the room, rub his hand, and beg
Fanny's pardon, assure she he do not know whether she be man or
woman. that innocent creature firmly believe all he say, tell he she
be no long angry, and beg Joseph to conduct he into his own
apartment, where he should stay himself till she have put her clothe on.
Joseph and Adams accordingly depart, and the latter soon be convince
of the mistake he have commit; however, whilst he be dress
himself, he often assert he believe in the power of witchcraft
notwithstanding, and do not see how a Christian could deny it.
CHAPTER XV.
_the arrival of Gaffar and Gammar Andrews, with another person not
much expect; and a perfect solution of the difficulty raise by
the pedlar._
as soon as Fanny be dr Joseph return to she, and they have a long
conversation together, the conclusion of which be, that, if they find
themselves to be really brother and sister, they vow a perpetual
celibacy, and to live together all their day, and indulge a platonic
friendship for each other.
the company be all very merry at breakfast, and Joseph and Fanny
rather more chearful than the precede night. the Lady Booby produce
the diamond button, which the beau most readily own, and alledge that
he be very subject to walk in his sleep. indeed, he be far from be
ashamed of his amour, and rather endeavour to insinuate that more than
be really true have pass between he and the fair Slipslop.
their tea be scarce over when news come of the arrival of old Mr
Andrews and his wife. they be immediately introduce, and kindly
receive by the Lady Booby, whose heart go now pit-a-pat, as do those
of Joseph and Fanny. they feel, perhaps, little less anxiety in this
interval than Oedipus himself, whilst his fate be reveal.
Mr Booby first open the cause by inform the old gentleman that he
have a child in the company more than he know of, and, take Fanny by
the hand, tell he, this be that daughter of his who have be steal
away by gypsy in her infancy. Mr Andrews, after express some
astonishment, assure his honour that he have never lose a daughter by
gypsy, nor ever have any other child than Joseph and Pamela. these
word be a cordial to the two lover; but have a different effect on
Lady Booby. she order the pedlar to be call, who recount his story
as he have do before.--at the end of which, old Mrs Andrews, run to
Fanny, embrace she, cry out, "she be, she be my child!" the company
be all amazed at this disagreement between the man and his wife; and
the blood have now forsake the cheek of the lover, when the old woman,
turn to her husband, who be more surprized than all the rest, and
have a little recover her own spirit, deliver herself as follow:
"you may remember, my dear, when you go a serjeant to Gibraltar, you
leave I big with child; you stay abroad, you know, upwards of three
year. in your absence I be bring to bed, I verily believe, of this
daughter, whom I be sure I have reason to remember, for I suckle she at
this very breast till the day she be steal from I. one afternoon,
when the child be about a year, or a year and a half old, or
thereabout, two gypsy-woman come to the door and offer to tell my
fortune. one of they have a child in her lap. I show they my hand, and
desire to know if you be ever to come home again, which I remember as
well as if it be but yesterday: they faithfully promise I you
should.--i leave the girl in the cradle and go to draw they a cup of
liquor, the good I have: when I return with the pot (I be sure I be
not absent long than whilst I be tell it to you) the woman be
go. I be afraid they have steal something, and look and look, but
to no purpose, and, Heaven know, I have very little for they to steal.
at last, hear the child cry in the cradle, I go to take it up--but,
o the living! how be I surprize to find, instead of my own girl that I
have put into the cradle, who be as fine a fat thrive child as you
shall see in a summer's day, a poor sickly boy, that do not seem to
have an hour to live. I run out, pull my hair off and cry like any
mad after the woman, but never could hear a word of they from that day
to this. when I come back the poor infant (which be our Joseph there, as
stout as he now stand) lift up its eye upon I so piteously, that,
to be sure, notwithstanding my passion, I could not find in my heart to
do it any mischief. a neighbour of mine, happen to come in at the
same time, and hear the case, advise I to take care of this poor
child, and God would perhaps one day restore I my own. upon which I
take the child up, and suckle it to be sure, all the world as if it have
be bear of my own natural body; and as true as I be alive, in a little
time I love the boy all to nothing as if it have be my own
girl.--well, as I be say, time grow very hard, I have two
child and nothing but my own work, which be little enough, God
know, to maintain they, be oblige to ask relief of the parish; but,
instead of give it I, they remove I, by justice' warrant, fifteen
mile, to the place where I now live, where I have not be long settle
before you come home. Joseph (for that be the name I give he
myself--the Lord know whether he be baptize or no, or by what name),
Joseph, I say, seem to I about five year old when you return; for
I believe he be two or three year old than our daughter here (for I
be thoroughly convinced she be the same); and when you see he you say
he be a chop boy, without ever mind his age; and so I, see
you do not suspect anything of the matter, think I might e'en as well
keep it to myself, for fear you should not love he as well as I do.
and all this be veritably true, and I will take my oath of it before any
justice in the kingdom."
the pedlar, who have be summon by the order of Lady Booby, listen
with the utmost attention to Gammar Andrews's story; and, when she have
finish, ask she if the supposititious child have no mark on its
breast? to which she answer, "yes, he have as fine a strawberry as ever
grow in a garden." this Joseph acknowledge, and, unbutton his coat,
at the intercession of the company, show to they. "well," say Gaffar
Andrews, who be a comical sly old fellow, and very likely desire to
have no more child than he could keep, "you have prove, I think,
very plainly, that this boy doth not belong to we; but how be you
certain that the girl be ours?" the parson then bring the pedlar
forward, and desire he to repeat the story which he have communicate
to he the precede day at the ale-house; which he comply with, and
relate what the reader, as well as Mr Adams, hath see before. he then
confirm, from his wife's report, all the circumstance of the
exchange, and of the strawberry on Joseph's breast. at the repetition of
the word strawberry, Adams, who have see it without any emotion, start
and cry, "bless I! something come into my head." but before he have
time to bring anything out a servant call he forth. when he be go
the pedlar assure Joseph that his parent be person of much great
circumstance than those he have hitherto mistake for such; for that he
have be steal from a gentleman's house by those whom they call
gypsy, and have be keep by they during a whole year, when, look on
he as in a die condition, they have exchange he for the other
healthy child, in the manner before relate. he say, as to the name
of his father, his wife have either never know or forget it; but that
she have acquaint he he live about forty mile from the place where
the exchange have be make, and which way, promise to spare no pain
in endeavour with he to discover the place.
but Fortune, which seldom doth good or ill, or make man happy or
miserable, by half, resolve to spare he this labour. the reader may
please to recollect that Mr Wilson have intend a journey to the west,
in which he be to pass through Mr Adams's parish, and have promise to
call on he. he be now arrive at the Lady Booby's gate for that
purpose, be direct thither from the parson's house, and have send in
the servant whom we have above see call Mr Adams forth. this have no
soon mention the discovery of a steal child, and have utter the
word strawberry, than Mr Wilson, with wildness in his look, and the
utmost eagerness in his word, beg to be shew into the room, where
he enter without the least regard to any of the company but Joseph,
and, embrace he with a complexion all pale and trembling, desire to
see the mark on his breast; the parson follow he caper, rub
his hand, and cry out, _hic est quem quaeris; inventus est, &c_.
Joseph comply with the request of Mr Wilson, who no soon see the
mark than, abandon himself to the most extravagant rapture of
passion, he embrace Joseph with inexpressible ecstasy, and cry out in
tear of joy, "I have discover my son, I have he again in my arm!"
Joseph be not sufficiently apprize yet to taste the same delight with
his father (for so in reality he be); however, he return some warmth
to his embrace: but he no soon perceive, from his father's account,
the agreement of every circumstance, of person, time, and place, than he
throw himself at his foot, and, embrace his knee, with tear beg
his blessing, which be give with much affection, and receive with
such respect, mix with such tenderness on both side, that it affect
all present; but none so much as Lady Booby, who leave the room in an
agony, which be but too much perceive, and not very charitably
account for by some of the company.
CHAPTER XVI.
_be the last in which this true history be bring to a happy
conclusion._
Fanny be very little behind her Joseph in the duty she expr towards
her parent, and the joy she evidence in discover they. Gammar
Andrews kiss she, and say, she be heartily glad to see she; but for
her part, she could never love any one well than Joseph. Gaffar
Andrews testify no remarkable emotion: he bless and kiss she, but
complain bitterly that he want his pipe, not have have a whiff
that morning.
Mr Booby, who know nothing of his aunt's fondness, impute her abrupt
departure to her pride, and disdain of the family into which he be
marry; he be therefore desirous to be go with the utmost celerity;
and now, have congratulate Mr Wilson and Joseph on the discovery, he
salute Fanny, call her sister, and introduce she as such to Pamela,
who behave with great decency on the occasion.
he now send a message to his aunt, who return that she wish he a
good journey, but be too disorder to see any company: he therefore
prepare to set out, have invite Mr Wilson to his house; and Pamela
and Joseph both so insist on his complying, that he at last
consent, have first obtain a messenger from Mr Booby to acquaint
his wife with the news; which, as he know it would render she
completely happy, he could not prevail on himself to delay a moment in
acquaint she with.
the company be range in this manner: the two old people, with their
two daughter, ride in the coach; the squire, Mr Wilson, Joseph, parson
Adams, and the pedlar, proceed on horseback.
in their way, Joseph inform his father of his intend match with
Fanny; to which, though he express some reluctance at first, on the
eagerness of his son's instance he consent; say, if she be so
good a creature as she appear, and he describe she, he think the
disadvantage of birth and fortune might be compensate. he however
insist on the match be defer till he have see his mother; in
which, Joseph perceive he positive, with great duty obey he, to
the great delight of parson Adams, who by these mean see an
opportunity of fulfil the Church form, and marry his
parishioner without a licence.
Mr Adams, greatly exult on this occasion (for such ceremony be
matter of no small moment with he), accidentally give spur to his
horse, which the generous beast disdaining--for he be of high mettle,
and have be use to more expert rider than the gentleman who at
present bestrode he, for whose horsemanship he have perhaps some
contempt--immediately run away full speed, and play so many antic
trick that he tumble the parson from his back; which Joseph
perceiving, come to his relief.
this accident afford infinite merriment to the servant, and no less
fright poor Fanny, who behold he as he pass by the coach; but the
mirth of the one and terror of the other be soon determine, when the
parson declare he have receive no damage.
the horse have free himself from his unworthy rider, as he probably
think he, proceed to make the good of his way; but be stop by a
gentleman and his servant, who be travel the opposite way, and
be now at a little distance from the coach. they soon meet; and as one
of the servant deliver Adams his horse, his master hail he, and
Adams, look up, presently recollect he be the justice of peace
before whom he and Fanny have make their appearance. the parson presently
salute he very kindly; and the justice inform he that he have find
the fellow who attempt to swear against he and the young woman the
very next day, and have commit he to Salisbury gaol, where he be
charge with many robbery.
many compliment have pass between the parson and the justice, the
latter proceed on his journey; and the former, have with some
disdain refuse Joseph's offer of change horse, and declare he be
as able a horseman as any in the kingdom, remount his beast; and now
the company again proceed, and happily arrive at their journey's
end, Mr Adams, by good luck, rather than by good riding, escape a
second fall.
the company, arrive at Mr Booby's house, be all receive by he in
the most courteous and entertain in the most splendid manner, after
the custom of the old english hospitality, which be still preserve in
some very few family in the remote part of England. they all pass
that day with the utmost satisfaction; it be perhaps impossible to
find any set of people more solidly and sincerely happy. Joseph and
Fanny find mean to be alone upwards of two hour, which be the
short but the sweetest imaginable.
in the morning Mr Wilson propose to his son to make a visit with he to
his mother; which, notwithstanding his dutiful inclination, and a
longing desire he have to see she, a little concerned he, as he must be
oblige to leave his Fanny; but the goodness of Mr Booby relieve he;
for he propose to send his own coach and six for Mrs Wilson, whom
Pamela so very earnestly invite, that Mr Wilson at length agree with
the entreaty of Mr Booby and Joseph, and suffer the coach to go
empty for his wife.
on Saturday night the coach return with Mrs Wilson, who add one more
to this happy assembly. the reader may imagine much well and quick
too than I can describe the many embrace and tear of joy which
succeed her arrival. it be sufficient to say she be easily prevail
with to follow her husband's example in consent to the match.
on Sunday Mr Adams perform the service at the squire's parish church,
the curate of which very kindly exchange duty, and ride twenty mile to
the Lady Booby's parish so to do; be particularly charge not to omit
publish the bann, be the third and last time.
at length the happy day arrive which be to put Joseph in the
possession of all his wish. he arise, and drest himself in a neat but
plain suit of Mr Booby's, which exactly fit he; for he refuse all
finery; as do Fanny likewise, who could be prevail on by Pamela to
attire herself in nothing rich than a white dimity nightgown. her
shift indeed, which Pamela present she, be of the fine kind, and
have an edging of lace round the bosom. she likewise equip she with a
pair of fine white thread stocking, which be all she would accept;
for she wear one of her own short round-eared cap, and over it a
little straw hat, line with cherry-colour silk, and tie with a
cherry-colour ribbon. in this dress she come forth from her chamber,
blushing and breathing sweet; and be by Joseph, whose eye sparkle
fire, lead to church, the whole family attend, where Mr Adams
perform the ceremony; at which nothing be so remarkable as the
extraordinary and unaffected modesty of Fanny, unless the true
christian piety of Adams, who publickly rebuke Mr Booby and Pamela for
laugh in so sacred a place, and on so solemn an occasion. our parson
would have do no less to the high prince on earth; for, though he
pay all submission and deference to his superior in other matter,
where the least spice of religion intervene he immediately lose all
respect of person. it be his maxim, that he be a servant of the
Highest, and could not, without depart from his duty, give up the
least article of his honour or of his cause to the great earthly
potentate. indeed, he always assert that Mr Adams at church with his
surplice on, and Mr Adams without that ornament in any other place,
be two very different person.
when the church rite be over Joseph lead his bloom bride back to Mr
Booby's (for the distance be so very little they do not think proper
to use a coach); the whole company attend they likewise on foot; and
now a most magnificent entertainment be provide, at which parson Adams
demonstrate an appetite surprize as well as surpass every one
present. indeed the only person who betray any deficiency on this
occasion be those on whose account the feast be provide. they
pamper their imagination with the much more exquisite repast which
the approach of night promise they; the thought of which fill both
their mind, though with different sensation; the one all desire, while
the other have her wish temper with fear.
at length, after a day pass with the utmost merriment, correct by
the strict decency, in which, however, parson Adams, be well
fill with ale and pudding, have give a loose to more facetiousness
than be usual to he, the happy, the bl moment arrive when Fanny
retire with her mother, her mother-in-law, and her sister.
she be soon undrest; for she have no jewel to deposit in their casket,
nor fine lace to fold with the nice exactness. undress to she be
properly discover, not put off, ornament; for, as all her charm
be the gift of nature, she could divest herself of none. how, reader,
shall I give thee an adequate idea of this lovely young creature? the
bloom of rose and lily might a little illustrate her complexion, or
their smell her sweetness; but to comprehend she entirely, conceive
youth, health, bloom, neatness, and innocence, in her bridal bed;
conceive all these in their utmost perfection, and you may place the
charming Fanny's picture before your eye.
Joseph no soon hear she be in bed than he flee with the utmost
eagerness to she. a minute carry he into her arm, where we shall
leave this happy couple to enjoy the private reward of their constancy;
reward so great and sweet, that I apprehend Joseph neither envy the
noble duke, nor Fanny the fine duchess, that night.
the third day Mr Wilson and his wife, with their son and daughter,
return home; where they now live together in a state of bliss scarce
ever equalled. Mr Booby hath, with unprecedented generosity, give Fanny
a fortune of two thousand pound, which Joseph hath lay out in a little
estate in the same parish with his father, which he now occupy (his
father have stock it for he); and Fanny preside with most
excellent management in his dairy; where, however, she be not at present
very able to bustle much, be, as Mr Wilson inform I in his last
letter, extremely big with her first child.
Mr Booby hath present Mr Adams with a living of one hundred and
thirty pound a year. he at first refuse it, resolve not to quit
his parishioner, with whom he have live so long; but, on
recollect he might keep a curate at this living, he hath be
lately induct into it.
the pedlar, besides several handsome present, both from Mr Wilson and
Mr Booby, be, by the latter's interest, make an exciseman; a trust which
he discharge with such justice, that he be greatly beloved in his
neighbourhood.
as for the Lady Booby, she return to London in a few day, where a
young captain of dragoon, together with eternal party at card, soon
obliterate the memory of Joseph.
Joseph remain blest with his Fanny, whom he doat on with the utmost
tenderness, which be all return on her side. the happiness of this
couple be a perpetual fountain of pleasure to their fond parent; and,
what be particularly remarkable, he declare he will imitate they in
their retirement, nor will be prevail on by any bookseller, or their
author, to make his appearance in high life.
the END.
