
a sentimental journey through FRANCE and ITALY


they order, say I, this matter well in France. - you have be in France? say my gentleman, turn quick upon I, with the most civil triumph in the world. - strange! quoth I, debate the matter with myself, that one and twenty mile sailing, for 'tis absolutely no far from Dover to Calais, should give a man these right: - Iwill look into they: so, give up the argument, - I go straight to my lodging, put up half a dozen shirt and a black pair of silk breech, - "the coat I have on," say I, look at the sleeve, "will do;" - take a place in the Dover stage; and the packet sailing at nine the next morning, - by three I have get sit down to my dinner upon a fricaseed chicken, so incontestably in France, that have I die that night of an indigestion, the whole world could not have suspend the effect of the droit d'aubaine; - my shirt, and black pair of silk breech, - portmanteau and all, must have go to the King of France; - even the little picture which I have so long worn, and so 
often have tell thee, Eliza, I would carry with I into my grave, would have be tear from my neck! - ungenerous! to seize upon the wreck of an unwary passenger, whom your subject have beckon to their coast! - by heaven!  sire, it be not well do; and much do it grieve I, 'tis the monarch of a people so civilized and courteous, and so renowned for sentiment and fine feeling, that I have to reason with! -
but I have scarce set a foot in your dominion. -

CALAIS.

when I have fish my dinner, and drink the King of France's health, to satisfy my mind that I bear he no spleen, but, on the contrary, high honour for the humanity of his temper, - I rise up an inch tall for the accommodation.
- no - say I - the Bourbon be by no mean a cruel race: they may be mislead, like other people; but there be a mildness in their blood.  as I acknowledge this, I feel a suffusion of a fine kind upon my cheek - more warm and friendly to man, than what Burgundy (at least of two livre a bottle, which be such as I have be drink) could have produce.
- just God! say I, kick my portmanteau aside, what be there in this world's good which should sharpen our spirit, and make so many kind-hearted brother of we fall out so cruelly as we do by the way?
when man be at peace with man, how much light than a feather be the heavy of metal in his hand! he pull out his purse, and hold it airily and uncompressed, look round he, as if he seek for an object to share it with. - in do this, I feel every vessel in my frame dilate, - the artery beat all cheerily together, and every power which sustain life, perform it with so little friction, that 'twould have confound the most physical précieuse in France; with all her materialism, she could scarce have call I a machine. -
Ibe confident, say I to myself, I should have overset her creed.
the accession of that idea carry nature, at that time, as high as she could go; - I be at peace with the world before, and this finish'd the treaty with myself. -
- now, be I King of France, cry I - what a moment for an orphan to have begg'd his father's portmanteau of I!

the MONK.  CALAIS.

I have scarce utter the word, when a poor monk of the order of St. Francis come into the room to beg something for a his convent.  no man care to have his virtue the sport of contingency - or one man may be generous, as another be puissant; - se non quoad hanc - or be it as it may, - for there be no regular reasoning upon the ebb and flow of our humour; they may depend upon the same cause, for aught I know, which influence the tide themselves: 'twould oft be no discredit to we, to suppose it be so: Ibe sure at least for myself, that in many a case I should be more highly satisfied, to have it say by the world, "I have have an affair with the moon, in which there be neither sin nor shame," than have it pass altogether as my own act and deed, wherein there be so much of both.
- but, be this as it may, - the moment I cast my eye upon he, I be predetermine not to give he a single sous; and, accordingly, I put my purse into my pocket - button it - set myself a little more upon my centre, and advance up gravely to he; there be something, I fear, forbid in my look: I have his figure this moment before my eye, and think there be that in it which deserve well.
the monk, as I judge by the break in his tonsure, a few scatter white hair upon his temple, be all that remain of it, might be about seventy; - but from his eye, and that sort of fire which be in they, which seem more temper'd by courtesy than year, could be no more than sixty: - truth might lie between - he be certainly sixty-five; and the general air of his countenance, notwithstanding something seem'd to have be plant-wrinkle in it before their time, agree to the account.
it be one of those head which Guido have often paint, - mild, pale - penetrate, free from all commonplace idea of fat content ignorance look downward upon the earth; - it look'd forwards; but look'd as if it look'd at something beyond this world. - how one of his order come by it, heaven above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulder well know: but it would have suit a bramin, and have I meet it upon the plain of Indostan, I have reverence it.
the rest of his outline may be give in a few stroke; one might put it into the hand of any one to design, for 'twa neither elegant nor otherwise, but as character and expression make it so: it be a thin, spare form, something above the common size, if it lose not the distinction by a bend forward in the figure, - but it be the attitude of Intreaty; and, as it now stand present to my imagination, it gain more than it lose by it.
when he have enter the room three pace, he stand still; and lay his left hand upon his breast (a slender white staff with which he journey'd be in his right) - when I have get close up to he, he introduce himself with the little story of the want of his convent, and the poverty of his order; - and do it with so simple a grace, - and such an air of deprecation be there in the whole cast of his look and figure, - I be bewitch'd not to have be strike with it.
- a well reason be, I have predetermine not to give he a single sous.

the MONK.  CALAIS.

- 'tis very true, say I, reply to a cast upwards with his eye, with which he have conclude his address; - 'tis very true, - and heaven be their resource who have no other but the charity of the world, the stock of which, I fear, be no way sufficient for the many great claim which be hourly make upon it.
as I pronounce the word great claim, he give a slight glance with his eye downward upon the sleeve of his tunic: - I feel the full force of the appeal - I acknowledge it, say I: - a coarse habit, and that but once in three year with meagre diet, - be no great matter; and the true point of pity be, as they can be earn'd in the world with so little industry, that your order should wish to procure they by press upon a fund which be the property of the lame, the blind, the aged and the infirm; - the captive who lie down count over and over again the day of his affliction, languish also for his share of it; and have you be of the order of mercy, instead of the order of St. Francis, poor as I be, continue I, point at my portmanteau, full cheerfully should it have be open'd to you, for the ransom of the unfortunate. - the monk make I a bow. - but of all other, resume I, the unfortunate of our own country, surely, have the first right; and I have leave thousand in distress upon our own 
shore. - the monk give a cordial wave with his head, - as much as to say, no doubt there be misery enough in every corner of the world, as well as within our convent - but we distinguish, say I, lay my hand upon the sleeve of his tunic, in return for his appeal - we distinguish, my good father! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labour - and those who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in life, but to get through it in sloth and ignorance, for the love of God.
the poor Franciscan make no reply: a hectic of a moment pass'd across his cheek, but could not tarry - Nature seem to have do with her resentment in he; - he show none: - but let his staff fall within his arm, he press both his hand with resignation upon his breast, and retire.

the MONK.  CALAIS.

my heart smite I the moment he shut the door - Psha! say I, with an air of carelessness, three several time - but it would not do: every ungracious syllable I have utter'd crowd back into my imagination: I reflect, I have no right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny he; and that the punishment of that be enough to the disappoint, without the addition of unkind language. - I consider'd his gray hair - his courteous figure seem'd to re-enter and gently ask I what injury he have do I? - and why I could use he thus? - I would have give twenty livre for an advocate. - I have behave very ill, say I within myself; but I have only just set out upon my travel; and shall learn well manner as I get along.

the DESOBLIGEANT.  CALAIS.

when a man be discontent with himself, it have one advantage however, that it put he into an excellent frame of mind for make a bargain.  now there be no travel through France and Italy without a chaise, - and nature generally prompt we to the thing we be fit for, I walk'd out into the coach-yard to buy or hire something of that kind to my purpose: an old désobligeant in the furth corner of the court, hit my fancy at first sight, so I instantly get into it, and find it in tolerable harmony with my feeling, I order the waiter to call Monsieur Dessein, the master of the hotel: - but Monsieur Dessein be go to vesper, and not care to face the Franciscan, whom I see on the opposite side of the court, in conference with a lady just arrive at the inn, - I draw the taffeta curtain betwixt we, and be determined to write my journey, I take out my pen and ink and write the preface to it in the désobligeant.

PREFACE.  in the DESOBLIGEANT.

it must have be observe by many a peripatetic philosopher, that nature have set up by her own unquestionable authority certain boundary and fence to circumscribe the discontent of man; she have effect her purpose in the quiet and easy manner by lay he under almost insuperable obligation to work out his ease, and to sustain his suffering at home.  it be there only that she have provide he with the most suitable object to partake of his happiness, and bear a part of that burden which in all country and age have ever be too heavy for one pair of shoulder.  'tis true, we be endue with an imperfect power of spread our happiness sometimes beyond her limit, but 'tis so order, that, from the want of language, connection, and dependency, and from the difference in education, custom, and habit, we lie under so many impediment in communicate our sensation out of our own sphere, as often amount to a total impossibility.
it will always follow from hence, that the balance of sentimental commerce be always against the expatriated adventurer: he must buy what he have little occasion for, at their own price; - his conversation will seldom be take in exchange for theirs without a large discount, - and this, by the by, eternally drive he into the hand of more equitable broker, for such conversation as he can find, it require no great spirit of divination to guess at his party -
this bring I to my point; and naturally lead I (if the see-saw of this désobligeant will but let I get on) into the efficient as well as final cause of travel -
your idle people that leave their native country, and go abroad for some reason or reason which may be derive from one of these general causes:-

Infirmity of body,
imbecility of mind, or
inevitable necessity.

the first two include all those who travel by land or by water, labour with pride, curiosity, vanity, or spleen, subdivide and combine ad infinitum.
the third class include the whole army of peregrine martyr; more especially those traveller who set out upon their travel with the benefit of the clergy, either as delinquent travel under the direction of governor recommend by the magistrate; - or young gentleman transport by the cruelty of parent and guardian, and travel under the direction of governor recommend by Oxford, Aberdeen, and Glasgow.
there be a fourth class, but their number be so small that they would not deserve a distinction, be it not necessary in a work of this nature to observe the great precision and nicety, to avoid a confusion of character.  and these man I speak of, be such as cross the sea and sojourn in a land of stranger, with a view of save money for various reason and upon various pretence: but as they might also save themselves and other a great deal of unnecessary trouble by save their money at home, - and as their reason for travel be the least complex of any other specie of emigrant, I shall distinguish these gentleman by the name of

Simple Travellers.

thus the whole circle of traveller may be reduce to the follow heads:-

Idle Travellers,
Inquisitive Travellers,
Lying Travellers,
Proud Travellers,
Vain Travellers,
Splenetic Travellers.

then follow:

the Travellers of Necessity,
the Delinquent and Felonious Traveller,
the Unfortunate and Innocent Traveller,
the Simple Traveller,

and last of all (if you please) the Sentimental Traveller, (mean thereby myself) who have travell'd, and of which I be now sit down to give an account, - as much out of Necessity, and the besoin de Voyager, as any one in the class.
I be well aware, at the same time, as both my travel and observation will be altogether of a different cast from any of my forerunner, that I might have insist upon a whole nitch entirely to myself; - but I should break in upon the confine of the Vain Traveller, in wish to draw attention towards I, till I have some well ground for it than the mere Novelty of my Vehicle.
it be sufficient for my reader, if he have be a traveller himself, that with study and reflection hereupon he may be able to determine his own place and rank in the catalogue; - it will be one step towards know himself; as it be great odd but he retain some tincture and resemblance, of what he imbibe or carry out, to the present hour.
the man who first transplant the grape of Burgundy to the Cape of Good Hope (observe he be a Dutchman) never dream of drink the same wine at the Cape, that the same grape produce upon the french mountain, - he be too phlegmatic for that - but undoubtedly he expect to drink some sort of vinous liquor; but whether good or bad, or indifferent, - he know enough of this world to know, that it do not depend upon his choice, but that what be generally call choice, be to decide his success: however, he hop for the good; and in these hope, by an intemperate confidence in the fortitude of his head, and the depth of his discretion, Mynheer might possibly oversee both in his new vineyard; and by discover his nakedness, become a laugh stock to his people.
even so it fare with the Poor Traveller, sailing and post through the politer kingdom of the globe, in pursuit of knowledge and improvement.
Knowledge and improvement be to be get by sailing and post for that purpose; but whether useful knowledge and real improvement be all a lottery; - and even where the adventurer be successful, the acquire stock must be use with caution and sobriety, to turn to any profit: - but, as the chance run prodigiously the other way, both as to the acquisition and application, I be of opinion, that a man would act as wisely, if he could prevail upon himself to live content without foreign knowledge or foreign improvement, especially if he live in a country that have no absolute want of either; - and indeed, much grief of heart have it oft and many a time cost I, when I have observe how many a foul step the Inquisitive Traveller have measure to see sight and look into discovery; all which, as Sancho Panza say to Don Quixote, they might have see dry-shod at home.  it be an age so full of light, that there be scarce a country or corner in Europe whose beam be not cross and interchange with other. - 
Knowledge in most of its branch, and in most affair, be like music in an italian street, whereof those may partake who pay nothing. - but there be no nation under heaven - and God be my record (before whose tribunal I must one day come and give an account of this work) - that I do not speak it vauntingly, - but there be no nation under heaven abound with more variety of learning, - where the science may be more fitly woo'd, or more surely win, than here, - where art be encourage, and will so soon rise high, - where nature (take she altogether) have so little to answer for, - and, to close all, where there be more wit and variety of character to feed the mind with: - where then, my dear countryman, be you go? -
we be only look at this chaise, say they. - your most obedient servant, say I, skip out of it, and pull off my hat. - we be wonder, say one of they, who, I find be an Inquisitive Traveller, - what could occasion its motion. - 'twas the agitation, say I, coolly, of write a preface. - I never hear, say the other, who be a Simple Traveller, of a preface write in a désobligeant. - it would have be well, say I, in a vis-a-vis.
- as an Englishman do not travel to see Englishmen, I retire to my room.

CALAIS.

I perceive that something darken'd the passage more than myself, as I stepp'd along it to my room; it be effectually Mons. Dessein, the master of the hôtel, who have just return from vesper, and with his hat under his arm, be most complaisantly follow I, to put I in mind of my want.  I have write myself pretty well out of conceit with the désobligeant, and mon. Dessein speak of it, with a shrug, as if it would no way suit I, it immediately strike my fancy that it belong'd to some Innocent Traveller, who, on his return home, have leave it to Mons. Dessein's honour to make the most of.  four month have elapse since it have finish its career of Europe in the corner of Mons. Dessein's coach-yard; and have sally out from thence but a vampt-up business at the first, though it have be twice take to piece on Mount Sennis, it have not profit much by its adventure, - but by none so little as the standing so many month unpitied in the corner of Mons. Dessein's coach-yard.  much indeed be not 
to be say for it, - but something might; - and when a few word will rescue misery out of her distress, I hate the man who can be a churl of they.
- now be I the master of this hôtel, say I, lay the point of my fore-finger on Mons. Dessein's breast, I would inevitably make a point of get rid of this unfortunate désobligeant; - it stand swing reproach at you every time you pass by it.
Mon Dieu! say Mons. Dessein, - I have no interest - except the interest, say I, which man of a certain turn of mind take, Mons. Dessein, in their own sensation, - Ibe persuade, to a man who feel for other as well as for himself, every rainy night, disguise it as you will, must cast a damp upon your spirit: - you suffer, Mons. Dessein, as much as the machine -
I have always observe, when there be as much sour as sweet in a compliment, that an Englishman be eternally at a loss within himself, whether to take it, or let it alone: a Frenchman never be: mon. Dessein make I a bow.
C'est bien vrai, say he. - but in this case I should only exchange one disquietude for another, and with loss: figure to yourself, my dear Sir, that in give you a chaise which would fall to piece before you have get half-way to Paris, - figure to yourself how much I should suffer, in give an ill impression of myself to a man of honour, and lie at the mercy, as I must do, d'un homme d'esprit.
the dose be make up exactly after my own prescription; so I could not help taste it, - and, return Mons. Dessein his bow, without more casuistry we walk'd together towards his remise, to take a view of his magazine of chaise.

in the street.  CALAIS.

it must need be a hostile kind of a world, when the buyer (if it be but of a sorry post-chaise) cannot go forth with the seller thereof into the street to terminate the difference betwixt they, but he instantly fall into the same frame of mind, and view his conventionist with the same sort of eye, as if he be go along with he to Hyde-park corner to fight a duel.  for my own part, be but a poor swordsman, and no way a match for Monsieur Dessein, I feel the rotation of all the movement within I, to which the situation be incident; - I look at Monsieur Dessein through and through - eyed he as he walk'd along in profile, - then, en face; - think like a Jew, - then a Turk, - dislike his wig, - curse he by my god, - wish he at the devil. -
- and be all this to be light up in the heart for a beggarly account of three or four louis d'ors, which be the most I can be overreach in? - Base passion! say I, turn myself about, as a man naturally do upon a sudden reverse of sentiment, - base, ungentle passion! thy hand be against every man, and every man's hand against thee. - Heaven forbid! say she, raise her hand up to her forehead, for I have turn full in front upon the lady whom I have see in conference with the monk: - she have follow we unperceive. - Heaven forbid, indeed! say I, offer she my own; - she have a black pair of silk glove, open only at the thumb and two fore-finger, so accept it without reserve, - and I lead she up to the door of the Remise.
Monsieur Dessein have diable the key above fifty time before he have find out he have come with a wrong one in his hand: we be as impatient as himself to have it open; and so attentive to the obstacle that I continue hold her hand almost without know it: so that Monsieur Dessein leave we together with her hand in mine, and with our face turn towards the door of the Remise, and say he would be back in five minute.
now a colloquy of five minute, in such a situation, be worth one of as many age, with your face turn towards the street: in the latter case, 'tis draw from the object and occurrence without; - when your eye be fix upon a dead blank, - you draw purely from yourself.  a silence of a single moment upon mon. Dessein's leave we, have be fatal to the situation - she have infallibly turn about; - so I begin the conversation instantly. -
- but what be the temptation (as I write not to apologize for the weakness of my heart in this tour, - but to give an account of they) - shall be describe with the same simplicity with which I feel they.

the REMISE DOOR.  CALAIS.

when I tell the reader that I do not care to get out of the désobligeant, because I see the monk in close conference with a lady just arrive at the inn - I tell he the truth, - but I do not tell he the whole truth; for I be as full as much restrain by the appearance and figure of the lady he be talk to.  Suspicion cross my brain and say, he be tell she what have pass: something jar upon it within I, - I wish he at his convent.
when the heart fly out before the understanding, it save the judgment a world of pain. - I be certain she be of a well order of being; - however, I think no more of she, but go on and write my preface.
the impression return upon my encounter with she in the street; a guard frankness with which she give I her hand, show, I think, her good education and her good sense; and as I lead she on, I feel a pleasurable ductility about she, which spread a calmness over all my spirit -
- good God! how a man might lead such a creature as this round the world with he! -
I have not yet see her face - 'twa not material: for the drawing be instantly set about, and long before we have get to the door of the Remise, Fancy have finish the whole head, and please herself as much with its fitting her goddess, as if she have dive into the Tiber for it; - but thou art a seduced, and a seducing slut; and albeit thou cheat we seven time a day with thy picture and image, yet with so many charm dost thou do it, and thou deckest out thy picture in the shape of so many angel of light, 'tis a shame to break with thee.
when we have get to the door of the Remise, she withdraw her hand from across her forehead, and let I see the original: - it be a face of about six-and-twenty, - of a clear transparent brown, simply set off without rouge or powder; - it be not critically handsome, but there be that in it, which, in the frame of mind I be in, attach I much more to it, - it be interesting: I fancy it wear the character of a widow'd look, and in that state of its declension, which have pass the two first paroxysm of sorrow, and be quietly begin to reconcile itself to its loss; - but a thousand other distress might have trace the same line; I wish'd to know what they have be - and be ready to inquire, (have the same bon ton of conversation permit, as in the day of Esdras) - "what ailelh thee? and why art thou disquiet? and why be thy understanding trouble?" - in a word, I feel benevolence for she; and resolv'd some way or other to throw in my mite of courtesy, - if not of service.
such be my temptation; - and in this disposition to give way to they, be I leave alone with the lady with her hand in mine, and with our face both turn close to the door of the Remise than what be absolutely necessary.

the REMISE DOOR.  CALAIS.

this certainly, fair lady, say I, raise her hand up little lightly as I begin, must be one of Fortune's whimsical doing; to take two utter stranger by their hand, - of different sex, and perhaps from different corner of the globe, and in one moment place they together in such a cordial situation as Friendship herself could scarce have achieve for they, have she project it for a month.
- and your reflection upon it show how much, Monsieur, she have embarrass you by the adventure -
when the situation be what we would wish, nothing be so ill-time as to hint at the circumstance which make it so: you thank Fortune, continue she - you have reason - the heart know it, and be satisfied; and who but an english philosopher would have send notice of it to the brain to reverse the judgment?
in say this, she disengage her hand with a look which I think a sufficient commentary upon the text.
it be a miserable picture which I be go to give of the weakness of my heart, by own, that it suffer a pain, which worthy occasion could not have inflict. - I be mortify with the loss of her hand, and the manner in which I have lose it carry neither oil nor wine to the wound: I never feel the pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life.
the triumph of a true feminine heart be short upon these discomfiture.  in a very few second she lay her hand upon the cuff of my coat, in order to finish her reply; so, some way or other, God know how, I regain my situation.
- she have nothing to add.
I forthwith begin to model a different conversation for the lady, think from the spirit as well as moral of this, that I have be mistake in her character; but upon turn her face towards I, the spirit which have animate the reply be flee, - the muscle relax, and I behold the same unprotected look of distress which first win I to her interest: - melancholy! to see such sprightliness the prey of sorrow, - I pity she from my soul; and though it may seem ridiculous enough to a torpid heart, - I could have take she into my arm, and cherish she, though it be in the open street, without brush.
the pulsation of the artery along my finger press across her, tell she what be pass within I: she look down - a silence of some moment follow.
I fear in this interval, I must have make some slight effort towards a close compression of her hand, from a subtle sensation I feel in the palm of my own, - not as if she be go to withdraw her - but as if she think about it; - and I have infallibly lose it a second time, have not instinct more than reason direct I to the last resource in these danger, - to hold it loosely, and in a manner as if I be every moment go to release it, of myself; so she let it continue, till Monsieur Dessein return with the key; and in the mean time I set myself to consider how I should undo the ill impression which the poor monk's story, in case he have tell it she, must have plant in her breast against I.

the SNUFF BOX.  CALAIS.

the good old monk be within six pace of we, as the idea of he cross my mind; and be advance towards we a little out of the line, as if uncertain whether he should break in upon we or no. - he stopp'd, however, as soon as he come up to we, with a world of frankness: and have a horn snuff box in his hand, he present it open to I. - you shall taste mine - say I, pull out my box (which be a small tortoise one) and put it into his hand. - 'tis most excellent, say the monk.  then do I the favour, I reply, to accept of the box and all, and when you take a pinch out of it, sometimes recollect it be the peace offering of a man who once use you unkindly, but not from his heart.
the poor monk blush'd as red as scarlet.  Mon Dieu! say he, press his hand together - you never use I unkindly. - I should think, say the lady, he be not likely.  I blush'd in my turn; but from what movement, I leave to the few who feel, to analyze. - excuse I, Madame, reply I, - I treat he most unkindly; and from no provocation. - 'tis impossible, say the lady. - my God! cry the monk, with a warmth of asseveration which seem'd not to belong to he - the fault be in I, and in the indiscretion of my zeal. - the lady oppose it, and I join with she in maintain it be impossible, that a spirit so regulated as his, could give offence to any.
I know not that contention could be render so sweet and pleasurable a thing to the nerve as I then feel it. - we remain silent, without any sensation of that foolish pain which take place, when, in such a circle, you look for ten minute in one another's face without say a word.  Whilst this last, the monk rub his horn box upon the sleeve of his tunic; and as soon as it have acquire a little air of brightness by the friction - he make I a low bow, and say, 'twa too late to say whether it be the weakness or goodness of our temper which have involve we in this contest - but be it as it would, - he begg'd we might exchange box. - in say this, he present his to I with one hand, as he take mine from I in the other, and have kiss it, - with a stream of good nature in his eye, he put it into his bosom, - and take his leave.
I guard this box, as I would the instrumental part of my religion, to help my mind on to something well: in truth, I seldom go abroad without it; and oft and many a time have I call up by it the courteous spirit of its owner to regulate my own, in the justling of the world: they have find full employment for his, as I learn from his story, till about the forty-fifth year of his age, when upon some military service ill requite, and meet at the same time with a disappointment in the tender of passion, he abandon the sword and the sex together, and take sanctuary not so much in his convent as in himself.
I feel a damp upon my spirit, as I be go to add, that in my last return through Calais, upon enquire after Father Lorenzo, I hear he have be dead near three month, and be bury, not in his convent, but, accord to his desire, in a little cemetery belong to it, about two league off: I have a strong desire to see where they have lay he, - when, upon pull out his little horn box, as I sit by his grave, and pluck up a nettle or two at the head of it, which have no business to grow there, they all strike together so forcibly upon my affection, that I burst into a flood of tear: - but I be as weak as a woman; and I beg the world not to smile, but to pity I.

the REMISE DOOR.  CALAIS.

I have never quit the lady's hand all this time, and have hold it so long, that it would have be indecent to have let it go, without first press it to my lip: the blood and spirit, which have suffer a revulsion from she, crowd back to she as I do it.
now the two traveller, who have speak to I in the coach-yard, happen at that crisis to be pass by, and observe our communication, naturally take it into their head that we must be man and wife at least; so, stop as soon as they come up to the door of the Remise, the one of they who be the Inquisitive Traveller, ask'd we, if we set out for Paris the next morning? - I could only answer for myself, I say; and the lady add, she be for Amiens. - we din there yesterday, say the Simple Traveller. - you go directly through the town, add the other, in your road to Paris.  I be go to return a thousand thank for the intelligence, that Amiens be in the road to Paris, but, upon pull out my poor monk's little horn box to take a pinch of snuff, I make they a quiet bow, and wish they a good passage to Dover. - they leave we alone. -
- now where would be the harm, say I to myself, if I be to beg of this distressed lady to accept of half of my chaise? - and what mighty mischief could ensue?
every dirty passion, and bad propensity in my nature take the alarm, as I state the proposition. - it will oblige you to have a third horse, say Avarice, which will put twenty livre out of your pocket; - you know not what she be, say Caution; - or what scrap the affair may draw you into, whisper'd Cowardice. -
depend upon it, Yorick! say Discretion, 'twill be say you go off with a mistress, and come by assignation to Calais for that purpose; -
- you can never after, cry Hypocrisy aloud, show your face in the world; - or rise, quoth Meanness, in the church; - or be any thing in it, say Pride, but a lousy prebendary.
but 'tis a civil thing, say I; - and as I generally act from the first impulse, and therefore seldom listen to these cabal, which serve no purpose, that I know of, but to encompass the heart with adamant - I turn instantly about to the lady. -
- but she have glide off unperceived, as the cause be plead, and have make ten or a dozen pace down the street, by the time I have make the determination; so I set off after she with a long stride, to make she the proposal, with the good address I be master of: but observe she walk'd with her cheek half rest upon the palm of her hand, - with the slow short-measur'd step of thoughtfulness, - and with her eye, as she go step by step, fix upon the ground, it strike I she be try the same cause herself. - God help she! say I, she have some mother-in-law, or tartufish aunt, or nonsensical old woman, to consult upon the occasion, as well as myself: so not care to interrupt the process, and deem it more gallant to take she at discretion than by surprise, I face about and take a short turn or two before the door of the Remise, whilst she walk'd muse on one side.

in the street.  CALAIS.

have, on the first sight of the lady, settle the affair in my fancy "that she be of the well order of being;" - and then lay it down as a second axiom, as indisputable as the first, that she be a widow, and wear a character of distress, - I go no far; I get grind enough for the situation which please I; - and have she remain close beside my elbow till midnight, I should have hold true to my system, and consider she only under that general idea.
she have scarce get twenty pace distant from I, ere something within I call out for a more particular enquiry; - it bring on the idea of a further separation: - I might possibly never see she more: - the heart be for save what it can; and I want the trace through which my wish might find their way to she, in case I should never rejoin she myself; in a word, I wish to know her name, - her family's - her condition; and as I know the place to which she be go, I want to know from whence she come: but there be no come at all this intelligence; a hundred little delicacy stand in the way.  I form'd a score different plan. - there be no such thing as a man's ask she directly; - the thing be impossible.
a little french débonnaire captain, who come dance down the street, show I it be the easy thing in the world: for, pop in betwixt we, just as the lady be return back to the door of the Remise, he introduce himself to my acquaintance, and before he have well get announce, begg'd I would do he the honour to present he to the lady. - I have not be present myself; - so turn about to she, he do it just as well, by ask she if she have come from Paris?  no: she be go that route, she say. - vous n'?te pas de Londres? - she be not, she reply. - then Madame must have come through Flanders. - Apparemment vous ?tes Flammande? say the french captain. - the lady answer, she be. - Peut ?tre de Lisle? add he. - she say, she be not of Lisle. - nor Arras? - nor Cambray? - nor Ghent? - nor Brussels? - she answer, she be of Brussels.
he have have the honour, he say, to be at the bombardment of it last war; - that it be finely situate, pour cela, - and full of noblesse when the Imperialists be drive out by the French (the lady make a slight courtesy) - so give she an account of the affair, and of the share he have have in it, - he begg'd the honour to know her name, - so make his bow.
- Et Madame a son Mari? - say he, look back when he have make two step, - and, without stay for an answer - dance down the street.
have I serve seven year apprenticeship to good breeding, I could not have do as much.

the REMISE.  CALAIS.

as the little french captain leave we, Mons. Dessein come up with the key of the Remise in his hand, and forthwith let we into his magazine of chaise.
the first object which catch my eye, as Mons. Dessein open'd the door of the Remise, be another old tatter'd désobligeant; and notwithstanding it be the exact picture of that which have hit my fancy so much in the coach-yard but an hour before, - the very sight of it stirr'd up a disagreeable sensation within I now; and I think 'twas a churlish beast into whose heart the idea could first enter, to construct such a machine; nor have I much more charity for the man who could think of use it.
I observe the lady be as little take with it as myself: so mon. Dessein lead we on to a couple of chaise which stand abreast, tell we, as he recommend they, that they have be purchase by my lord A. and B. to go the grand tour, but have go no far than Paris, so be in all respect as good as new. - they be too good; - so I pass'd on to a third, which stand behind, and forthwith begin to chaffer for the price. - but 'twill scarce hold two, say I, open the door and get in. - have the goodness, Madame, say Mons. Dessein, offer his arm, to step in. - the lady hesitate half a second, and step in; and the waiter that moment beckon to speak to Mon. Dessein, he shut the door of the chaise upon we, and leave we.

the REMISE.  CALAIS.

C'est bien comique, 'tis very droll, say the lady, smile, from the reflection that this be the second time we a have be leave together by a parcel of nonsensical contingency, - c'est bien comique, say she. -
- there want nothing, say I, to make it so but the comic use which the gallantry of a Frenchman would put it to, - to make love the first moment, and an offer of his person the second.
'tis their fort, reply the lady.
it be suppose so at least; - and how it have come to pass, continue I, I know not; but they have certainly get the credit of understanding more of love, and make it well than any other nation upon earth; but, for my own part, I think they arrant bungler, and in truth the bad set of marksman that ever try Cupid's patience.
- to think of make love by sentiment!
I should as soon think of make a genteel suit of clothe out of remnant: - and to do it - pop - at first sight, by declaration - be submit the offer, and themselves with it, to be sift with all their pour and contre, by an unheated mind.
the lady attend as if she expect I should go on.
consider then, Madame, continue I, lay my hand upon hers:-
that grave people hate love for the name's sake; -
that selfish people hate it for their own; -
Hypocrites for heaven's; -
and that all of we, both old and young, be ten time bad frightened than hurt by the very report, - what a want of knowledge in this branch of commence a man betray, whoever let the word come out of his lip, till an hour or two, at least, after the time that his silence upon it become torment.  a course of small, quiet attention, not so point as to alarm, - nor so vague as to be misunderstood - with now and then a look of kindness, and little or nothing say upon it, - leave nature for your mistress, and she fashion it to her mind. -
then I solemnly declare, say the lady, blushing, you have be make love to I all this while.

the REMISE.  CALAIS.

Monsieur Dessein come back to let we out of the chaise, and acquaint the lady, the count de L-, her brother, be just arrive at the hotel.  though I have infinite good will for the lady, I cannot say that I rejoice in my heart at the event - and could not help tell she so; - for it be fatal to a proposal, Madame, say I, that I be go to make to you -
- you need not tell I what the proposal be, say she, lay her hand upon both mine, as she interrupt I. - a man my good Sir, have seldom an offer of kindness to make to a woman, but she have a presentiment of it some moment before. -
nature arm she with it, say I, for immediate preservation. - but I think, say she, look in my face, I have no evil to apprehend, - and, to deal frankly with you, have determine to accept it. - if I have - (she stop a moment) - I believe your good will would have draw a story from I, which would have make pity the only dangerous thing in the journey.
in say this, she suffer I to kiss her hand twice, and with a look of sensibility mix with concern, she get out of the chaise, - and bid adieu.

in the street.  CALAIS.

I never finish a twelve guinea bargain so expeditiously in my life: my time seem heavy, upon the loss of the lady, and know every moment of it would be as two, till I put myself into motion, - I order post horse directly, and walk towards the hotel.
Lord! say I, hear the town clock strike four, and recollect that I have be little more than a single hour in Calais, -
- what a large volume of adventure may be grasp within this little span of life by he who interest his heart in every thing, and who, have eye to see what time and chance be perpetually hold out to he as he journeyeth on his way, miss nothing he can fairly lay his hand on!
- if this willnot turn out something, - another will; - no matter, - 'tis an assay upon human nature - I get my labour for my pain, - 'tis enough; - the pleasure of the experiment have keep my sens and the good part of my blood awake, and lay the gross to sleep.
I pity the man who can travel from Dan to Beersheba, and cry, 'tis all barren; - and so it be: and so be all the world to he who will not cultivate the fruit it offer.  I declare, say I, clap my hand cheerily together, that be I in a desert, I would find out wherewith in it to call forth my affection: - if I could not do well, I would fasten they upon some sweet myrtle, or seek some melancholy cypress to connect myself to; - I would court their shade, and greet they kindly for their protection. - I would cut my name upon they, and swear they be the lovely tree throughout the desert: if their leaf wither'd, I would teach myself to mourn; and, when they rejoice, I would rejoice along with they.
the learned Smelfungus travel from Boulogne to Paris, - from Paris to Rome, - and so on; - but he set out with the spleen and jaundice, and every object he pass'd by be discolour or distort. - he write an account of they, but 'twa nothing but the account of his miserable feeling.
I meet Smelfungus in the grand portico of the Pantheon: - he be just come out of it. - 'tis nothing but a huge cockpit, say he: - I wish you have say nothing bad of the Venus of Medicis, reply I; - for in pass through Florence, I have hear he have fall foul upon the goddess, and use she bad than a common strumpet, without the least provocation in nature.
I popp'd upon Smelfungus again at Turin, in his return home; and a sad tale of sorrowful adventure have he to tell, "wherein he speak of move accident by flood and field, and of the cannibal that each other eat: the Anthropophagi:" - he have be flay alive, and bedevil'd, and use bad than St. Bartholomew, at every stage he have come at. -
- Iwill tell it, cry Smelfungus, to the world.  you have well tell it, say I, to your physician.
Mundungus, with an immense fortune, make the whole tour; go on from Rome to Naples, - from Naples to Venice, - from Venice to Vienna, - to Dresden, to Berlin, without one generous connection or pleasurable anecdote to tell of; but he have travell'd straight on, look neither to his right hand nor his left, lest Love or Pity should seduce he out of his road.
peace be to they! if it be to be find; but heaven itself, be it possible to get there with such temper, would want object to give it; every gentle spirit would come fly upon the wing of Love to hail their arrival. - nothing would the soul of Smelfungus and Mundungus hear of, but fresh anthem of joy, fresh rapture of love, and fresh congratulation of their common felicity. - I heartily pity they; they have bring up no faculty for this work; and, be the happy mansion in heaven to be allot to Smelfungus and Mundungus, they would be so far from be happy, that the soul of Smelfungus and Mundungus would do penance there to all eternity!

MONTREUIL.

I have once lose my portmanteau from behind my chaise, and twice get out in the rain, and one of the time up to the knee in dirt, to help the postilion to tie it on, without be able to find out what be want. - nor be it till I get to Montreuil, upon the landlord's ask I if I want not a servant, that it occur to I, that that be the very thing.
a servant!  that I do most sadly, quoth I. - because, Monsieur, say the landlord, there be a clever young fellow, who would be very proud of the honour to serve an Englishman. - but why an english one, more than any other? - they be so generous, say the landlord. - Iwill be shoot if this be not a livre out of my pocket, quoth I to myself, this very night. - but they have wherewithal to be so, Monsieur, add he. - set down one livre more for that, quoth I. - it be but last night, say the landlord, qu'un milord Anglois présentoit un écu ? la fille de chambre. - Tant pis pour Mademoiselle Janatone, say I.
now Janatone, be the landlord's daughter, and the landlord suppose I be young in French, take the liberty to inform I, I should not have say tant pis - but, tant mieux.  Tant mieux, toujour, Monsieur, say he, when there be any thing to be get - tant pis, when there be nothing.  it come to the same thing, say I.  Pardonnez-moi, say the landlord.
I cannot take a fitter opportunity to observe, once for all, that tant pis and tant mieux, be two of the great hinge in french conversation, a stranger would do well to set himself right in the use of they, before he get to Paris.
a prompt french marquis at our ambassador's table demand of Mr. H-, if he be H- the poet?  no, say Mr. H-, mildly. - Tant pis, reply the marquis.
it be H- the historian, say another, - Tant mieux, say the marquis.  and Mr. H-, who be a man of an excellent heart, return'd thank for both.
when the landlord have set I right in this matter, he call in La Fleur, which be the name of the young man he have speak of, - say only first, that as for his talent he would presume to say nothing, - Monsieur be the good judge what would suit he; but for the fidelity of La Fleur he would stand responsible in all he be worth.
the landlord deliver'd this in a manner which instantly set my mind to the business I be upon; - and La Fleur, who stand wait without, in that breathless expectation which every son of nature of we have feel in our turn, come in.

MONTREUIL.

I be apt to be take with all kind of people at first sight; but never more so than when a poor devil come to offer his service to so poor a devil as myself; and as I know this weakness, I always suffer my judgment to draw back something on that very account, - and this more or less, accord to the mood I be in, and the case; - and I may add, the gender too, of the person I be to govern.
when La Fleur enter the room, after every discount I could make for my soul, the genuine look and air of the fellow determine the matter at once in his favour; so I hire he first, - and then begin to enquire what he could do: but I shall find out his talent, quoth I, as I want they, - besides, a Frenchman can do every thing.
now poor La Fleur could do nothing in the world but beat a drum, and play a march or two upon the fife.  I be determined to make his talent do; and cannot say my weakness be ever so insult by my wisdom as in the attempt.
La Fleur have set out early in life, as gallantly as most frenchman do, with serve for a few year; at the end of which, have satisfy the sentiment, and find, moreover, that the honour of beat a drum be likely to be its own reward, as it open'd no further track of glory to he, - he retire ? s terre, and live comme il plaisoit ? Dieu; - that be to say, upon nothing.
- and so, quoth Wisdom, you have hire a drummer to attend you in this tour of yours through France and Italy! - Psha! say I, and do not one half of our gentry go with a humdrum compagnon du voyage the same round, and have the piper and the devil and all to pay besides?  when man can extricate himself with an équivoque in such an unequal match, - he be not ill off. - but you can do something else, La Fleur? say I. - O qu'oui! he could make spatterdashe, and play a little upon the fiddle. - Bravo! say Wisdom. - why, I play a bass myself, say I; - we shall do very well.  you can shave, and dress a wig a little, La Fleur? - he have all the disposition in the world. - it be enough for heaven! say I, interrupt he, - and ought to be enough for I. - so, supper come in, and have a frisky english spaniel on one side of my chair, and a french valet, with as much hilarity in his countenance as ever Nature paint in one, on the other, - I be satisfied to my heart's content with my empire; and if 
monarchs know what they would be at, they might be as satisfied as I be.

MONTREUIL.

as La Fleur go the whole tour of France and Italy with I, and will be often upon the stage, I must interest the reader a little far in his behalf, by say, that I have never less reason to repent of the impulse which generally do determine I, than in regard to this fellow; - he be a faithful, affectionate, simple soul as ever trudge after the heel of a philosopher; and, notwithstanding his talent of drum beating and spatterdash-making, which, though very good in themselves, happen to be of no great service to I, yet be I hourly recompense by the festivity of his temper; - it supply all defect: - I have a constant resource in his look in all difficulty and distress of my own - I be go to have add of his too; but La Fleur be out of the reach of every thing; for, whether 'twa hunger or thirst, or cold or nakedness, or watching, or whatever stripe of ill luck La Fleur meet with in our journeying, there be no index in his physiognomy to point they out by, - he be eternally 
the same; so that if I be a piece of a philosopher, which Satan now and then put it into my head I be, - it always mortify the pride of the conceit, by reflect how much I owe to the complexional philosophy of this poor fellow, for sham I into one of a well kind.  with all this, La Fleur have a small cast of the coxcomb, - but he seem at first sight to be more a coxcomb of nature than of art; and, before I have be three day in Paris with he, - he seem to be no coxcomb at all.

MONTREUIL.

the next morning, La Fleur enter upon his employment, I deliver to he the key of my portmanteau, with an inventory of my half a dozen shirt and silk pair of breech, and bid he fasten all upon the chaise, - get the horse put to, - and desire the landlord to come in with his bill.
C'est un garcon de bonne fortune, say the landlord, point through the window to half a dozen wench who have get round about La Fleur, and be most kindly take their leave of he, as the postilion be lead out the horse.  La Fleur kiss all their hand round and round again, and thrice he wipe his eye, and thrice he promise he would bring they all pardon from Rome.
- the young fellow, say the landlord, be belove by all the town, and there be scarce a corner in Montreuil where the want of he will not be feel: he have but one misfortune in the world, continue he, "he be always in love." - I be heartily glad of it, say I, - 'twill save I the trouble every night of put my breech under my head.  in say this, I be make not so much La Fleur's eloge as my own, have be in love with one princess or another almost all my life, and I hope I shall go on so till I die, be firmly persuade, that if ever I do a mean action, it must be in some interval betwixt one passion and another: whilst this interregnum last, I always perceive my heart lock up, - I can scarce find in it to give Misery a sixpence; and therefore I always get out of it as fast as I can - and the moment I be rekindle, I be all generosity and good-will again; and would do anything in the world, either for or with any one, if they will but satisfy I there be no sin in it.
- but in say this, - sure I be command the passion, - not myself.

a FRAGMENT.

- the town of Abdera, notwithstanding Democritus live there, try all the power of irony and laughter to reclaim it, be the vile and most profligate town in all Thrace.  what for poison, conspiracy, and assassination, - libel, pasquinade, and tumult, there be no go there by day - 'twa bad by night.
now, when thing be at the bad, it come to pass that the Andromeda of Euripides be represent at Abdera, the whole orchestra be delighted with it: but of all the passage which delight they, nothing operate more upon their imagination than the tender stroke of nature which the poet have work up in that pathetic speech of Perseus, O Cupid, prince of god and man! &c.  every man almost speak pure iambic the next day, and talk of nothing but Perseus his pathetic address, - "O Cupid! prince of god and man!" - in every street of Abdera, in every house, "O Cupid!  Cupid!" - in every mouth, like the natural note of some sweet melody which drop from it, whether it will or no, - nothing but "Cupid! Cupid! prince of god and man!" - the fire catch - and the whole city, like the heart of one man, open'd itself to Love.
no pharmacopolist could sell one grain of hellebore, - not a single armourer have a heart to forge one instrument of death; - Friendship and Virtue meet together, and kiss'd each other in the street; the golden age return, and hang over the town of Abdera - every Abderite take his eaten pipe, and every abderitish woman leave her purple web, and chastely sit she down and listen to the song.
'twas only in the power, say the Fragment, of the God whose empire extendeth from heaven to earth, and even to the depth of the sea, to have do this.

MONTREUIL.

when all be ready, and every article be dispute and pay for in the inn, unless you be a little sour'd by the adventure, there be always a matter to compound at the door, before you can get into your chaise; and that be with the son and daughter of poverty, who surround you.  let no man say, "let they go to the devil!" - 'tis a cruel journey to send a few miserable, and they have have suffering enow without it: I always think it well to take a few sous out in my hand; and I would counsel every gentle traveller to do so likewise: he need not be so exact in set down his motif for give they; - they will be register elsewhere.
for my own part, there be no man give so little as I do; for few, that I know, have so little to give; but as this be the first public act of my charity in France, I take the more notice of it.
a well-a-way! say I, - I have but eight sous in the world, show they in my hand, and there be eight poor man and eight poor woman for them.
a poor tatter'd soul, without a shirt on, instantly withdraw his claim, by retire two step out of the circle, and make a disqualifying bow on his part.  have the whole parterre cry out, Place aux dames, with one voice, it would not have convey the sentiment of a deference for the sex with half the effect.
just Heaven! for what wise reason hast thou order it, that beggary and urbanity, which be at such variance in other country, should find a way to be at unity in this?
- I insist upon present he with a single sous, merely for his politesse.
a poor little dwarfish brisk fellow, who stand over against I in the circle, put something first under his arm, which have once be a hat, take his snuff-box out of his pocket, and generously offer'd a pinch on both side of he: it be a gift of consequence, and modestly decline.  - the poor little fellow press it upon they with a nod of welcomeness. - Prenez en - prenez, say he, look another way; so they each take a pinch. - Pity thy box should ever want one! say I to myself; so I put a couple of sous into it - take a small pinch out of his box, to enhance their value, as I do it.  he feel the weight of the second obligation more than of the first, - 'twa do he an honour, - the other be only do he a charity; - and he make I a bow down to the ground for it.
- here! say I to an old soldier with one hand, who have be campaign and wear out to death in the service - herebe a couple of sous for thee. - Vive le Roi! say the old soldier.
I have then but three sous left: so I give one, simply, pour l'amour de Dieu, which be the footing on which it be begg'd. - the poor woman have a dislocate hip; so it could not be well upon any other motive.
Mon cher et tr?s-charitable Monsieur. - therebe no oppose this, say I.
Milord Anglois - the very sound be worth the money; - so I give my last sous for it.  but in the eagerness of give, I have overlook a pauvre honteux, who have have no one to ask a sous for he, and who, I believe, would have perish, ere he could have ask'd one for himself: he stand by the chaise a little without the circle, and wipe a tear from a face which I think have see well day. - Good God! say I - and I have not one single sous leave to give he. - but you have a thousand! cry all the power of nature, stir within I; - so I give he - no matter what - I be ashamed to say how much now, - and be ashamed to think how little, then: so, if the reader can form any conjecture of my disposition, as these two fix point be give he, he may judge within a livre or two what be the precise sum.
I could afford nothing for the rest, but Dieu vous bénisse!
- Et le bon Dieu vous bénisse encore, say the old soldier, the dwarf, &c.  the pauvre honteux could say nothing; - he pull'd out a little handkerchief, and wipe his face as he turn away - and I think he thank I more than they all.

THE BIDET.

have settle all these little matter, I get into my post-chaise with more ease than ever I get into a post-chaise in my life; and La Fleur have get one large jack-boot on the far side of a little bidet, and another on this (for I count nothing of his leg) - he canter'd away before I as happy and as perpendicular as a prince. - but what be happiness! what be grandeur in this paint scene of life!  a dead ass, before we have get a league, put a sudden stop to La Fleur's career; - his bidet would not pass by it, - a contention arise betwixt they, and the poor fellow be kick'd out of his jack-boot the very first kick.
La Fleur bear his fall like a french Christian, say neither more nor less upon it, than Diable!  so presently get up, and come to the charge again astride his bidet, beat he up to it as he would have beat his drum.
the bidet fly from one side of the road to the other, then back again, - then this way, then that way, and in short, every way but by the dead ass: - La Fleur insist upon the thing - and the bidet throw he.
whatbe the matter, La Fleur, say I, with this bidet of thine?  Monsieur, say he, c'est un cheval le plus opiniâtre du monde. - Nay, if he be a conceited beast, he must go his own way, reply I.  so La Fleur get off he, and give he a good sound lash, the bidet take I at my word, and away he scamper back to Montreuil. - Peste! say La Fleur.
it be not mal-?-propos to take notice here, that though La Fleur avail himself but of two different term of exclamation in this encounter, - namely, Diable! and Peste! that there be, nevertheless, three in the french language: like the positive, comparative, and superlative, one or the other of which serve for every unexpected throw of the dice in life.
Le Diable! which be the first, and positive degree, be generally use upon ordinary emotion of the mind, where small thing only fall out contrary to your expectation; such as - the throwing once doublet - La Fleur's be kick'd off his horse, and so forth. - Cuckoldom, for the same reason, be always - le Diable!
but, in case where the cast have something provoke in it, as in that of the bidet's run away after, and leave La Fleur aground in jack-boot, - 'tis the second degree.
'tis then Peste!
and for the third -
- but here my heart be wring with pity and fellow feeling, when I reflect what misery must have be their lot, and how bitterly so refine a people must have smart, to have force they upon the use of it. -
Grant I, o ye power which touch the tongue with eloquence in distress! - what ever be my cast, grant I but decent word to exclaim in, and I will give my nature way.
- but as these be not to be have in France, I resolve to take every evil just as it befell I, without any exclamation at all.
La Fleur, who have make no such covenant with himself, follow the bidet with his eye till it be get out of sight, - and then, you may imagine, if you please, with what word he close the whole affair.
as there be no hunting down a frightened horse in jack-boot, there remain no alternative but take La Fleur either behind the chaise, or into it. -
I prefer the latter, and in half an hour we get to the post-house at Nampont.

NAMPONT.  the dead ASS.

- and this, say he, put the remain of a crust into his wallet - and this should have be thy portion, say he, hadst thou be alive to have share it with I. - I think, by the accent, it have be an apostrophe to his child; but 'twa to his ass, and to the very ass we have see dead in the road, which have occasion La Fleur's misadventure.  the man seem to lament it much; and it instantly bring into my mind Sancho's lamentation for his; but he do it with more true touch of nature.
the mourner be sit upon a stone bench at the door, with the ass's pannel and its bridle on one side, which he take up from time to time, - then lay they down, - look'd at they, and shake his head.  he then take his crust of bread out of his wallet again, as if to eat it; hold it some time in his hand, - then lay it upon the bit of his ass's bridle, - look wistfully at the little arrangement he have make - and then give a sigh.
the simplicity of his grief draw number about he, and La Fleur amongst the rest, whilst the horse be get ready; as I continue sit in the post-chaise, I could see and hear over their head.
- he say he have come last from Spain, where he have be from the furth border of Franconia; and have get so far on his return home, when his ass die.  every one seem desirous to know what business could have take so old and poor a man so far a journey from his own home.
it have please heaven, he say, to bless he with three son, the fine lad in Germany; but have in one week lose two of the eld of they by the small-pox, and the youngest fall ill of the same distemper, he be afraid of be bereft of they all; and make a vow, if heaven would not take he from he also, he would go in gratitude to St. Iago in Spain.
when the mourner get thus far on his story, he stopp'd to pay nature her tribute, - and weep bitterly.
he say, heaven have accept the condition; and that he have set out from his cottage with this poor creature, who have be a patient partner of his journey; - that it have eat the same bread with he all the way, and be unto he as a friend.
every body who stand about, hear the poor fellow with concern. - La Fleur offer he money. - the mourner say he do not want it; - it be not the value of the ass - but the loss of he. - the ass, he say, he be assure, love he; - and upon this tell they a long story of a mischance upon their passage over the pyrenean mountain, which have separate they from each other three day; during which time the ass have seek he as much as he have seek the ass, and that they have scarce either eat or drank till they meet.
Thou hast one comfort, friend, say I, at least, in the loss of thy poor beast; Ibe sure thou hast be a merciful master to he. - alas! say the mourner, I think so when he be alive; - but now that he be dead, I think otherwise. - I fear the weight of myself and my affliction together have be too much for he, - they have shorten the poor creature's day, and I fear I have they to answer for. - shame on the world! say I to myself. - do we but love each other as this poor soul love his ass - 'twould be something. -

NAMPONT.  the POSTILION.

the concern which the poor fellow's story throw I into require some attention; the postilion pay not the least to it, but set off upon the pavé in a full gallop.
the thirsty soul in the most sandy desert of Arabia could not have wish more for a cup of cold water, than mine do for grave and quiet movement; and I should have have an high opinion of the postilion have he but steal off with I in something like a pensive pace. - on the contrary, as the mourner finish his lamentation, the fellow give an unfeele lash to each of his beast, and set off clattering like a thousand devil.
I call to he as loud as I could, for heaven's sake to go slow: - and the louder I call, the more unmercifully he gallop. - the deuce take he and his gallop too - say I, - hewill go on tear my nerve to piece till he have work I into a foolish passion, and then hewill go slow that I may enjoy the sweet of it.
the postilion manage the point to a miracle: by the time he have get to the foot of a steep hill, about half a league from Nampont, - he have put I out of temper with he, - and then with myself, for be so.
my case then require a different treatment; and a good rattle gallop would have be of real service to I. -
- then, prithee, get on - get on, my good lad, say I.
the postilion point to the hill. - I then try to return back to the story of the poor German and his ass - but I have break the clue, - and could no more get into it again, than the postilion could into a trot.
- the deuce go, say I, with it all!  here be I sit as candidly dispose to make the good of the bad, as ever wight be, and all run counter.
there be one sweet lenitive at least for evil, which nature hold out to we: so I take it kindly at her hand, and fall asleep; and the first word which rouse I be Amiens.
- bless I! say I, rub my eye, - this be the very town where my poor lady be to come.

amien.

the word be scarce out of my mouth when the Count de L-'s post-chaise, with his sister in it, drive hastily by: she have just time to make I a bow of recognition, - and of that particular kind of it, which tell I she have not yet do with I.  she be as good as her look; for, before I have quite finish my supper, her brother's servant come into the room with a billet, in which she say she have take the liberty to charge I with a letter, which I be to present myself to Madame R- the first morning I have nothing to do at Paris.  there be only add, she be sorry, but from what penchant she have not consider, that she have be prevent tell I her story, - that she still owe it to I; and if my route should ever lay through Brussels, and I have not by then forget the name of Madame de L-, - that Madame de L- would be glad to discharge her obligation.
then I will meet thee, say I, fair spirit! at Brussels; - 'tis only return from Italy through Germany to Holland, by the route of Flanders, home; - 'twill scarce be ten post out of my way; but, be it ten thousand! with what a moral delight will it crown my journey, in share in the sicken incident of a tale of misery tell to I by such a sufferer?  to see her weep! and, though I cannot dry up the fountain of her tear, what an exquisite sensation be there still leave, in wipe they away from off the cheek of the first and fairest of woman, as Ibe sit with my handkerchief in my hand in silence the whole night beside she?
there be nothing wrong in the sentiment; and yet I instantly reproach my heart with it in the bitter and most reprobate of expression.
it have ever, as I tell the reader, be one of the singular blessing of my life, to be almost every hour of it miserably in love with some one; and my last flame happen to be blow out by a whiff of jealousy on the sudden turn of a corner, I have light it up afresh at the pure taper of Eliza but about three month before, - swearing, as I do it, that it should last I through the whole journey. - why should I dissemble the matter?  I have swear to her eternal fidelity; - she have a right to my whole heart: - to divide my affection be to lessen they; - to expose they be to risk they: where there be risk there may be loss: - and what wilt thou have, Yorick, to answer to a heart so full of trust and confidence - so good, so gentle, and unreproaching!
- I will not go to Brussels, reply I, interrupt myself. - but my imagination go on, - I recall her look at that crisis of our separation, when neither of we have power to say adieu!  I look'd at the picture she have tie in a black riband about my neck, - and blush'd as I look'd at it. - I would have give the world to have kiss'd it, - but be ashamed. - and shall this tender flower, say I, press it between my hand, - shall it be smite to its very root, - and smitten, Yorick! by thee, who hast promise to shelter it in thy breast?
Eternal Fountain of Happiness! say I, kneel down upon the ground, - be thou my witness - and every pure spirit which taste it, be my witness also, that I would not travel to Brussels, unless Eliza go along with I, do the road lead I towards heaven!
in transport of this kind, the heart, in spite of the understanding, will always say too much.

the letter.  amien.

Fortune have not smile upon La Fleur; for he have be unsuccessful in his feat of chivalry, - and not one thing have offer to signalise his zeal for my service from the time that he have enter into it, which be almost four-and-twenty hour.  the poor soul burn'd with impatience; and the Count de L-'s servant come with the letter, be the first practicable occasion which offer'd, La Fleur have lay hold of it; and, in order to do honour to his master, have take he into a back parlour in the auberge, and treat he with a cup or two of the good wine in Picardy; and the Count de L-'s servant, in return, and not to be behindhand in politeness with La Fleur, have take he back with he to the Count's hotel.  La Fleur's prevenancy (for there be a passport in his very look) soon set every servant in the kitchen at ease with he; and as a Frenchman, whatever be his talent, have no sort of prudery in show they, La Fleur, in less than five minute, have pull out his fife, and lead off the dance 
himself with the first note, set the fille de chambre, the maître d'hôtel, the cook, the scullion, and all the house-hold, dog and cat, besides an old monkey, a dancing: I suppose there never be a merry kitchen since the flood.
Madame de L-, in pass from her brother's apartment to her own, hear so much jollity below stair, ring up her fille de chambre to ask about it; and, hear it be the english gentleman's servant, who have set the whole house merry with his pipe, she order he up.
as the poor fellow could not present himself empty, he have load himself in go up stair with a thousand compliment to Madame de L-, on the part of his master, - add a long apocrypha of inquiry after Madame de L-'s health, - tell she, that Monsieur his master be au désespoire for her re-establishment from the fatigue of her journey, - and, to close all, that Monsieur have receive the letter which Madame have do he the honour - and he have do I the honour, say Madame de L-, interrupt La Fleur, to send a billet in return.
Madame de L- have say this with such a tone of reliance upon the fact, that La Fleur have not power to disappoint her expectation; - he tremble for my honour, - and possibly might not altogether be unconcerned for his own, as a man capable of be attach to a master who could be want en égard vis ? vis d'une femme! so that when Madame de L- ask La Fleur if he have bring a letter, - o qu'oui, say La Fleur: so lay down his hat upon the ground, and take hold of the flap of his right side pocket with his left hand, he begin to search for the letter with his right; - then contrariwise. - Diable! then seek every pocket - pocket by pocket, round, not forget his fob: - peste! - then La Fleur empty they upon the floor, - pull out a dirty cravat, - a handkerchief, - a comb, - a whip lash, - a nightcap, - then give a peep into his hat, - Quelle étourderie!  he have leave the letter upon the table in the auberge; - he would run for it, and be back with it in three minute.
I have just finish my supper when La Fleur come in to give I an account of his adventure: he tell the whole story simply as it be: and only add that if Monsieur have forget (par hazard) to answer Madame's letter, the arrangement give he an opportunity to recover the faux pas; - and if not, that thing be only as they be.
now I be not altogether sure of my étiquette, whether I ought to have write or no; - but if I have, - a devil himself could not have be angry: 'twa but the officious zeal of a well meaning creature for my honour; and, however he might have mistook the road, - or embarrass I in so do, - his heart be in no fault, - I be under no necessity to write; - and, what weigh more than all, - he do not look as if he have do amiss.
- 'tis all very well, La Fleur, say I. - 'twas sufficient.  La Fleur fly out of the room like lightning, and return with pen, ink, and paper, in his hand; and, come up to the table, lay they close before I, with such a delight in his countenance, that I could not help take up the pen.
I begin and begin again; and, though I have nothing to say, and that nothing might have be express in half a dozen line, I make half a dozen different beginning, and could no way please myself.
in short, I be in no mood to write.
La Fleur stepp'd out and bring a little water in a glass to dilute my ink, - then fetch'd sand and seal-wax. - it be all one; I write, and blot, and tear off, and burn, and write again. - Le diable l'emporte! say I, half to myself, - I cannot write this self-same letter, throw the pen down despairingly as I say it.
as soon as I have cast down my pen, La Fleur advance with the most respectful carriage up to the table, and make a thousand apology for the liberty he be go to take, tell I he have a letter in his pocket write by a drummer in his regiment to a corporal's wife, which he durst say would suit the occasion.
I have a mind to let the poor fellow have his humour. - then prithee, say I, let I see it.
La Fleur instantly pull out a little dirty pocket book cramm'd full of small letter and billet-doux in a sad condition, and lay it upon the table, and then untie the string which hold they all together, run they over, one by one, till he come to the letter in question, - La voila! say he, clap his hand: so, unfold it first, he lay it open before I, and retire three step from the table whilst I read it.

the letter.

Madame,
Je suis pénétré de la douleur la plus vive, et réduit en m?me temp au désespoir par ce retour imprév? du caporal qui rend notre entrev?e de ce soir la choose du monde la plus impossible.
Mais vive la joie! et toute la mienne sera de penser ? vous.
l'amour n'est rien san sentiment.
et le sentiment est encore moin sans amour.
on dit qu'on ne doit jamais se désesperér.
on dit aussi que Monsieur le Caporal monte la garde Mercredi: alors ce cera mon tour.
Chacun ? son tour.
en attendant - Vive l'amour! et vive la bagatelle!
Je suis, Madame,
Avec tous les sentimen le plus respectueux et les plus tendre,
tout ? vous,
JAQUES ROQUE.

it be but change the Corporal into the Count, - and say nothing about mount guard on Wednesday, - and the letter be neither right nor wrong: - so, to gratify the poor fellow, who stand tremble for my honour, his own, and the honour of his letter, - I take the cream gently off it, and whip it up in my own way, I seal'd it up and send he with it to Madame de L-; - and the next morning we pursue our journey to Paris.

PARIS.

when a man can contest the point by dint of equipage, and carry all on flounder before he with half a dozen of lackie and a couple of cook - 'tis very well in such a place as Paris, - he may drive in at which end of a street he will.
a poor prince who be weak in cavalry, and whose whole infantry do not exceed a single man, have well quit the field, and signalize himself in the cabinet, if he can get up into it; - I say up into it - for there be no descend perpendicular amongst them with a "Me voici! mes enfans" - here I be - whatever many may think.
I own my first sensation, as soon as I be leave solitary and alone in my own chamber in the hotel, be far from be so flattering as I have prefigure they.  I walk up gravely to the window in my dusty black coat, and look through the glass see all the world in yellow, blue, and green, run at the ring of pleasure. - the old with broken lance, and in helmet which have lose their vizard; - the young in armour bright which shine like gold, beplume with each gay feather of the east, - all, - all, tilt at it like fascinated knight in tournament of yore for fame and love. -
Alas, poor Yorick! cry I, what art thou do here?  on the very first onset of all this glitter clatter thou art reduce to an atom; - seek, - seek some wind alley, with a tourniquet at the end of it, where chariot never roll or flambeau shoot its ray; - there thou may solace thy soul in converse sweet with some kind grisette of a barber's wife, and get into such coterie! -
- may I perish! if I do, say I, pull out the letter which I have to present to Madame de R-  - Iwill wait upon this lady, the very first thing I do.  so I call La Fleur to go seek I a barber directly, - and come back and brush my coat.

the WIG.  PARIS.

when the barber come, he absolutely refuse to have any thing to do with my wig: 'twas either above or below his art: I have nothing to do but to take one ready make of his own recommendation.
- but I fear, friend! say I, this buckle willnot stand. - you may emerge it, reply he, into the ocean, and it will stand. -
what a great scale be every thing upon in this city think I. - the utmost stretch of an english periwig-maker's idea could have go no far than to have "dip it into a pail of water." - what difference! 'tis like Time to Eternity!
I confess I do hate all cold conception, as I do the puny idea which engender they; and be generally so strike with the great work of nature, that for my own part, if I could help it, I never would make a comparison less than a mountain at least.  all that can be say against the french sublime, in this instance of it, be this: - that the grandeur be more in the word, and less in the thing.  no doubt, the ocean fill the mind with vast idea; but Paris be so far inland, it be not likely I should run post a hundred mile out of it, to try the experiment; - the parisian barber mean nothing. -
the pail of water stand beside the great deep, make, certainly, but a sorry figure in speech; - but, 'twill be say, - it have one advantage - 'tis in the next room, and the truth of the buckle may be try in it, without more ado, in a single moment.
in honest truth, and upon a more candid revision of the matter, the french expression profess more than it perform.
I think I can see the precise and distinguish mark of national character more in these nonsensical minutia than in the most important matter of state; where great man of all nation talk and stalk so much alike, that I would not give ninepence to choose amongst they.
I be so long in get from under my barber's hand, that it be too late to think of go with my letter to Madame R- that night: but when a man be once dress at all point for go out, his reflection turn to little account; so take down the name of the Hôtel de Modene, where I lodge, I walk forth without any determination where to go; - I shall consider of that, say I, as I walk along.

the PULSE.  PARIS.

Hail, ye small sweet courtesy of life, for smooth do ye make the road of it! like grace and beauty, which beget inclination to love at first sight: 'tis ye who open this door and let the stranger in.
- Pray, Madame, say I, have the goodness to tell I which way I must turn to go to the Opéra Comique? - most willingly, Monsieur, say she, lay aside her work. -
I have give a cast with my eye into half a dozen shop, as I come along, in search of a face not likely to be disorder by such an interruption: till at last, this, hit my fancy, I have walk in.
she be work a pair of ruffle, as she sit in a low chair, on the far side of the shop, face the door.
- tre volontier, most willingly, say she, lay her work down upon a chair next she, and rise up from the low chair she be sit in, with so cheerful a movement, and so cheerful a look, that have I be lay out fifty louis d'or with she, I should have say - "this woman be grateful."
you must turn, Monsieur, say she, go with I to the door of the shop, and point the way down the street I be to take, - you must turn first to your left hand, - mais prenez garde - there be two turn; and be so good as to take the second - then go down a little way and youwill see a church: and, when you be past it, give yourself the trouble to turn directly to the right, and that will lead you to the foot of the Pont Neuf, which you must cross - and there any one will do himself the pleasure to show you. -
she repeat her instruction three time over to I, with the same goodnatur'd patience the third time as the first; - and if tone and manner have a meaning, which certainly they have, unless to heart which shut they out, - she seem really interested that I should not lose myself.
I will not suppose it be the woman's beauty, notwithstanding she be the handsome grisette, I think, I ever see, which have much to do with the sense I have of her courtesy; only I remember, when I tell she how much I be oblige to she, that I look very full in her eye, - and that I repeat my thank as often as she have do her instruction.
I have not get ten pace from the door, before I find I have forget every tittle of what she have say; - so look back, and see she still stand in the door of the shop, as if to look whether I go right or not, - I return back to ask she, whether the first turn be to my right or left, - for that I have absolutely forget. - be it possible! say she, half laugh.  'tis very possible, reply I, when a man be think more of a woman than of her good advice.
as this be the real truth - she take it, as every woman take a matter of right, with a slight curtsey.
- Attendez! say she, lay her hand upon my arm to detain I, whilst she call a lad out of the back shop to get ready a parcel of glove.  I be just go to send he, say she, with a packet into that quarter, and if you will have the complaisance to step in, it will be ready in a moment, and he shall attend you to the place. - so I walk'd in with she to the far side of the shop: and take up the ruffle in my hand which she lay upon the chair, as if I have a mind to sit, she sit down herself in her low chair, and I instantly sit myself down beside she.
- he will be ready, Monsieur, say she, in a moment. - and in that moment, reply I, most willingly would I say something very civil to you for all these courtesy.  any one may do a casual act of good nature, but a continuation of they show it be a part of the temperature; and certainly, add I, if it be the same blood which come from the heart which descend to the extreme (touch her wrist) I be sure you must have one of the good pulse of any woman in the world. - feel it, say she, hold out her arm.  so lay down my hat, I take hold of her finger in one hand, and apply the two forefinger of my other to the artery. -
- would to heaven! my dear Eugenius, thou hadst pass by, and behold I sit in my black coat, and in my lack-a-day-sical manner, count the throb of it, one by one, with as much true devotion as if I have be watch the critical ebb or flow of her fever. - how wouldst thou have laugh'd and moralize upon my new profession! - and thou shouldst have laugh'd and moralize on. - trust I, my dear Eugenius, I should have say, "there be bad occupation in this world than feel a woman's pulse." - but a grisette's! thou wouldst have say, - and in an open shop!  Yorick -
- so much the well: for when my view be direct, Eugenius, I care not if all the world see I feel it.

the HUSBAND.  PARIS.

I have count twenty pulsation, and be go on fast towards the fortieth, when her husband, come unexpected from a back parlour into the shop, put I a little out of my reckoning. - 'twa nobody but her husband, she say; - so I begin a fresh score. - Monsieur be so good, quoth she, as he pass'd by we, as to give himself the trouble of feel my pulse. - the husband take off his hat, and make I a bow, say, I do he too much honour - and have say that, he put on his hat and walk'd out.
good God! say I to myself, as he go out, - and can this man be the husband of this woman!
let it not torment the few who know what must have be the ground of this exclamation, if I explain it to those who do not.
in London a shopkeeper and a shopkeeper's wife seem to be one bone and one flesh: in the several endowment of mind and body, sometimes the one, sometimes the other have it, so as, in general, to be upon a par, and totally with each other as nearly as man and wife need to do.
in Paris, there be scarce two order of being more different: for the legislative and executive power of the shop not rest in the husband, he seldom come there: - in some dark and dismal room behind, he sit commerce-less, in his thrum nightcap, the same rough son of Nature that Nature leave he.
the genius of a people, where nothing but the monarchy be salique, have cede this department, with sundry other, totally to the woman, - by a continual higgling with customer of all rank and size from morning to night, like so many rough pebble shake long together in a bag, by amicable collision they have wear down their asperity and sharp angle, and not only become round and smooth, but will receive, some of they, a polish like a brilliant: - Monsieur le Mari be little well than the stone under your foot.
- surely, - surely, man! it be not good for thee to sit alone: - thou wast make for social intercourse and gentle greeting; and this improvement of our nature from it I appeal to as my evidence.
- and how do it beat, Monsieur? say she. - with all the benignity, say I, look quietly in her eye, that I expect. - she be go to say something civil in return - but the lad come into the shop with the glove. - Á propos, say I, I want a couple of pair myself.

the GLOVES.  PARIS.

the beautiful grisette rise up when I say this, and go behind the counter, reach'd down a parcel and untie it: I advance to the side over against she: they be all too large.  the beautiful grisette measure they one by one across my hand. - it would not alter their dimension. - she begg'd I would try a single pair, which seem to be the least. - she hold it open; - my hand slip into it at once. - it will not do, say I, shake my head a little. - no, say she, do the same thing.
there be certain combined look of simple subtlety, - where whim, and sense, and seriousness, and nonsense, be so blended, that all the language of Babel set loose together, could not express they; - they be communicate and catch so instantaneously, that you can scarce say which party be the infector.  I leave it to your man of word to swell page about it - it be enough in the present to say again, the glove would not do; so, fold our hand within our arm, we both loll upon the counter - it be narrow, and there be just room for the parcel to lay between we.
the beautiful grisette look sometimes at the glove, then sideways to the window, then at the glove, - and then at I.  I be not disposed to break silence: - I follow her example: so, I look at the glove, then to the window, then at the glove, and then at she, - and so on alternately.
I find I lose considerably in every attack: - she have a quick black eye, and shoot through two such long and silken eyelash with such penetration, that she look'd into my very heart and rein. - it may seem strange, but I could actually feel she do. -
it be no matter, say I, take up a couple of the pair next I, and put they into my pocket.
I be sensible the beautiful grisette have not ask above a single livre above the price. - I wish'd she have ask a livre more, and be puzzle my brain how to bring the matter about. - do you think, my dear Sir, say she, mistake my embarrassment, that I could ask a sous too much of a stranger - and of a stranger whose politeness, more than his want of glove, have do I the honour to lay himself at my mercy? - M'en croyez capable? - Faith! not I, say I; and if you be, you be welcome.  so count the money into her hand, and with a low bow than one generally make to a shopkeeper's wife, I go out, and her lad with his parcel follow I.

the TRANSLATION.  PARIS.

there be nobody in the box I be let into but a kindly old french officer.  I love the character, not only because I honour the man whose manner be soften by a profession which make bad man bad; but that I once know one, - for he be no more, - and why should I not rescue one page from violation by write his name in it, and tell the world it be Captain Tobias Shandy, the dearest of my flock and friend, whose philanthropy I never think of at this long distance from his death - but my eye gush out with tear.  for his sake I have a predilection for the whole corps of veteran; and so I stride over the two back row of bench and place myself beside he.
the old officer be read attentively a small pamphlet, it might be the book of the opera, with a large pair of spectacle.  as soon as I sit down, he take his spectacle off, and put they into a shagreen case, return'd they and the book into his pocket together.  I half rise up, and make he a bow.
translate this into any civilized language in the world - the sense be this:
"herebe a poor stranger come into the box - he seem as if he know nobody; and be never likely, be he to be seven year in Paris, if every man he come near keep his spectacle upon his nose: - 'tis shut the door of conversation absolutely in his face - and use he bad than a German."
the french officer might as well have say it all aloud: and if he have, I should in course have put the bow I make he into French too, and tell he, "I be sensible of his attention, and return'd he a thousand thank for it."
there be not a secret so aid to the progress of sociality, as to get master of this short hand, and to be quick in render the several turn of look and limb with all their inflection and delineation, into plain word.  for my own part, by long habitude, I do it so mechanically, that, when I walk the street of London, I go translate all the way; and have more than once stand behind in the circle, where not three word have be say, and have bring off twenty different dialogue with I, which I could have fairly write down and swear to.
I be go one evening to Martini's concert at Milan, and, be just enter the door of the hall, when the Marquisina di F- be come out in a sort of a hurry: - she be almost upon I before I see she; so I give a spring to once side to let she pass. - she have do the same, and on the same side too; so we run our head together: she instantly get to the other side to get out: I be just as unfortunate as she have be, for I have spring to that side, and oppose her passage again. - we both fly together to the other side, and then back, - and so on: - it be ridiculous: we both blush'd intolerably: so I do at last the thing I should have do at first; - I stand stock-still, and the Marquisina have no more difficulty.  I have no power to go into the room, till I have make she so much reparation as to wait and follow she with my eye to the end of the passage.  she look'd back twice, and walk'd along it rather sideways, as if she would make room for any one come up stair to pass she. - no, say I - thatbe 
a vile translation: the Marquisina have a right to the good apology I can make she, and that opening be leave for I to do it in; - so I run and begg'd pardon for the embarrassment I have give she, say it be my intention to have make her way.  she answer, she be guide by the same intention towards I; - so we reciprocally thank'd each other.  she be at the top of the stair; and see no cicisbeo near she, I begg'd to hand she to her coach; - so we go down the stair, stop at every third step to talk of the concert and the adventure. - upon my word, Madame, say I, when I have hand she in, I make six different effort to let you go out. - and I make six effort, reply she, to let you enter. - I wish to heaven you would make a seventh, say I. - with all my heart, say she, make room. - life be too short to be long about the form of it, - so I instantly stepp'd in, and she carry I home with she. - and what become of the concert, St. Cecilia, who I suppose be at it, know more than I.
I will only add, that the connexion which arise out of the translation give I more pleasure than any one I have the honour to make in Italy.

the dwarf.  PARIS.

I have never hear the remark make by any one in my life, except by one; and who that be will probably come out in this chapter; so that be pretty much unprepossessed, there must have be ground for what strike I the moment I cast my eye over the parterre, - and that be, the unaccountable sport of Nature in form such number of dwarf. - no doubt she sport at certain time in almost every corner of the world; but in Paris there be no end to her amusement. - the goddess seem almost as merry as she be wise.
as I carry my idea out of the Opéra Comique with I, I measure every body I see walk in the street by it. - melancholy application! especially where the size be extremely little, - the face extremely dark, - the eye quick, - the nose long, - the tooth white, - the jaw prominent, - to see so many miserable, by force of accident drive out of their own proper class into the very verge of another, which it give I pain to write down: - every third man a pigmy! - some by rickety head and hump back; - other by bandy leg; - a third set arrest by the hand of Nature in the sixth and seventh year of their growth; - a fourth, in their perfect and natural state like dwarf apple tree; from the first rudiment and stamina of their existence, never mean to grow high.
a Medical Traveller might say, 'tis owe to undue bandage; - a splenetic one, to want of air; - and an Inquisitive Traveller, to fortify the system, may measure the height of their house, - the narrowness of their street, and in how few foot square in the sixth and seventh story such number of the bourgeoisie eat and sleep together; but I remember Mr. Shandy the elder, who account for nothing like any body else, in speak one evening of these matter, aver that child, like other animal, might be increase almost to any size, provide they come right into the world; but the misery be, the citizen of be Paris so coop'd up, that they have not actually room enough to get they. - I do not call it get anything, say he; - 'tis get nothing. - Nay, continue he, rise in his argument, 'tis get bad than nothing, when all you have get after twenty or five and twenty year of the tender care and most nutritious aliment bestow upon it, shall not at last be as high as my leg.  now,
 Mr. Shandy be very short, there could be nothing more say of it.
as this be not a work of reasoning, I leave the solution as I find it, and content myself with the truth only of the remark, which be verify in every lane and by-lane of Paris.  I be walk down that which lead from the Carousal to the Palais Royal, and observe a little boy in some distress at the side of the gutter which run down the middle of it, I take hold of his hand and help'd he over.  upon turn up his face to look at he after, I perceive he be about forty. - never mind, say I, some good body will do as much for I when I be ninety.
I feel some little principle within I which incline I to be merciful towards this poor blighted part of my specie, who have neither size nor strength to get on in the world. - I cannot bear to see one of they trod upon; and have scarce get seat beside my old french officer, ere the disgust be exercise, by see the very thing happen under the box we sit in.
at the end of the orchestra, and betwixt that and the first side box, there be a small esplanade leave, where, when the house be full, number of all rank take sanctuary.  though you stand, as in the parterre, you pay the same price as in the orchestra.  a poor defenceless being of this order have get thrust somehow or other into this luckless place; - the night be hot, and he be surround by being two foot and a half high than himself.  the dwarf suffer inexpressibly on all side; but the thing which incommode he most, be a tall corpulent German, near seven foot high, who stand directly betwixt he and all possibility of his seeing either the stage or the actor.  the poor dwarf do all he could to get a peep at what be go forwards, by seek for some little opening betwixt the German's arm and his body, try first on one side, then the other; but the german stand square in the most unaccommodating posture that can be imagine: - the dwarf might as well have be place at the bottom of the 
deep draw-well in Paris; so he civilly reach up his hand to the German's sleeve, and tell he his distress. - the german turn'd his head back, look down upon he as Goliah do upon David, - and unfeelingly resume his posture.
I be just then take a pinch of snuff out of my monk's little horn box. - and how would thy meek and courteous spirit, my dear monk! so temper'd to bear and forbear! - how sweetly would it have lend an ear to this poor soul's complaint!
the old french officer, see I lift up my eye with an emotion, as I make the apostrophe, take the liberty to ask I what be the matter? - I tell he the story in three word; and add, how inhuman it be.
by this time the dwarf be drive to extreme, and in his first transport, which be generally unreasonable, have tell the german he would cut off his long queue with his knife. - the german look'd back coolly, and tell he he be welcome, if he could reach it.
an injury sharpen'd by an insult, be it to whom it will, make every man of sentiment a party: I could have leap'd out of the box to have redress it. - the old french officer do it with much less confusion; for lean a little over, and nod to a sentinel, and point at the same time with his finger at the distress, - the sentinel make his way to it. - there be no occasion to tell the grievance, - the thing tell himself; so thrust back the german instantly with his musket, - he take the poor dwarf by the hand, and place he before he. - this be noble! say I, clap my hand together. - and yet you would not permit this, say the old officer, in England.
- in England, dear Sir, say I, we sit all at our ease.
the old french officer would have set I at unity with myself, in case I have be at variance, - by say it be a bon mot; - and, as a bon mot be always worth something at Paris, he offer I a pinch of snuff.

the ROSE.  PARIS.

it be now my turn to ask the old french officer "what be the matter?" for a cry of "haussez les main, Monsieur l'Abbé!" re-echo from a dozen different part of the parterre, be as unintelligible to I, as my apostrophe to the monk have be to he.
he tell I it be some poor Abbé in one of the upper loge, who, he suppose, have get plant perdu behind a couple of grisette in order to see the opera, and that the parterre espy he, be insist upon his hold up both his hand during the representation. - and can it be suppose, say I, that an ecclesiastic would pick the grisette' pocket?  the old french officer smile, and whisper in my ear, open a door of knowledge which I have no idea of.
good God! say I, turn pale with astonishment - be it possible, that a people so smit with sentiment should at the same time be so unclean, and so unlike themselves, - Quelle grossi?rté! add I.
the french officer tell I, it be an illiberal sarcasm at the church, which have begin in the theatre about the time the Tartuffe be give in it by moli?re: but like other remain of Gothic manner, be decline. - every nation, continue he, have their refinement and grossi?rtés, in which they take the lead, and lose it of one another by turn: - that he have be in most country, but never in one where he find not some delicacy, which other seem to want.  Le POUR et le CONTRE se trouvent en chaque nation; there be a balance, say he, of good and bad everywhere; and nothing but the know it be so, can emancipate one half of the world from the prepossession which it hold against the other: - that the advantage of travel, as it regard the sçavoir vivre, be by see a great deal both of man and manner; it teach we mutual toleration; and mutual toleration, conclude he, make I a bow, teach us mutual love.
the old french officer deliver this with an air of such candour and good sense, as coincide with my first favourable impression of his character: - I think I love the man; but I fear I mistook the object; - 'twa my own way of thinking - the difference be, I could not have express it half so well.
it be alike troublesome to both the rider and his beast, - if the latter go prick up his ear, and start all the way at every object which he never see before. - I have as little torment of this kind as any creature alive; and yet I honestly confess, that many a thing give I pain, and that I blush'd at many a word the first month, - which I find inconsequent and perfectly innocent the second.
Madame do Rambouliet, after an acquaintance of about six week with she, have do I the honour to take I in her coach about two league out of town. - of all woman, Madame de Rambouliet be the most correct; and I never wish to see one of more virtue and purity of heart. - in our return back, Madame de Rambouliet desire I to pull the cord. - I ask she if she want anything - Rien que pour pisser, say Madame de Rambouliet.
grieve not, gentle traveller, to let Madame de Rambouliet p-ss on. - and, ye fair mystic nymph! go each one pluck your rose, and scatter they in your path, - for Madame de Rambouliet do no more. - I hand Madame de Rambouliet out of the coach; and have I be the priest of the chaste Castalia, I could not have serve at her fountain with a more respectful decorum.

the FILLE DE CHAMBRE.  PARIS.

what the old french officer have deliver upon travel, bring Polonius's advice to his son upon the same subject into my head, - and that bring in Hamlet, and Hamlet the rest of Shakespeare's work, I stopp'd at the Quai de Conti in my return home, to purchase the whole set.
the bookseller say he have not a set in the world.  comment! say I, take one up out of a set which lie upon the counter betwixt we. - he say they be send he only to be get bind, and be to be send back to Versailles in the morning to the Count de B-.
- and do the Count de B-, say I, read Shakespeare?  C'est un esprit fort, reply the bookseller. - he love english book! and what be more to his honour, Monsieur, he love the English too.  you speak this so civilly, say I, that it be enough to oblige an Englishman to lay out a louis d'or or two at your shop. - the bookseller make a bow, and be go to say something, when a young decent girl about twenty, who by her air and dress seem to be fille de chambre to some devout woman of fashion, come into the shop and ask for Les Egarements du Coeur et de l'Esprit: the bookseller give she the book directly; she pull out a little green satin purse run round with a riband of the same colour, and put her finger and thumb into it, she take out the money and pay for it.  as I have nothing more to stay I in the shop, we both walk'd out at the door together.
- and what have you to do, my dear, say I, with the Wanderings of the Heart, who scarce know yet you have one? nor, till love have first tell you it, or some faithless shepherd have make it ache, canst thou ever be sure it be so. - Le Dieu m'en garde! say the girl. - with reason, say I, for if it be a good one, 'tis pity it should be steal; 'tis a little treasure to thee, and give a well air to your face, than if it be dress'd out with pearl.
the young girl listen with a submissive attention, hold her satin purse by its riband in her hand all the time. - 'tis a very small one, say I, take hold of the bottom of it - she hold it towards I - and there be very little in it, my dear, say I; but be but as good as thou art handsome, and heaven will fill it.  I have a parcel of crown in my hand to pay for Shakespeare; and, as she have let go the purse entirely, I put a single one in; and, tie up the riband in a bow-knot, return it to she.
the young girl make I more a humble courtesy than a low one: - 'twa one of those quiet, thankful sinking, where the spirit bow itself down, - the body do no more than tell it.  I never give a girl a crown in my life which give I half the pleasure.
my advice, my dear, would not have be worth a pin to you, say I, if I have not give this along with it: but now, when you see the crown, youwill remember it; - so donot, my dear, lie it out in riband.
upon my word, Sir, say the girl, earnestly, I be incapable; - in say which, as be usual in little bargain of honour, she give I her hand: - En vérité, Monsieur, je mettrai cet argent ?part, say she.
when a virtuous convention be make betwixt man and woman, it sanctify their most private walk: so, notwithstanding it be dusky, yet as both our road lay the same way, we make no scruple of walk along the Quai de Conti together.
she make I a second courtesy in set off, and before we get twenty yard from the door, as if she have not do enough before, she make a sort of a little stop to tell I again - she thank'd I.
it be a small tribute, I tell she, which I could not avoid pay to virtue, and would not be mistake in the person I have be render it to for the world; - but I see innocence, my dear, in your face, - and foul befall the man who ever lay a snare in its way!
the girl seem'd affect some way or other with what I say; - she give a low sigh: - I find I be not empower to enquire at all after it, - so say nothing more till I get to the corner of the Rue de Nevers, where, we be to part.
- but be this the way, my dear, say I, to the Hotel de Modene?  she tell I it be; - or that I might go by the Rue de Gueneguault, which be the next turn. - then Iwill go, my dear, by the Rue de Gueneguault, say I, for two reason; first, I shall please myself, and next, I shall give you the protection of my company as far on your way as I can.  the girl be sensible I be civil - and say, she wish the Hotel de Modene be in the Rue de St. Pierre. - you live there? say I. - she tell I she be fille de chambre to Madame R-. - Good God! say I, 'tis the very lady for whom I have bring a letter from Amiens. - the girl tell I that Madame R-, she believe, expect a stranger with a letter, and be impatient to see he: - so I desire the girl to present my compliment to Madame R-, and say, I would certainly wait upon she in the morning.
we stand still at the corner of the Rue de Nevers whilst this pass'd. - we then stop a moment whilst she dispose of her Egarements du Coeur &c. more commodiously than carry they in her hand - they be two volume: so I hold the second for she whilst she put the first into her pocket; and then she hold her pocket, and I put in the other after it.
'tis sweet to feel by what fine spin thread our affection be draw together.
we set off afresh, and as she take her third step, the girl put her hand within my arm. - I be just bid she, - but she do it of herself, with that undeliberating simplicity, which show'd it be out of her head that she have never see I before.  for my own part, I feel the conviction of consanguinity so strongly, that I could not help turn half round to look in her face, and see if I could trace out any thing in it of a family likeness. - Tut! say I, be we not all relation?
when we arrive at the turning up of the Rue de Gueneguault, I stopp'd to bid she adieu for good and all: the girl would thank I again for my company and kindness. - she bid I adieu twice. - I repeat it as often; and so cordial be the parting between we, that have it happen any where else, Ibe not sure but I should have sign it with a kiss of charity, as warm and holy as an apostle.
but in Paris, as none kiss each other but the man, - I do, what amount to the same thing -
- I bid God bless she.

the PASSPORT.  PARIS.

when I get home to my hotel, La Fleur tell I I have be enquire after by the Lieutenant de Police. - the deuce take it! say I, - I know the reason.  it be time the reader should know it, for in the order of thing in which it happen, it be omit: not that it be out of my head; but that have I tell it then it might have be forget now; - and now be the time I want it.
I have leave London with so much precipitation, that it never enter'd my mind that we be at war with France; and have reach Dover, and look through my glass at the hill beyond Boulogne, before the idea present itself; and with this in its train, that there be no get there without a passport.  go but to the end of a street, I have a mortal aversion for return back no wise than I set out; and as this be one of the great effort I have ever make for knowledge, I could less bear the thought of it: so hear the Count de - have hire the packet, I begg'd he would take I in his suite.  the Count have some little knowledge of I, so make little or no difficulty, - only say, his inclination to serve I could reach no farth than Calais, as he be to return by way of Brussels to Paris; however, when I have once pass'd there, I might get to Paris without interruption; but that in Paris I must make friend and shift for myself. - let I get to Paris, Monsieur le Count, say I, - and I shall do very 
well.  so I embark'd, and never think more of the matter.
when La Fleur tell I the Lieutenant de Police have be enquire after I, - the thing instantly recur; - and by the time La Fleur have well tell I, the master of the hotel come into my room to tell I the same thing, with this addition to it, that my passport have be particularly ask after: the master of the hotel conclude with say, he hop I have one. - not i, faith! say I.
the master of the hotel retire three step from I, as from an infected person, as I declare this; - and poor La Fleur advance three step towards I, and with that sort of movement which a good soul make to succour a distress'd one: - the fellow win my heart by it; and from that single trait I know his character as perfectly, and could rely upon it as firmly, as if he have serve I with fidelity for seven year.
Mon seigneur! cry the master of the hotel; but recollect himself as he make the exclamation, he instantly change the tone of it. - if Monsieur, say he, have not a passport (apparemment) in all likelihood he have friend in Paris who can procure he one. - not that I know of, quoth I, with an air of indifference. - then certe, reply he, youwill be send to the Bastile or the Chatelet au moin. - Poo! say I, the King of France be a good natur'd soul: - hewill hurt nobody. - Cela n'emp?che pas, say he - you will certainly be send to the Bastile to-morrow morning. - but Ihave take your lodging for a month, answer'd I, and Iwill not quit they a day before the time for all the king of France in the world.  La Fleur whisper in my ear, that nobody could oppose the king of France.
Pardi! say my host, ce Messieurs Anglois sont des gen tr?s extraordinaire; - and, have both say and swear it, - he go out.

the PASSPORT.  the HOTEL AT PARIS.

I could not find in my heart to torture La Fleur's with a serious look upon the subject of my embarrassment, which be the reason I have treat it so cavalierly: and to show he how light it lie upon my mind, I dropt the subject entirely; and whilst he wait upon I at supper, talk'd to he with more than usual gaiety about Paris, and of the Opéra Comique. - La Fleur have be there himself, and have follow I through the street as far as the bookseller's shop; but see I come out with the young fille de chambre, and that we walk'd down the Quai de Conti together, La Fleur deem'd it unnecessary to follow I a step far; - so make his own reflection upon it, he take a short cut, - and get to the hotel in time to be inform'd of the affair of the police against my arrival.
as soon as the honest creature have take away, and go down to sup himself, I then begin to think a little seriously about my situation. -
- and here, I know, Eugenius, thou wilt smile at the remembrance of a short dialogue which pass betwixt we the moment I be go to set out: - I must tell it here.
Eugenius, know that I be as little subject to be overburden'd with money as thought, have draw I aside to interrogate I how much I have take care for.  upon tell he the exact sum, Eugenius shake his head, and say it would not do; so pull'd out his purse in order to empty it into mine. - Ihave enough in conscience, Eugenius, say I. - Indeed, Yorick, you have not, reply Eugenius; I know France and Italy well than you. - but you donot consider, Eugenius, say I, refuse his offer, that before I have be three day in Paris, I shall take care to say or do something or other for which I shall get clapp'd up into the Bastile, and that I shall live there a couple of month entirely at the king of France's expense. - I beg pardon, say Eugenius drily: really I have forget that resource.
now the event I treat gaily come seriously to my door.
be it folly, or nonchalance, or philosophy, or pertinacity - or what be it in I, that, after all, when La Fleur have go down stair, and I be quite alone, I could not bring down my mind to think of it otherwise than I have then speak of it to Eugenius?
- and as for the Bastile; the terror be in the word. - make the most of it you can, say I to myself, the Bastile be but another word for a tower; - and a tower be but another word for a house you cannot get out of. - mercy on the gouty! for they be in it twice a year. - but with nine livre a day, and pen and ink, and paper, and patience, albeit a man cannot get out, he may do very well within, - at least for a mouth or six week; at the end of which, if he be a harmless fellow, his innocence appear, and he come out a well and wise man than he go in.
I have some occasion (I forget what) to step into the court-yard, as I settle this account; and remember I walk'd down stair in no small triumph with the conceit of my reasoning. - Beshrew the sombre pencil! say I, vauntingly - for I envy not its power, which paint the evil of life with so hard and deadly a colouring.  the mind sit terrify at the object she have magnify herself, and blacken: reduce they to their proper size and hue, she overlook they. - 'tis true, say I, correct the proposition, - the Bastile be not an evil to be despise; - but strip it of its tower - fill up the fosse, - unbarricade the door - call it simply a confinement, and suppose 'tis some tyrant of a distemper - and not of a man, which hold you in it, - the evil vanishe, and you bear the other half without complaint.
I be interrupt in the heyday of this soliloquy, with a voice which I take to be of a child, which complain "it could not get out." - I look'd up and down the passage, and see neither man, woman, nor child, I go out without farther attention.
in my return back through the passage, I hear the same word repeat twice over; and, look up, I see it be a starle hang in a little cage. - "I cannot get out, - I cannot get out," say the starling.
I stand look at the bird: and to every person who come through the passage it run flutter to the side towards which they approach'd it, with the same lamentation of its captivity.  "I cannot get out," say the starling. - God help thee! say I, but Iwill let thee out, cost what it will; so I turn about the cage to get to the door: it be twisted and double twisted so fast with wire, there be no get it open without pull the cage to piece. - I take both hand to it.
the bird fly to the place where I be attempt his deliverance, and thrust his head through the trelli press his breast against it as if impatient. - I fear, poor creature! say I, I cannot set thee at liberty. - "no," say the starling, -  "I cannot get out - I cannot get out," say the starling.
I vow I never have my affection more tenderly awaken; nor do I remember an incident in my life, where the dissipate spirit, to which my reason have be a bubble, be so suddenly call'd home.  Mechanical as the note be, yet so true in tune to nature be they chant, that in one moment they overthrow all my systematic reasoning upon the Bastile; and I heavily walk upstairs, unsay every word I have say in go down they.
disguise thyself as thou wilt, still, Slavery! say I, - still thou art a bitter draught! and though thousand in all age have be make to drink of thee, thou art no less bitter on that account. - 'tis thou, thrice sweet and gracious goddess, address myself to Liberty, whom all in public or in private worship, whose taste be grateful, and ever will be so, till Nature herself shall change. - no tint of word can spot thy snowy mantle, or chymic power turn thy sceptre into iron: - with thee to smile upon he as he eat his crust, the swain be happy than his monarch, from whose court thou art exile! - Gracious Heaven! cry I, kneel down upon the last step but one in my ascent, grant I but health, thou great Bestower of it, and give I but this fair goddess as my companion, - and shower down thy mitre, if it seem good unto thy divine providence, upon those head which be ache for they!

the CAPTIVE.  PARIS.

the bird in his cage pursue I into my room; I sit down close to my table, and lean my head upon my hand, I begin to figure to myself the misery of confinement.  I be in a right frame for it, and so I give full scope to my imagination.
I be go to begin with the million of my fellow-creature bear to no inheritance but slavery: but find, however affect the picture be, that I could not bring it near I, and that the multitude of sad group in it do but distract I. -
- I take a single captive, and have first shut he up in his dungeon, I then look'd through the twilight of his grated door to take his picture.
I behold his body half-waste away with long expectation and confinement, and feel what kind of sickness of the heart it be which arise from hope deferr'd.  upon look nearer I see he pale and feverish: in thirty year the western breeze have not once fann'd his blood; - he have see no sun, no moon, in all that time - nor have the voice of friend or kinsman breathe through his lattice. - his child -
but here my heart begin to bleed - and I be force to go on with another part of the portrait.
he be sit upon the ground upon a little straw, in the furth corner of his dungeon, which be alternately his chair and bed: a little calendar of small stick be lay at the head, notch'd all over with the dismal day and night he have pass there; - he have one of these little stick in his hand, and, with a rusty nail he be etch another day of misery to add to the heap.  as I darken the little light he have, he lift up a hopeless eye towards the door, then cast it down, - shake his head, and go on with his work of affliction.  I hear his chain upon his leg, as he turn his body to lay his little stick upon the bundle. - he give a deep sigh. - I see the iron enter into his soul! - I burst into tear. - I could not sustain the picture of confinement which my fancy have draw. - I start up from my chair, and call La Fleur: I bid he bespeak I a remise, and have it ready at the door of the hotel by nine in the morning.
Iwill go directly, say I, myself to Monsieur le Duc de Choiseul.
La Fleur would have put I to bed; but - not willing he should see anything upon my cheek which would cost the honest fellow a heart-ache, - I tell he I would go to bed by myself, - and bid he go do the same.

the starling.  road to VERSAILLES.

I get into my remise the hour I propose: La Fleur get up behind, and I bid the coachman make the good of his way to Versailles.
as there be nothing in this road, or rather nothing which I look for in travel, I cannot fill up the blank well than with a short history of this self-same bird, which become the subject of the last chapter.
whilst the honourable Mr. - be wait for a wind at Dover, it have be catch upon the cliff, before it could well fly, by an english lad who be his groom; who, not care to destroy it, have take it in his breast into the packet; - and, by course of feed it, and take it once under his protection, in a day or two grow fond of it, and get it safe along with he to Paris.
at Paris the lad have lay out a livre in a little cage for the starling, and as he have little to do well the five month his master staid there, he teach it, in his mother's tongue, the four simple word - (and no more) - to which I own'd myself so much its debtor.
upon his master's go on for Italy, the lad have give it to the master of the hotel.  but his little song for liberty be in an unknown language at Paris, the bird have little or no store set by he: so La Fleur buy both he and his cage for I for a bottle of Burgundy.
in my return from Italy I bring he with I to the country in whose language he have learn his note; and tell the story of he to Lord A-, Lord A- begg'd the bird of I; - in a week Lord A- give he to Lord B-; Lord B- make a present of he to Lord C-; and Lord C-'s gentleman sell he to Lord D-'s for a shilling; Lord D- give he to Lord E-; and so on - half round the alphabet.  from that rank he pass'd into the low house, and pass'd the hand of as many commoner.  but as all these want to get in, and my bird want to get out, he have almost as little store set by he in London as in Paris.
it be impossible but many of my reader must have hear of he; and if any by mere chance have ever see he, I beg leave to inform they, that that bird be my bird, or some vile copy set up to represent he.
I have nothing farth to add upon he, but that from that time to this I have bear this poor starling as the crest to my arm. - thus:
[picture which cannot be reproduce]
- and let the herald's officer twist his neck about if they dare.

the ADDRESS.  VERSAILLES.

I should not like to have my enemy take a view of my mind when I be go to ask protection of any man; for which reason I generally endeavour to protect myself; but this go to Monsieur le Duc de C- be an act of compulsion; have it be an act of choice, I should have do it, I suppose, like other people.
how many mean plan of dirty address, as I go along, do my servile heart form!  I deserve the Bastile for every one of they.
then nothing would serve I when I get within sight of Versailles, but put word and sentence together, and conceive attitude and tone to wreath myself into Monsieur le Duc de C-'s good grace. - this will do, say I. - just as well, retort I again, as a coat carry up to he by an adventurous tailor, without take his measure.  Fool! continue I, - see Monsieur le Duc's face first; - observe what character be write in it; - take notice in what posture he stand to hear you; - mark the turn and expression of his body and limb; - and for the tone, - the first sound which come from his lip will give it you; and from all these together youwill compound an address at once upon the spot, which cannot disgust the Duke; - the ingredient be his own, and most likely to go down.
well! say I, I wish it well over. - coward again! as if man to man be not equal throughout the whole surface of the globe; and if in the field - why not face to face in the cabinet too?  and trust I, Yorick, whenever it be not so, man be false to himself and betray his own succour ten time where nature do it once.  go to the Duc de C- with the Bastile in thy look; - my life for it, thou wilt be send back to Paris in half an hour with an escort.
I believe so, say I. - then Iwill go to the Duke, by heaven! with all the gaiety and debonairness in the world. -
- and there you be wrong again, reply I. - A heart at ease, Yorick, fly into no extreme - 'tis ever on its centre. - well! well! cry I, as the coachman turn'd in at the gate, I find I shall do very well: and by the time he have wheel'd round the court, and bring I up to the door, I find myself so much the well for my own lecture, that I neither ascend the step like a victim to justice, who be to part with life upon the top most, - nor do I mount they with a skip and a couple of stride, as I do when I fly up, Eliza! to thee to meet it.
as I enter the door of the saloon I be meet by a person, who possibly might be the maître d'hôtel, but have more the air of one of the under secretary, who tell I the Duc de C- be busy. - I be utterly ignorant, say I, of the form of obtain an audience, be an absolute stranger, and what be bad in the present conjuncture of affair, be an Englishman too. - he reply, that do not increase the difficulty. - I make he a slight bow, and tell he, I have something of importance to say to Monsieur le Duc.  the secretary look'd towards the stair, as if he be about to leave I to carry up this account to some one. - but I must not mislead you, say I, - for what I have to say be of no manner of importance to Monsieur le Duc de C- - but of great importance to myself. - C'est une autre affaire, reply he. - not at all, say I, to a man of gallantry. - but pray, good sir, continue I, when can a strange hope to have access? - in not less than two hour, say he, look at his watch.  the number 
of equipage in the court-yard seem to justify the calculation, that I could have no near a prospect; - and as walk backwards and forwards in the saloon, without a soul to commune with, be for the time as bad as be in the Bastile itself, I instantly go back to my remise, and bid the coachman drive I to the Cordon Bleu, which be the near hotel.
I think there be a fatality in it; - I seldom go to the place I set out for.

LE PATISSIER.  VERSAILLES.

before I have get half way down the street I change my mind: as I be at Versailles, think I, I might as well take a view of the town; so I pull'd the cord, and order the coachman to drive round some of the principal street. - I suppose the town be not very large, say I. - the coachman begg'd pardon for set I right, and tell I it be very superb, and that number of the first duke and marquis and count have hotel. - the Count de B-, of whom the bookseller at the Quai de Conti have speak so handsomely the night before, come instantly into my mind. - and why should I not go, think I, to the Count de B-, who have so high an idea of english book and english man - and tell he my story? so I change my mind a second time. - in truth it be the third; for I have intend that day for Madame de R-, in the Rue St. Pierre, and have devoutly send her word by her fille de chambre that I would assuredly wait upon she; - but I be govern by circumstance; - I cannot govern they: so see a man stand 
with a basket on the other side of the street, as if he have something to sell, I bid La Fleur go up to he, and enquire for the Count's hotel.
La Fleur return a little pale; and tell I it be a Chevalier de St. Louis selling pâtés. - it be impossible, La Fleur, say I. - La Fleur could no more account for the phenomenon than myself; but persist in his story: he have see the croix set in gold, with its red riband, he say, tie to his buttonhole - and have look into the basket and see the pâtés which the Chevalier be sell; so could not be mistake in that.
such a reverse in man's life awaken a well principle than curiosity: I could not help look for some time at he as I sit in the remise: - the more I look'd at he, his croix, and his basket, the strong they weave themselves into my brain. - I get out of the remise, and go towards he.
he be begirt with a clean linen apron which fall below his knee, and with a sort of a bib that go half way up his breast; upon the top of this, but a little below the hem, hang his croix.  his basket of little pâtés be cover over with a white damask napkin; another of the same kind be spread at the bottom; and there be a look of propreté and neatness throughout, that one might have buy his pâtés of he, as much from appetite as sentiment.
he make an offer of they to neither; but stand still with they at the corner of an hotel, for those to buy who choose it without solicitation.
he be about forty-eight; - of a sedate look, something approach to gravity.  I do not wonder. - I go up rather to the basket than he, and have lift up the napkin, and take one of his pâtés into my hand, - I begg'd he would explain the appearance which affect I.
he tell I in a few word, that the good part of his life have pass in the service, in which, after spend a small patrimony, he have obtain a company and the croix with it; but that, at the conclusion of the last peace, his regiment be reform, and the whole corps, with those of some other regiment, leave without any provision, he find himself in a wide world without friend, without a livre, - and indeed, say he, without anything but this, - (pointing, as he say it, to his croix). - the poor Chevalier win my pity, and he finish the scene with win my esteem too.
the king, he say, be the most generous of prince, but his generosity could neither relieve nor reward everyone, and it be only his misfortune to be amongst the number.  he have a little wife, he say, whom he love, who do the pâtisserie; and add, he feel no dishonour in defend she and himself from want in this way - unless Providence have offer'd he a well.
it would be wicked to withhold a pleasure from the good, in pass over what happen'd to this poor Chevalier of St. Louis about nine month after.
it seem he usually take his stand near the iron gate which lead up to the palace, and as his croix have catch the eye of number, number have make the same enquiry which I have do. - he have tell they the same story, and always with so much modesty and good sense, that it have reach'd at last the king's ear; - who, hear the Chevalier have be a gallant officer, and respect by the whole regiment as a man of honour and integrity, - he break up his little trade by a pension of fifteen hundred livre a year.
as I have tell this to please the reader, I beg he will allow I to relate another, out of its order, to please myself: - the two story reflect light upon each other, - and 'tis a pity they should be part.

the SWORD.  RENNES.

when state and empire have their period of declension, and feel in their turn what distress and poverty be, - I stop not to tell the cause which gradually bring the house d'e-, in Brittany, into decay.  the Marquis d'e- have fight up against his condition with great firmness; wish to preserve, and still show to the world, some little fragment of what his ancestor have be; - their indiscretion have put it out of his power.  there be enough leave for the little exigency of obscurity. - but he have two boy who look up to he for light; - he think they deserve it.  he have try his sword - it could not open the way, - the mount be too expensive, - and simple economy be not a match for it: - there be no resource but commerce.
in any other province in France, save Brittany, this be smite the root for ever of the little tree his pride and affection wish'd to see re-blossom. - but in Brittany, there be a provision for this, he avail'd himself of it; and, take an occasion when the state be assemble at Rennes, the Marquis, attend with his two boy, enter the court; and have plead the right of an ancient law of the duchy, which, though seldom claim'd, he say, be no less in force, he take his sword from his side: - here, say he, take it; and be trusty guardian of it, till well time put I in condition to reclaim it.
the president accept the Marquis's sword: he staid a few minute to see it deposit in the archive of his house - and depart.
the Marquis and his whole family embark the next clay for Martinico, and in about nineteen or twenty year of successful application to business, with some unlook'd for bequest from distant branch of his house, return home to reclaim his nobility, and to support it.
it be an incident of good fortune which will never happen to any traveller but a sentimental one, that I should be at Rennes at the very time of this solemn requisition: I call it solemn; - it be so to I.
the Marquis enter the court with his whole family: he support his lady, - his eld son support his sister, and his young be at the other extreme of the line next his mother; - he put his handkerchief to his face twice. -
- there be a dead silence.  when the Marquis have approach within six pace of the tribunal, he give the Marchioness to his young son, and advance three step before his family, - he reclaim'd his sword.  his sword be give he, and the moment he get it into his hand he draw it almost out of the scabbard: - 'twa the shin face of a friend he have once give up - he look'd attentively along it, begin at the hilt, as if to see whether it be the same, - when, observe a little rust which it have contract near the point, he bring it near his eye, and bend his head down over it, - I think - I see a tear fall upon the place.  I could not be deceive by what follow.
"I shall find," say he, "some other way to get it off."
when the Marquis have say this, he return his sword into its scabbard, make a bow to the guardian of it, - and, with his wife and daughter, and his two son follow he, walk'd out.
O, how I envy he his feeling!

the PASSPORT.  VERSAILLES.

I find no difficulty in get admittance to Monsieur le Count de B-.  the set of Shakespeares be lay upon the table, and he be tumble they over.  I walk'd up close to the table, and give first such a look at the book as to make he conceive I know what they be, - I tell he I have come without any one to present I, know I should meet with a friend in his apartment, who, I trust, would do it for I: - it be my countryman, the great Shakespeare, say I, point to his work - et ayez la bouté, mon cher ami, apostrophize his spirit, add I, de I faire cet honneur-l?. -
the Count smile at the singularity of the introduction; and see I look'd a little pale and sickly, insist upon my take an arm-chair; so I sit down; and to save he conjecture upon a visit so out of all rule, I tell he simply of the incident in the bookseller's shop, and how that have impel I rather to go to he with the story of a little embarrassment I be under, than to any other man in France. - and what be your embarrassment? let I hear it, say the Count.  so I tell he the story just as I have tell it the reader.
- and the master of my hotel, say I, as I conclude it, will need have it, Monsieur le Count, that I shall be send to the Bastile; - but I have no apprehension, continue I; - for, in fall into the hand of the most polish'd people in the world, and be conscious I be a true man, and not come to spy the nakedness of the land, I scarce think I lie at their mercy. - it do not suit the gallantry of the French, Monsieur le Count, say I, to show it against invalid.
an animate blush come into the Count de B-'s cheek as I speak this. - Ne craignez rien - donot fear, say he. - indeed, I donot, reply I again. - besides, continue I, a little sportingly, I have come laugh all the way from London to Paris, and I do not think Monsieur le Duc de Choiseul be such an enemy to mirth as to send I back cry for my pain.
- my application to you, Monsieur le Count de B- (make he a low bow), be to desire he will not.
the Count hear I with great good nature, or I have not say half as much, - and once or twice say, - C'est bien dit.  so I rest my cause there - and determine to say no more about it.
the Count lead the discourse: we talk'd of indifferent thing, - of book, and politic, and man; - and then of woman. - God bless they all! say I, after much discourse about they - there be not a man upon earth who love they so much as I do: after all the foible I have see, and all the satire I have read against they, still I love they; be firmly persuade that a man, who have not a sort of affection for the whole sex, be incapable of ever love a single one as he ought.
eh bien!  Monsieur l'Anglois, say the Count, gaily; - you be not come to spy the nakedness of the land; - I believe you; - ni encore, I dare say, that of our woman! - but permit I to conjecture, - if, par hazard, they fall into your way, that the prospect would not affect you.
I have something within I which cannot bear the shock of the least indecent insinuation: in the sportability of chit-chat I have often endeavour to conquer it, and with infinite pain have hazard a thousand thing to a dozen of the sex together, - the least of which I could not venture to a single one to gain heaven.
excuse I, Monsieur le Count, say I; - as for the nakedness of your land, if I see it, I should cast my eye over it with tear in they; - and for that of your woman (blush at the idea he have excite in I) I be so evangelical in this, and have such a fellow-feeling for whatever be weak about they, that I would cover it with a garment if I know how to throw it on: - but I could wish, continue I, to spy the nakedness of their heart, and through the different disguise of custom, climate, and religion, find out what be good in they to fashion my own by: - and therefore be I come.
it be for this reason, Monsieur le Count, continue I, that I have not see the Palais Royal, - nor the Luxembourg, - nor the Façade of the Louvre, - nor have attempt to swell the catalogue we have of picture, statue, and church. - I conceive every fair being as a temple, and would rather enter in, and see the original drawing and loose sketch hang up in it, than the Transfiguration of Raphael itself.
the thirst of this, continue I, as impatient as that which inflame the breast of the connoisseur, have lead I from my own home into France, - and from France will lead I through Italy; - 'tis a quiet journey of the heart in pursuit of Nature, and those affection which arise out of she, which make we love each other, - and the world, well than we do.
the Count say a great many civil thing to I upon the occasion; and add very politely, how much he stand oblige to Shakespeare for make I known to he. - but a propos, say he; - Shakespeare be full of great thing; - he forget a small punctilio of announce your name: - it put you under a necessity of do it yourself.

the PASSPORT.  VERSAILLES.

there be not a more perplexing affair in life to I, than to set about tell any one who I be, - for there be scarce any body I cannot give a well account of than myself; and I have often wish I could do it in a single word, - and have an end of it.  it be the only time and occasion in my life I could accomplish this to any purpose; - for Shakespeare lie upon the table, and recollect I be in his book, I take up Hamlet, and turn immediately to the grave-digger' scene in the fifth act, I lay my finger upon Yorick, and advance the book to the Count, with my finger all the way over the name, - I voici! say I.
now, whether the idea of poor Yorick's skull be put out of the Count's mind by the reality of my own, or by what magic he could drop a period of seven or eight hundred year, make nothing in this account; - 'tis certain the French conceive well than they combine; - I wonder at nothing in this world, and the less at this; inasmuch as one of the first of our own Church, for whose candour and paternal sentiment I have the high veneration, fall into the same mistake in the very same case: - "he could not bear," he say, "to look into the sermon write by the King of Denmark's jester."  Good, my Lord say I; but there be two Yoricks.  the Yorick your Lordship think of, have be dead and bury eight hundred year ago; he flourish in Horwendillus's court; - the other Yorick be myself, who have flourish, my Lord, in no court. - he shake his head.  good God! say I, you might as well confound Alexander the Great with Alexander the Coppersmith, my lord! - "'twas all one," he reply. -
- if Alexander, King of Macedon, could have translate your Lordship, say I, Ibe sure your Lordship would not have say so.
the poor Count de B- fall but into the same error.
- Et, Monsieur, est-il Yorick? cry the Count. - Je le suis, say I. - Vous? - Moi, - moi qui ai l'honneur de vous parler, Monsieur le Comte. - Mon Dieu! say he, embrace I, - vous ?tes Yorick!
the Count instantly put the Shakespeare into his pocket, and leave I alone in his room.

the PASSPORT.  VERSAILLES.

I could not conceive why the Count de B- have go so abruptly out of the room, any more than I could conceive why he have put the Shakespeare into his pocket. -
Mysteries which must explain themselves be not worth the loss of time which a conjecture about they take up: 'twa well to read Shakespeare; so take up "much ado about nothing," I transport myself instantly from the chair I sit in to Messina in Sicily, and get so busy with Don Pedro, and Benedict, and Beatrice, that I think not of Versailles, the Count, or the passport.
sweet pliability of man's spirit, that can at once surrender itself to illusion, which cheat expectation and sorrow of their weary moment! - long, - long since have ye number'd out my day, have I not trod so great a part of they upon this enchant ground.  when my way be too rough for my foot, or too steep for my strength, I get off it, to some smooth velvet path, which Fancy have scatter over with rosebud of delight; and have take a few turn in it, come back strengthen and refresh'd. - when evil press sore upon I, and there be no retreat from they in this world, then I take a new course; - I leave it, - and as I have a clear idea of the elysian field than I have of heaven, I force myself, like AEneas, into they. - I see he meet the pensive shade of his forsaken Dido, and wish to recognise it; - I see the injure spirit wave her head, and turn off silent from the author of her misery and dishonour; - I lose the feeling for myself in her, and in those affection which be willnot to make 
I mourn for she when I be at school.
surely this be not walk in a vain shadow - nor do man disquiet himself in vain by it: - he oftener do so in trust the issue of his commotion to reason only. - I can safely say for myself, I be never able to conquer any one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively, as beat up as fast as I could for some kindly and gentle sensation to fight it upon its own ground
when I have get to the end of the third act the Count de B- enter, with my passport in his hand.  Monsieur le Duc de C-, say the Count, be as good a prophet, I dare say, as he be a statesman.  Un homme qui rit, say the Duke, ne sera jamais dangereux. - have it be for any one but the king's jester, add the Count, I could not have get it these two hour. - Pardonnez moi, Monsieur le Count, say I - I be not the king's jester. - but you be Yorick? - yes. - et vous plaisantez? - I answer, indeed I do jest, - but be not pay for it; - 'twa entirely at my own expense.
we have no jester at court, Monsieur le Count, say I; the last we have be in the licentious reign of Charles II.; - since which time our manner have be so gradually refining, that our court at present be so full of patriot, who wish for nothing but the honour and wealth of their country; - and our lady be all so chaste, so spotless, so good, so devout, - there be nothing for a jester to make a jest of. -
Voila un persiflage! cry the Count.

the PASSPORT.  VERSAILLES.

as the passport be direct to all lieutenant-governor, governor, and commandant of city, general of army, justiciary, and all officer of justice, to let Mr. Yorick the king's jester, and his baggage, travel quietly along, I own the triumph of obtain the passport be not a little tarnish'd by the figure I cut in it. - but there be nothing unmix'd in this world; and some of the grave of our divine have carry it so far as to affirm, that enjoyment itself be attend even with a sigh, - and that the great they know of terminate, in a general way, in little well than a convulsion.
I remember the grave and learn Bevoriskius, in his Commentary upon the generation from Adam, very naturally break off in the middle of a note to give an account to the world of a couple of sparrow upon the out-edge of his window, which have incommode he all the time he write, and at last have entirely take he off from his genealogy.
- 'tis strange! write Bevoriskius; but the fact be certain, for I have have the curiosity to mark they down one by one with my pen; - but the cock sparrow, during the little time that I could have finish the other half of this note, have actually interrupt I with the reiteration of his caress three-and-twenty time and a half.
how merciful, add Bevoriskius, be heaven to his creature!
Ill fat Yorick! that the gravest of thy brother should be able to write that to the world, which stain thy face with crimson to copy, even in thy study.
but this be nothing to my travel. - so I twice, - twice beg pardon for it.

CHARACTER.  VERSAILLES.

and how do you find the French? say the Count de B-, after he have give I the passport.
the reader may suppose, that after so oblige a proof of courtesy, I could not be at a loss to say something handsome to the enquiry.
- Mais passe, pour cela. - speak frankly, say he: do you find all the urbanity in the French which the world give we the honour of? - I have find every thing, I say, which confirm it. - Vraiment, say the Count, les François sont poli. - to an excess, reply I.
the Count take notice of the word exc?s; and would have it I mean more than I say.  I defend myself a long time as well as I could against it. - he insist I have a reserve, and that I would speak my opinion frankly.
I believe, Monsieur le Count, say I, that man have a certain compass, as well as an instrument; and that the social and other call have occasion by turn for every key in he; so that if you begin a note too high or too low, there must be a want either in the upper or under part, to fill up the system of harmony. - the Count de B- do not understand music, so desire I to explain it some other way.  a polish'd nation, my dear Count, say I, make every one its debtor: and besides, Urbanity itself, like the fair sex, have so many charm, it go against the heart to say it can do ill; and yet, I believe, there be but a certain line of perfection, that man, take he altogether, be empower'd to arrive at: - if he get beyond, he rather exchange quality than get they.  I must not presume to say how far this have affect the French in the subject we be speak of; - but, should it ever be the case of the English, in the progress of their refinement, to arrive at the same polish which distinguish the 
French, if we do not lose the politesse du coeur, which incline man more to humane action than courteous one, - we should at least lose that distinct variety and originality of character, which distinguish they, not only from each other, but from all the world besides.
I have a few of King William's shilling, as smooth as glass, in my pocket; and foresee they would be of use in the illustration of my hypothesis, I have get they into my hand when I have proceed so far: -
see, Monsieur le Count, say I, rise up, and lay they before he upon the table, - by jingle and rub one against another for seventy year together in one body's pocket or anotherbe, they be become so much alike, you can scarce distinguish one shilling from another.
the English, like ancient medal, keep more apart, and pass but few people's hand, preserve the first sharpness which the fine hand of Nature have give they; - they be not so pleasant to feel, - but in return the legend be so visible, that at the first look you see whose image and superscription they bear. - but the French, Monsieur le Count, add I (wish to soften what I have say), have so many excellence, they can the well spare this; - they be a loyal, a gallant, a generous, an ingenious, and good temper'd people as be under heaven; - if they have a fault - they be too serious.
Mon Dieu! cry the Count, rise out of his chair.
Mais vous plaisantez, say he, correct his exclamation. - I lay my hand upon my breast, and with earnest gravity assure he it be my most settle opinion.
the Count say he be mortify he could not stay to hear my reason, be engage to go that moment to dine with the Duc de C-.
but if it be not too far to come to Versailles to eat your soup with I, I beg, before you leave France, I may have the pleasure of know you retract your opinion, - or, in what manner you support it. - but, if you do support it, Monsieur Anglois, say he, you must do it with all your power, because you have the whole world against you. - I promise the Count I would do myself the honour of dining with he before I set out for Italy; - so take my leave.

the TEMPTATION.  PARIS.

when I alight at the hotel, the porter tell I a young woman with a bandbox have be that moment enquire for I. - I do not know, say the porter, whether she be go away or not.  I take the key of my chamber of he, and go upstairs; and when I have get within ten step of the top of the landing before my door, I meet she come easily down.
it be the fair fille de chambre I have walk along the Quai de Conti with; Madame de R- have send she upon some commission to a marchande des mode within a step or two of the Hôtel de Modene; and as I have fail'd in wait upon she, have bid her enquire if I have leave Paris; and if so, whether I have not leave a letter address to she.
as the fair fille de chambre be so near my door, she return back, and go into the room with I for a moment or two whilst I write a card.
it be a fine still evening in the latter end of the month of May, - the crimson window curtain (which be of the same colour as those of the bed) be draw close: - the sun be set, and reflect through they so warm a tint into the fair fille de chambre's face, - I think she blush'd; - the idea of it make I blush myself: - we be quite alone; and that superinduce a second blush before the first could get off.
there be a sort of a pleasing half guilty blush, where the blood be more in fault than the man: - 'tis send impetuous from the heart, and virtue fly after it, - not to call it back, but to make the sensation of it more delicious to the nerve: - 'tis associate. -
but Iwill not describe it; - I feel something at first within I which be not in strict unison with the lesson of virtue I have give she the night before. - I seek five minute for a card; - I know I have not one. - I take up a pen. - I lay it down again; - my hand tremble: - the devil be in I.
I know as well as any one he be an adversary, whom, if we resist, he will fly from we; - but I seldom resist he at all; from a terror, though I may conquer, I may still get a hurt in the combat; - so I give up the triumph for security; and, instead of think to make he fly, I generally fly myself.
the fair fille de chambre come close up to the bureau where I be look for a card - take up first the pen I cast down, then offer'd to hold I the ink; she offer'd it so sweetly, I be go to accept it; - but I durst not; - I have nothing, my dear, say I, to write upon. - write it, say she, simply, upon anything. -
I be just go to cry out, then I will write it, fair girl! upon thy lip. -
if I do, say I, I shall perish; - so I take she by the hand, and lead she to the door, and begg'd she would not forget the lesson I have give she. - she say, indeed she would not; - and, as she utter it with some earnestness, she turn'd about, and give I both her hand, close together, into mine; - it be impossible not to compress they in that situation; - I wish'd to let they go; and all the time I hold they, I keep argue within myself against it, - and still I hold they on. - in two minute I find I have all the battle to fight over again; - and I feel my leg and every limb about I tremble at the idea.
the foot of the bed be within a yard and a half of the place where we be stand. - I have still hold of her hand - and how it happen I can give no account; but I neither ask'd she - nor draw she - nor do I think of the bed; - but so it do happen, we both sit down.
Iwill just show you, say the fair fille de chambre, the little purse I have be make to-day to hold your crown.  so she put her hand into her right pocket, which be next I, and feel for it some time - then into the left. - "she have lose it." - I never bear expectation more quietly; - it be in her right pocket at last; - she pull'd it out; it be of green taffeta, line with a little bit of white quilted satin, and just big enough to hold the crown: she put it into my hand; - it be pretty; and I hold it ten minute with the back of my hand rest upon her lap - look sometimes at the purse, sometimes on one side of it.
a stitch or two have break out in the gather of my stock; the fair fille de chambre, without say a word, take out her little housewife, thread a small needle, and sew'd it up. - I foresaw it would hazard the glory of the day; and, as she pass'd her hand in silence across and across my neck in the manoeuvre, I feel the laurel shake which fancy have wreath'd about my head.
a strap have give way in her walk, and the buckle of her shoe be just fall off. - see, say the fille de chambre, hold up her foot. - I could not, for my soul but fasten the buckle in return, and put in the strap, - and lift up the other foot with it, when I have do, to see both be right, - in do it too suddenly, it unavoidably throw the fair fille de chambre off her centre, - and then -

THE conquest.

yes, - and then -.  Ye whose clay-cold head and luke-warm heart can argue down or mask your passion, tell I, what trespass be it that man should have they? or how his spirit stand answerable to the Father of spirit but for his conduct under they?
if Nature have so wove her web of kindness, that some thread of love and desire be entangle with the piece, - must the whole web be rent in draw they out? - whip I such stoic, great Governor of Nature! say I to myself: - wherever thy providence shall place I for the trial of my virtue; - whatever be my danger, - whatever be my situation, - let I feel the movement which rise out of it, and which belong to I as a man, - and, if I govern they as a good one, I will trust the issue to thy justice; for thou hast make we, and not we ourselves.
as I finish my address, I raise the fair fille de chambre up by the hand, and lead she out of the room: - she stand by I till I lock the door and put the key in my pocket, - and then, - the victory be quite decisive - and not till then, I press'd my lip to her cheek, and take she by the hand again, lead she safe to the gate of the hotel.

the MYSTERY.  PARIS.

if a man know the heart, he will know it be impossible to go back instantly to my chamber; - it be touch a cold key with a flat third to it upon the close of a piece of music, which have call'd forth my affection: - therefore, when I let go the hand of the fille de chambre, I remain at the gate of the hotel for some time, look at every one who pass'd by, - and form conjecture upon they, till my attention get fix'd upon a single object which confound all kind of reasoning upon he.
it be a tall figure of a philosophic, serious, adust look, which pass and repass'd sedately along the street, make a turn of about sixty pace on each side of the gate of the hotel; - the man be about fifty-two - have a small cane under his arm - be dress'd in a dark drab-colour'd coat, waistcoat, and breech, which seem'd to have see some year service: - they be still clean, and there be a little air of frugal propreté throughout he.  by his pull off his hat, and his attitude of accost a good many in his way, I see he be ask charity: so I get a sous or two out of my pocket ready to give he, as he take I in his turn. - he pass'd by I without ask anything - and yet do not go five step far before he ask'd charity of a little woman. - I be much more likely to have give of the two. - he have scarce do with the woman, when he pull'd off his hat to another who be come the same way. - an ancient gentleman come slowly - and, after he, a young smart one. - he let they both 
pass, and ask'd nothing.  I stand observe he half an hour, in which time he have make a dozen turn backwards and forwards, and find that he invariably pursue the same plan.
there be two thing very singular in this, which set my brain to work, and to no purpose: - the first be, why the man should only tell his story to the sex; - and, secondly, - what kind of story it be, and what specie of eloquence it could be, which soften'd the heart of the woman, which he know 'twas to no purpose to practise upon the man.
there be two other circumstance, which entangle this mystery; - the one be, he tell every woman what he have to say in her ear, and in a way which have much more the air of a secret than a petition; - the other be, it be always successful. - he never stopp'd a woman, but she pull'd out her purse, and immediately give he something.
I could form no system to explain the phenomenon.
I have get a riddle to amuse I for the rest of the evening; so I walk'd upstairs to my chamber.

the case of CONSCIENCE.  PARIS.

I be immediately follow up by the master of the hotel, who come into my room to tell I I must provide lodging elsewhere. - how so, friend? say I. - he answer, I have have a young woman lock'd up with I two hour that evening in my bedchamber, and 'twa against the rule of his house. - very well, say I, wewill all part friend then, - for the girl be no bad, - and I be no bad, - and you will be just as I find you. - it be enough, he say, to overthrow the credit of his hotel. - Voyez vous, Monsieur, say he, point to the foot of the bed we have be sit upon. - I own it have something of the appearance of an evidence; but my pride not suffer I to enter into any detail of the case, I exhort he to let his soul sleep in peace, as I resolve to let mine do that night, and that I would discharge what I owe he at breakfast.
I should not have mind, Monsieur, say he, if you have have twenty girl - 'tis a score more, reply I, interrupt he, than I ever reckon'd upon - provide, add he, it have be but in a morning. - and do the difference of the time of the day at Paris make a difference in the sin? - it make a difference, he say, in the scandal. - I like a good distinction in my heart; and cannot say I be intolerably out of temper with the man. - I own it be necessary, resume the master of the hotel, that a stranger at Paris should have the opportunity present to he of buy lace and silk stocking and ruffle, et tout cela; - and 'tis nothing if a woman come with a band-box. - o, my conscience! say I, she have one but I never look'd into it. - then Monsieur, say he, have buy nothing? - not one earthly thing, reply I. - because, say he, I could recommend one to you who would use you en conscience. - but I must see she this night, say I. - he make I a low bow, and walk'd down.
now shall I triumph over this maître d'hôtel, cry I, - and what then?  then I shall let he see I know he be a dirty fellow. - and what then?  what then? - I be too near myself to say it be for the sake of other. - I have no good answer leave; - there be more of spleen than principle in my project, and I be sick of it before the execution.
in a few minute the grisette come in with her box of lace. - Iwill buy nothing, however, say I, within myself.
the grisette would show I everything. - I be hard to please: she would not seem to see it; she open her little magazine, and lay all her lace one after another before I; - unfold and fold they up again one by one with the most patient sweetness. - I might buy, - or not; - she would let I have everything at my own price: - the poor creature seem'd anxious to get a penny; and lay herself out to win I, and not so much in a manner which seem'd artful, as in one I feel simple and caressing.
if there be not a fund of honest gullibility in man, so much the bad; - my heart relent, and I give up my second resolution as quietly as the first. - why should I chastise one for the trespass of another?  if thou art tributary to this tyrant of an host, think I, look up in her face, so much hard be thy bread.
if I have not have more than four louis d'or in my purse, there be no such thing as rise up and show she the door, till I have first lay three of they out in a pair of ruffle.
- the master of the hotel will share the profit with she; - no matter, - then I have only pay as many a poor soul have pay before I, for an act he could not do, or think of.

the RIDDLE.  PARIS.

when La Fleur come up to wait upon I at supper, he tell I how sorry the master of the hotel be for his affront to I in bid I change my lodging.
a man who value a good night's rest will not lie down with enmity in his heart, if he can help it. - so I bid La Fleur tell the master of the hotel, that I be sorry on my side for the occasion I have give he; - and you may tell he, if you will, La Fleur, add I, that if the young woman should call again, I shall not see she.
this be a sacrifice not to he, but myself, have resolve, after so narrow an escape, to run no more risk, but to leave Paris, if it be possible, with all the virtue I enter'd it.
C'est déroger ? noblesse, Monsieur, say La Fleur, make I a bow down to the ground as he say it. - et encore, Monsieur, say he, may change his sentiment; - and if (par hazard) he should like to amuse himself, - I find no amusement in it, say I, interrupt he. -
Mon Dieu! say La Fleur, - and take away.
in an hour's time he come to put I to bed, and be more than commonly officious: - something hang upon his lip to say to I, or ask I, which he could not get off: I could not conceive what it be, and indeed give myself little trouble to find it out, as I have another riddle so much more interesting upon my mind, which be that of the man's ask charity before the door of the hotel. - I would have give anything to have get to the bottom of it; and that, not out of curiosity, - 'tis so low a principle of enquiry, in general, I would not purchase the gratification of it with a two-sous piece; - but a secret, I think, which so soon and so certainly soften'd the heart of every woman you come near, be a secret at least equal to the philosopher's stone; have I both the Indies, I would have give up one to have be master of it.
I toss'd and turn'd it almost all night long in my brain to no manner of purpose; and when I awake in the morning, I find my spirit as much trouble with my dream, as ever the King of Babylon have be with his; and I will not hesitate to affirm, it would have puzzle all the wise man of Paris as much as those of Chaldea to have give its interpretation.

LE DIMANCHE.  PARIS.

it be Sunday; and when La Fleur come in, in the morning, with my coffee and roll and butter, he have get himself so gallantly array'd, I scarce know he.
I have covenant at Montreuil to give he a new hat with a silver button and loop, and four louis d'ors, pour s'adoniser, when we get to Paris; and the poor fellow, to do he justice, have do wonder with it.
he have buy a bright, clean, good scarlet coat, and a pair of breech of the same. - they be not a crown bad, he say, for the wearing. - I wish'd he hang'd for tell I. - they look'd so fresh, that though I know the thing could not be do, yet I would rather have impose upon my fancy with think I have buy they new for the fellow, than that they have come out of the Rue de Friperie.
this be a nicety which make not the heart sore at Paris.
he have purchase, moreover, a handsome blue satin waistcoat, fancifully enough embroider: - this be indeed something the bad for the service it have do, but 'twa clean scour'd; - the gold have be touch'd up, and upon the whole be rather showy than otherwise; - and as the blue be not violent, it suit with the coat and breech very well: he have squeez'd out of the money, moreover, a new bag and a solitaire; and have insist with the fripi upon a gold pair of garter to his breech knee. - he have purchase muslin ruffle, bien brodées, with four livre of his own money; - and a pair of white silk stocking for five more; - and to top all, nature have give he a handsome figure, without cost he a sous.
he enter the room thus set off, with his hair dress in the first style, and with a handsome bouquet in his breast. - in a word, there be that look of festivity in everything about he, which at once put I in mind it be Sunday; - and, by combine both together, it instantly strike I, that the favour he wish'd to ask of I the night before, be to spend the day as every body in Paris spend it besides.  I have scarce make the conjecture, when La Fleur, with infinite humility, but with a look of trust, as if I should not refuse he, begg'd I would grant he the day, pour faire le galant vis-?-vis de sa maîtresse.
now it be the very thing I intend to do myself vis-?-vis Madame de R-. - I have retain the remise on purpose for it, and it would not have mortify my vanity to have have a servant so well dress'd as La Fleur be, to have get up behind it: I never could have worse spar he.
but we must feel, not argue in these embarrassment. - the son and daughter of Service part with liberty, but not with nature, in their contract; they be flesh and blood, and have their little vanity and wish in the midst of the house of bondage, as well as their task-master; - no doubt, they have set their self-denial at a price, - and their expectation be so unreasonable, that I would often disappoint they, but that their condition put it so much in my power to do it.
Behold, - Behold, I be thy servant - disarm I at once of the power of a master. -
Thou shalt go, La Fleur! say I.
- and what mistress, La Fleur, say I, canst thou have pick up in so little a time at Paris?  La Fleur lay his hand upon his breast, and say 'twa a petite demoiselle, at Monsieur le Count de B-'s. - La Fleur have a heart make for society; and, to speak the truth of he, let as few occasion slip he as his master; - so that somehow or other, - but how, - heaven know, - he have connect himself with the demoiselle upon the landing of the staircase, during the time I be take up with my passport; and as there be time enough for I to win the Count to my interest, La Fleur have contrive to make it do to win the maid to his.  the family, it seem, be to be at Paris that day, and he have make a party with she, and two or three more of the Count's household, upon the boulevard.
happy people! that once a week at least be sure to lay down all your care together, and dance and sing and sport away the weight of grievance, which bow down the spirit of other nation to the earth.

the FRAGMENT.  PARIS.

La Fleur have leave I something to amuse myself with for the day more than I have bargain'd for, or could have enter'd either into his head or mine.
he have bring the little print of butter upon a currant leaf: and as the morning be warm, and he have a good step to bring it, he have begg'd a sheet of waste paper to put betwixt the currant leaf and his hand. - as that be plate sufficient, I bid he lie it upon the table as it be; and as I resolve to stay within all day, I order he to call upon the traîteur, to bespeak my dinner, and leave I to breakfast by myself.
when I have finish the butter, I throw the currant-leaf out of the window, and be go to do the same by the waste paper; - but stop to read a line first, and that draw I on to a second and third, - I think it well worth; so I shut the window, and draw a chair up to it, I sit down to read it.
it be in the old French of Rabelais's time, and for aught I know might have be write by he: - it be moreover in a Gothic letter, and that so fade and go off by damp and length of time, it cost I infinite trouble to make anything of it. - I throw it down; and then write a letter to Eugenius; - then I take it up again, and embroil my patience with it afresh; - and then to cure that, I write a letter to Eliza. - still it keep hold of I; and the difficulty of understanding it increase but the desire.
I get my dinner; and after I have enlighten my mind with a bottle of Burgundy; I at it again, - and, after two or three hour pore upon it, with almost as deep attention as ever Gruter or Jacob Spon do upon a nonsensical inscription, I think I make sense of it; but to make sure of it, the good way, I imagine, be to turn it into English, and see how it would look then; - so I go on leisurely, as a trifling man do, sometimes write a sentence, - then take a turn or two, - and then look how the world go, out of the window; so that it be nine o'clock at night before I have do it. - I then begin and read it as follow.

the FRAGMENT.  PARIS.

- now, as the notary's wife dispute the point with the notary with too much heat, - I wish, say the notary, (throw down the parchment) that there be another notary here only to set down and attest all this. -
- and what would you do then, Monsieur? say she, rise hastily up. - the notary's wife be a little fume of a woman, and the notary think it well to avoid a hurricane by a mild reply. - I would go, answer he, to bed. - you may go to the devil, answer'd the notary's wife.
now there happen to be but one bed in the house, the other two room be unfurnishe, as be the custom at Paris, and the notary not care to lie in the same bed with a woman who have but that moment send he pell mell to the devil, go forth with his hat and cane and short cloak, the night be very windy, and walk'd out, ill at ease, towards the Pont Neuf.
of all the bridge which ever be build, the whole world who have pass'd over the Pont Neuf must own, that it be the noble, - the fine, - the grand, - the light, - the long, - the broad, that ever conjoin'd land and land together upon the face of the terraqueous globe.
[by this it seem as if the author of the fragment have not be a Frenchman.]
the bad fault which divine and the doctor of the Sorbonne can allege against it be, that if there be but a capfull of wind in or about Paris, 'tis more blasphemously sacre Dieu'd there than in any other aperture of the whole city, - and with reason good and cogent, Messieurs; for it come against you without cry garde d'eau, and with such unpremeditable puff, that of the few who cross it with their hat on, not one in fifty but hazard two livre and a half, which be its full worth.
the poor notary, just as he be pass by the sentry, instinctively clapp'd his cane to the side of it, but in raise it up, the point of his cane catch hold of the loop of the sentinel's hat, hoist it over the spike of the ballustrade clear into the Seine. -
- 'tis an ill wind, say a boatman, who catch it, which blow nobody any good.
the sentry, be a Gascon, incontinently twirl up his whisker, and levell'd his arquebuss.
arquebusse in those day go off with match; and an old woman's paper lantern at the end of the bridge happen to be blow out, she have borrow'd the sentry's match to light it: - it give a moment's time for the Gascon's blood to run cool, and turn the accident well to his advantage. - 'tis an ill wind, say he, catch off the notary's castor, and legitimate the capture with the boatman's adage.
the poor notary cross the bridge, and pass along the Rue de Dauphine into the fauxbourgs of St. Germain, lament himself as he walk along in this manner: -
luckless man that I be! say the notary, to be the sport of hurricane all my day: - to be bear to have the storm of ill language levell'd against I and my profession wherever I go; to be force into marriage by the thunder of the church to a tempest of a woman; - to be drive forth out of my house by domestic wind, and despoil'd of my castor by pontific one! - to be here, bareheade, in a windy night, at the mercy of the ebb and flow of accident! - where be I to lay my head? - miserable man! what wind in the two-and-thirty point of the whole compass can blow unto thee, as it do to the rest of thy fellow-creature, good?
as the notary be pass on by a dark passage, complain in this sort, a voice call'd out to a girl, to bid her run for the next notary. - now the notary be the next, and avail himself of his situation, walk'd up the passage to the door, and pass through an old sort of a saloon, be usher'd into a large chamber, dismantle of everything but a long military pike, - a breastplate, - a rusty old sword, and bandoleer, hang up, equidistant, in four different place against the wall.
an old personage who have heretofore be a gentleman, and unless decay of fortune taint the blood along with it, be a gentleman at that time, lie support his head upon his hand in his bed; a little table with a taper burning be set close beside it, and close by the table be place a chair: - the notary sit he down in it; and pull out his inkhorn and a sheet or two of paper which he have in his pocket, he place they before he; and dip his pen in his ink, and lean his breast over the table, he dispose everything to make the gentleman's last will and testament
Alas!  Monsieur le Notaire, say the gentleman, raise himself up a little, I have nothing to bequeath, which will pay the expense of bequeath, except the history of myself, which I could not die in peace, unless I leave it as a legacy to the world: the profit arise out of it I bequeath to you for the pain of take it from I. - it be a story so uncommon, it must be read by all mankind; - it will make the fortune of your house. - the notary dipp'd his pen into his inkhorn. - Almighty Director of every event in my life! say the old gentleman, look up earnestly, and raise his hand towards heaven, - Thou, whose hand have lead I on through such a labyrinth of strange passage down into this scene of desolation, assist the decay memory of an old, infirm, and break-hearted man; - direct my tongue by the spirit of thy eternal truth, that this stranger may set down nought but what be write in that BOOK, from whose record, say he, clasp his hand together, I be to be condemn'd or acquit! -
 the notary hold up the point of his pen betwixt the taper and his eye. -
it be a story, Monsieur le Notaire, say the gentleman, which will rouse up every affection in nature; - it will kill the humane, and touch the heart of Cruelty herself with pity. -
- the notary be inflame with a desire to begin, and put his pen a third time into his ink-horn - and the old gentleman, turn a little more towards the notary, begin to dictate his story in these word: -
- and where be the rest of it, La Fleur? say I, as he just then enter'd the room.

the FRAGMENT, and the BOUQUET. {1}  PARIS.

when La Fleur come up close to the table, and be make to comprehend what I want, he tell I there be only two other sheet of it, which he have wrap round the stalk of a bouquet to keep it together, which he have present to the demoiselle upon the boulevard. - then prithee, La Fleur, say I, step back to she to the Count de B-'s hotel, and see if thou canst get it. - there be no doubt of it, say La Fleur; - and away he fly.
in a very little time the poor fellow come back quite out of breath, with deep mark of disappointment in his look than could arise from the simple irreparability of the fragment.  Juste Ciel! in less than two minute that the poor fellow have take his last tender farewell of she - his faithless mistress have give his gage d'amour to one of the Count's footman, - the footman to a young sempstress, - and the sempstress to a fiddler, with my fragment at the end of it. - our misfortune be involve together: - I give a sigh, - and La Fleur echo it back again to my ear.
- how perfidious! cry La Fleur. - how unlucky! say I.
- I should not have be mortify, Monsieur, quoth La Fleur, if she have lose it. - nor I, La Fleur, say I, have I find it.
whether I do or no will be see hereafter.

the ACT of CHARITY.  PARIS.

the man who either disdain or fear to walk up a dark entry may be an excellent good man, and fit for a hundred thing, but he will not do to make a good Sentimental Traveller. - I count little of the many thing I see pass at broad noonday, in large and open street. - nature be shy, and hat to act before spectator; but in such an unobserved corner you sometimes see a single short scene of hers worth all the sentiment of a dozen french play compound together, - and yet they be absolutely fine; - and whenever I have a more brilliant affair upon my hand than common, as they suit a preacher just as well as a hero, I generally make my sermon out of them; - and for the text, - "Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia," - be as good as any one in the Bible.
there be a long dark passage issue out from the Opera Comique into a narrow street; 'tis trod by a few who humbly wait for a fiacre, {2} or wish to get off quietly o'foot when the opera be do.  at the end of it, towards the theatre, 'tis light by a small candle, the light of which be almost lose before you get half-way down, but near the door - 'tis more for ornament than use: you see it as a fix star of the least magnitude; it burn, - but do little good to the world, that we know of.
in return along this passage, I discern, as I approach within five or six pace of the door, two lady stand arm-in-arm with their back against the wall, wait, as I imagine, for a fiacre; - as they be next the door, I think they have a prior right; so edge myself up within a yard or little more of they, and quietly take my stand. - I be in black, and scarce see.
the lady next I be a tall lean figure of a woman, of about thirty-six; the other of the same size and make, of about forty: there be no mark of wife or widow in any one part of either of they; - they seem'd to be two upright vestal sister, unsappe by caress, unbroke in upon by tender salutation. - I could have wish'd to have make they happy: - their happiness be destin'd that night, to come from another quarter.
a low voice, with a good turn of expression, and sweet cadence at the end of it, begg'd for a twelve-sous piece betwixt they, for the love of heaven.  I think it singular that a beggar should fix the quota of an alm - and that the sum should be twelve time as much as what be usually give in the dark. - they both seem astonish at it as much as myself. - twelve sous! say one. - a twelve-sous piece! say the other, - and make no reply.
the poor man say, he know not how to ask less of lady of their rank; and bow'd down his head to the ground.
Poo! say they, - we have no money.
the beggar remain silent for a moment or two, and renew'd his supplication.
- do not, my fair young lady, say he, stop your good ear against I. - upon my word, honest man! say the young, we have no change. - then God bless you, say the poor man, and multiply those joy which you can give to other without change! - I observe the eld sister put her hand into her pocket. - Iwill see, say she, if I have a sous.  a sous! give twelve, say the supplicant; nature have be bountiful to you, be bountiful to a poor man.
- I would friend, with all my heart, say the young, if I have it.
my fair charitable! say he, address himself to the elder, - what be it but your goodness and humanity which make your bright eye so sweet, that they outshine the morning even in this dark passage? and what be it which make the Marquis de Santerre and his brother say so much of you both as they just pass by?
the two lady seem much affected; and impulsively, at the same time they both put their hand into their pocket, and each take out a twelve-sous piece.
the contest betwixt they and the poor supplicant be no more; - it be continue betwixt themselves, which of the two should give the twelve-sous piece in charity; - and, to end the dispute, they both give it together, and the man go away.

the RIDDLE EXPLAINED.  PARIS.

I step hastily after he: it be the very man whose success in ask charity of the woman before the door of the hotel have so puzzle I; - and I find at once his secret, or at least the basis of it: - 'twas flattery.
Delicious essence! how refreshing art thou to Nature! how strongly be all its power and all its weakness on thy side! how sweetly dost thou mix with the blood, and help it through the most difficult and tortuous passage to the heart!
the poor man, as he be not straiten'd for time, have give it here in a large dose: 'tis certain he have a way of bring it into a less form, for the many sudden case he have to do with in the street: but how he contrive to correct, sweeten, concentre, and qualify it, - I vex not my spirit with the enquiry; - it be enough the beggar gain two twelve-sous piece - and they can well tell the rest, who have gain much great matter by it.

PARIS.

we get forwards in the world, not so much by do service, as receive they; you take a wither twig, and put it in the ground; and then you water it, because you have plant it.
Monsieur le Count de B-, merely because he have do I one kindness in the affair of my passport, would go on and do I another, the few day he be at Paris, in make I known to a few people of rank; and they be to present I to other, and so on.
I have get master of my secret just in time to turn these honour to some little account; otherwise, as be commonly the case, I should have din or supp'd a single time or two round, and then, by translate french look and attitude into plain English, I should presently have see, that I have hold of the couvert {3} of some more entertaining guest; and in course should have resign all my place one after another, merely upon the principle that I could not keep they. - as it be, thing do not go much amiss.
I have the honour of be introduce to the old Marquis de B-: in day of yore he have signalize himself by some small feat of chivalry in the Cour d'Amour, and have dress'd himself out to the idea of tilt and tournament ever since. - the Marquis de B- wish'd to have it think the affair be somewhere else than in his brain.  "he could like to take a trip to England," and ask much of the english lady. - stay where you be, I beseech you, Monsieur le Marquis, say I. - Les Messieurs Anglois can scarce get a kind look from they as it be. - the Marquis invite I to supper.
Monsieur P-, the farmer-general, be just as inquisitive about our taxis.  they be very considerable, he hear. - if we know but how to collect they, say I, make he a low bow.
I could never have be invite to Mons. P-'s concert upon any other term.
I have be misrepresent to Madame de Q- as an esprit. - Madame de Q- be an esprit herself: she burn with impatience to see I, and hear I talk.  I have not take my seat, before I see she do not care a sous whether I have any wit or no; - I be let in, to be convince she have.  I call heaven to witness I never once open the door of my lip.
Madame de V- vow'd to every creature she meet - "she have never have a more improve conversation with a man in her life."
there be three epochas in the empire of a french woman. - she be coquette, - then deist, - then dévote: the empire during these be never lose, - she only change her subject when thirty-five year and more have unpeople her dominion of the slave of love, she re-people it with slave of infidelity, - and then with the slave of the church.
Madame de V- be vibrate betwixt the first of those epochas: the colour of the rose be fade fast away; - she ought to have be a deist five year before the time I have the honour to pay my first visit.
she place I upon the same sofa with she, for the sake of dispute the point of religion more closely. - in short Madame de V- tell I she believe nothing. - I tell Madame de V- it might be her principle, but I be sure it could not be her interest to level the outwork, without which I could not conceive how such a citadel as hers could be defend; - that there be not a more dangerous thing in the world than for a beauty to be a deist; - that it be a debt I owe my creed not to conceal it from she; - that I have not be five minute sit upon the sofa beside she, but I have begin to form design; - and what be it, but the sentiment of religion, and the persuasion they have excite in her breast, which could have check'd they as they rise up?
we be not adamant, say I, take hold of her hand; - and there be need of all restraint, till age in her own time steal in and lay they on we. - but my dear lady, say I, kiss her hand, - 'tis too - too soon.
I declare I have the credit all over Paris of unperverte Madame de V-. - she affirm to Monsieur D- and the Abbé M-, that in one half hour I have say more for reveal religion, than all their encyclopaedia have say against it. - I be list directly into Madame de V-'s coterie; - and she put off the epocha of deism for two year.
I remember it be in this coterie, in the middle of a discourse, in which I be show the necessity of a first cause, when the young Count de Faineant take I by the hand to the farth corner of the room, to tell I my solitaire be pinn'd too straight about my neck. - it should be plus badinant, say the Count, look down upon his own; - but a word, Monsieur Yorick, to the wise -
and from the wise, Monsieur le Count, reply I, make he a bow, - be enough.
the Count de Faineant embrace I with more ardour than ever I be embrace by mortal man.
for three week together I be of every man's opinion I meet. - Pardi! ce Monsieur Yorick a autant d'esprit que nous autre. - Il raisonne bien, say another. - C'est un bon enfant, say a third. - and at this price I could have eat and drank and be merry all the day of my life at Paris; but 'twas a dishonest reckoning; - I grow ashamed of it. - it be the gain of a slave; - every sentiment of honour revolt against it; - the high I get, the more be I force upon my beggarly system; - the well the coterie, - the more child of art; - I languish'd for those of nature: and one night, after a most vile prostitution of myself to half a dozen different people, I grow sick, - go to bed; - order'd La Fleur to get I horse in the morning to set out for Italy.

MARIA.  MOULINES.

I never feel what the distress of plenty be in any one shape till now, - to travel it through the Bourbonnois, the sweetest part of France, - in the heyday of the vintage, when Nature be pour her abundance into every one's lap, and every eye be lift up, - a journey, through each step of which music beat time to Labour, and all her child be rejoice as they carry in their cluster: to pass through this with my affection fly out, and kindling at every group before I, - and every one of they be pregnant with adventure. -
just heaven! - it would fill up twenty volume; - and alas! I have but a few small page leave of this to crowd it into, - and half of these must be take up with the poor Maria my friend, Mr. Shandy, meet with near Moulines.
the story he have tell of that disorder maid affect I not a little in the reading; but when I get within the neighbourhood where she live, it return so strong into the mind, that I could not resist an impulse which prompt I to go half a league out of the road, to the village where her parent dwelt, to enquire after she.
'tis go, I own, like the Knight of the Woeful Countenance in quest of melancholy adventure.  but I know not how it be, but I be never so perfectly conscious of the existence of a soul within I, as when I be entangle in they.
the old mother come to the door; her look tell I the story before she open'd her mouth. - she have lose her husband; he have die, she say, of anguish, for the loss of Maria's sens, about a month before. - she have fear at first, she add, that it would have plunder'd her poor girl of what little understanding be leave; - but, on the contrary, it have bring she more to herself: - still, she could not rest. - her poor daughter, she say, cry, be wander somewhere about the road.
why do my pulse beat languid as I write this? and what make La Fleur, whose heart seem'd only to be tune to joy, to pass the back of his hand twice across his eye, as the woman stand and tell it?  I beckon to the postilion to turn back into the road.
when we have get within half a league of Moulines, at a little opening in the road lead to a thicket, I discover poor Maria sit under a poplar.  she be sit with her elbow in her lap, and her head lean on one side within her hand: - a small brook run at the foot of the tree.
I bid the postilion go on with the chaise to Moulines - and La Fleur to bespeak my supper; - and that I would walk after he.
she be dress'd in white, and much as my friend describe she, except that her hair hang loose, which before be twist within a silk net. - she have superadde likewise to her jacket, a pale green riband, which fall across her shoulder to the waist; at the end of which hang her pipe. - her goat have be as faithless as her lover; and she have get a little dog in lieu of he, which she have keep tie by a string to her girdle: as I look at her dog, she draw he towards she with the string. - "thou shalt not leave I, Sylvio," say she.  I look'd in Maria's eye and see she be think more of her father than of her lover, or her little goat; for, as she utter'd they, the tear trickle down her cheek.
I sit down close by she; and Maria let I wipe they away as they fall, with my handkerchief. - I then steep'd it in my own, - and then in her, - and then in mine, - and then I wip'd hers again; - and as I do it, I feel such undescribable emotion within I, as I be sure could not be account for from any combination of matter and motion.
I be positive I have a soul; nor can all the book with which materialist have pester'd the world ever convince I to the contrary.

MARIA.

when Maria have come a little to herself, I ask'd she if she remember a pale thin person of a man, who have sit down betwixt she and her goat about two year before?  she say she be unsettle much at that time, but remember it upon two account: - that ill as she be, she see the person pity she; and next, that her goat have steal his handkerchief, and she have beat he for the theft; - she have wash'd it, she say, in the brook, and keep it ever since in her pocket to restore it to he in case she should ever see he again, which, she add, he have half promise she.  as she tell I this, she take the handkerchief out of her pocket to let I see it; she have fold it up neatly in a couple of vine leaf, tie round with a tendril; - on open it, I see an S. mark in one of the corner.
she have since that, she tell I, stray'd as far as Rome, and walk'd round St. Peter's once, - and return'd back; - that she find her way alone across the Apennines; - have travell'd over all Lombardy, without money, - and through the flinty road of Savoy without shoe: - how she have bear it, and how she have get support, she could not tell; - but God temper the wind, say Maria, to the shorn lamb.
Shorn indeed! and to the quick, say I: and wast thou in my own land, where I have a cottage, I would take thee to it, and shelter thee: thou shouldst eat of my own bread and drink of my own cup; - I would be kind to thy Sylvio; - in all thy weakness and wandering I would seek after thee and bring thee back; - when the sun go down I would say my prayer: and when I have do thou shouldst play thy evening song upon thy pipe, nor would the incense of my sacrifice be bad accept for enter heaven along with that of a broken heart!
nature melt within I, as I utter'd this; and Maria observe, as I take out my handkerchief, that it be steep'd too much already to be of use, would need go wash it in the stream. - and where will you dry it, Maria? say I. - Iwill dry it in my bosom, say she: - 'twill do I good.
and be your heart still so warm, Maria? say I.
I touch'd upon the string on which hang all her sorrow: - she look'd with wistful disorder for some time in my face; and then, without say any thing, take her pipe and play'd her service to the Virgin. - the string I have touch cease to vibrate; - in a moment or two Maria return to herself, - let her pipe fall, - and rise up.
and where be you go, Maria? say I. - she say, to Moulines. - let we go, say I, together. - Maria put her arm within mine, and lengthen the string, to let the dog follow, - in that order we enter'd Moulines.

MARIA.  MOULINES.

though I hate salutation and greeting in the market-place, yet, when we get into the middle of this, I stopp'd to take my last look and last farewell of Maria.
Maria, though not tall, be nevertheless of the first order of fine form: - affliction have touch her look with something that be scarce earthly; - still she be feminine; - and so much be there about she of all that the heart wish, or the eye look for in woman, that could the trace be ever wear out of her brain, and those of eliza out of mine, she should not only eat of my bread and drink of my own cup, but Maria should lie in my bosom, and be unto I as a daughter.
Adieu, poor luckless maiden! - imbibe the oil and wine which the compassion of a stranger, as he journeyeth on his way, now pour into thy wound; - the Being, who have twice bruise thee, can only bind they up for ever.

the bourbonnnois.

there be nothing from which I have paint out for my self so joyous a riot of the affection, as in this journey in the vintage, through this part of France; but press through this gate, of sorrow to it, my suffering have totally unfit I.  in every scene of festivity, I see Maria in the background of the piece, sit pensive under her poplar; and I have get almost to Lyons before I be able to cast a shade across she.
- Dear Sensibility! source inexhauste of all thatbe precious in our joy, or costly in our sorrow! thou chain thy martyr down upon his bed of straw - and 'tis thou who lift'st he up to Heaven! - Eternal Fountain of our feeling! - 'tis here I trace thee - and this be thy "divinity which stir within I;" - not that, in some sad and sicken moment, "my soul shrink back upon herself, and startle at destruction;" - mere pomp of word! - but that I feel some generous joy and generous care beyond myself; - all come from thee, great - great SENSORIUM of the world! which vibrate, if a hair of our head but fall upon the ground, in the remotest desert of thy creation. - touch'd with thee, Eugenius draw my curtain when I languish - hear my tale of symptom, and blame the weather for the disorder of his nerve.  Thou giv'st a portion of it sometimes to the roughest peasant who traverse the bleakest mountain; - he find the lacerated lamb of another's flock. - this moment I behold he lean with 
his head against his crook, with piteous inclination look down upon it! - oh! have I come one moment soon! it bleed to death! - his gentle heart bleed with it. -
Peace to thee, generous swain! - I see thou walkest off with anguish, - but thy joy shall balance it; - for, happy be thy cottage, - and happy be the sharer of it, - and happy be the lamb which sport about you!

the supper.

a shoe come loose from the fore foot of the thill-horse, at the beginning of the ascent of mount Taurira, the postilion dismount, twist the shoe off, and put it in his pocket; as the ascent be of five or six mile, and that horse our main dependence, I make a point of have the shoe fasten on again, as well as we could; but the postilion have throw away the nail, and the hammer in the chaise box be of no great use without they, I submit to go on.
he have not mount half a mile high, when, come to a flinty piece of road, the poor devil lose a second shoe, and from off his other fore foot.  I then get out of the chaise in good earnest; and see a house about a quarter of a mile to the left hand, with a great deal to do I prevail upon the postilion to turn up to it.  the look of the house, and of every thing about it, as we draw nearer, soon reconcile I to the disaster. - it be a little farm-house, surround with about twenty acre of vineyard, about as much corn; - and close to the house, on one side, be a potagerie of an acre and a half, full of everything which could make plenty in a french peasant's house; - and, on the other side, be a little wood, which furnish wherewithal to dress it.  it be about eight in the evening when I get to the house - so I leave the postilion to manage his point as he could; - and, for mine, I walk directly into the house.
the family consist of an old grey-head man and his wife, with five or six son and son-in-law, and their several wife, and a joyous genealogy out of they.
they be all sit down together to their lentil-soup; a large wheaten loaf be in the middle of the table; and a flagon of wine at each end of it promise joy through the stage of the repast: - 'twa a feast of love.
the old man rise up to meet I, and with a respectful cordiality would have I sit down at the table; my heart be set down the moment I enter'd the room; so I sit down at once like a son of the family; and to invest myself in the character as speedily as I could, I instantly borrow the old man's knife, and take up the loaf, cut myself a hearty luncheon; and, as I do it, I see a testimony in every eye, not only of an honest welcome, but of a welcome mix'd with thank that I have not seem'd to doubt it.
be it this? or tell I, Nature, what else it be that make this morsel so sweet, - and to what magic I owe it, that the draught I take of their flagon be so delicious with it, that they remain upon my palate to this hour?
if the supper be to my taste, - the grace which follow it be much more so.

the GRACE.

when supper be over, the old man give a knock upon the table with the haft of his knife, to bid they prepare for the dance: the moment the signal be give, the woman and girl run altogether into a back apartment to tie up their hair, - and the young man to the door to wash their face, and change their sabot; and in three minute every soul be ready upon a little esplanade before the house to begin. - the old man and his wife come out last, and place I betwixt they, sit down upon a sofa of turf by the door.
the old man have some fifty year ago be no mean performer upon the vielle, - and at the age he be then of, touch'd it well enough for the purpose.  his wife sing now and then a little to the tune, - then intermit, - and join'd her old man again, as their child and grand-child dance before they.
it be not till the middle of the second dance, when, from some pause in the movement, wherein they all seem to look up, I fancy I could distinguish an elevation of spirit different from that which be the cause or the effect of simple jollity.  in a word, I think I behold Religion mix in the dance: - but, as I have never see she so engaged, I should have look'd upon it now as one of the illusion of an imagination which be eternally mislead I, have not the old man, as soon as the dance end, say, that this be their constant way; and that all his life long he have make it a rule, after supper be over, to call out his family to dance and rejoice; believe, he say, that a cheerful and contented mind be the good sort of thank to heaven that an illiterate peasant could pay, -
or a learn prelate either, say I.

the case of DELICACY.

when you have gain the top of Mount Taurira, you run presently down to Lyons: - adieu, then, to all rapid movement!  'tis a journey of caution; and it fare well with sentiment, not to be in a hurry with they; so I contract with a voiturin to take his time with a couple of mule, and convoy I in my own chaise safe to Turin, through Savoy.
Poor, patient, quiet, honest people! fear not: your poverty, the treasury of your simple virtue, will not be envy you by the world, nor will your valley be invade by it. - nature! in the midst of thy disorder, thou art still friendly to the scantiness thou hast create: with all thy great work about thee, little hast thou leave to give, either to the scythe or to the sickle; - but to that little thou grant safety and protection; and sweet be the dwelling which stand so shelter'd.
let the way-wear traveller vent his complaint upon the sudden turn and danger of your road, - your rock, - your precipice; - the difficulty of get up, - the horror of get down, - mountain impracticable, - and cataract, which roll down great stone from their summit, and block his road up. - the peasant have be all day at work in remove a fragment of this kind between St. Michael and Madane; and, by the time my voiturin get to the place, it want full two hour of complete before a passage could any how be gain'd: there be nothing but to wait with patience; - 'twa a wet and tempestuous night; so that by the delay, and that together, the voiturin find himself oblige to put up five mile short of his stage at a little decent kind of an inn by the roadside.
I forthwith take possession of my bedchamber - get a good fire - order'd supper; and be thank heaven it be no bad, when a voiture arrive with a lady in it and her servant maid.
as there be no other bed-chamber in the house, the hostess, - without much nicety, lead they into mine, tell they, as she usher'd they in, that there be nobody in it but an english gentleman; - that there be two good bed in it, and a closet within the room which hold another.  the accent in which she speak of this third bed, do not say much for it; - however, she say there be three bed and but three people, and she durst say, the gentleman would do anything to accommodate matter. - I leave not the lady a moment to make a conjecture about it - so instantly make a declaration that I would do anything in my power.
as this do not amount to an absolute surrender of my bed-chamber, I still feel myself so much the proprietor, as to have a right to do the honour of it; - so I desire the lady to sit down, - press she into the warm seat, - call for more wood, - desire the hostess to enlarge the plan of the supper, and to favour we with the very good wine.
the lady have scarce warm'd herself five minute at the fire, before she begin to turn her head back, and give a look at the bed; and the oftener she cast her eye that way, the more they return'd perplexd; - I feel for she - and for myself: for in a few minute, what by her look, and the case itself, I find myself as much embarrassed as it be possible the lady could be herself.
that the bed we be to lie in be in one and the same room, be enough simply by itself to have excite all this; - but the position of they, for they stand parallel, and so very close to each other as only to allow space for a small wicker chair betwixt they, render the affair still more oppressive to we; - they be fix up moreover near the fire; and the projection of the chimney on one side, and a large beam which cross'd the room on the other, form a kind of recess for they that be no way favourable to the nicety of our sensation: - if anything could have add to it, it be that the two bed be both of they so very small, as to cut we off from every idea of the lady and the maid lie together; which in either of they, could it have be feasible, my lie beside they, though a thing not to be wish'd, yet there be nothing in it so terrible which the imagination might not have pass'd over without torment.
as for the little room within, it offer'd little or no consolation to we: 'twa a damp, cold closet, with a half dismantle window-shutter, and with a window which have neither glass nor oil paper in it to keep out the tempest of the night.  I do not endeavour to stifle my cough when the lady give a peep into it; so it reduce the case in course to this alternative - that the lady should sacrifice her health to her feeling, and take up with the closet herself, and abandon the bed next mine to her maid, - or that the girl should take the closet, &c., &c.
the lady be a Piedmontese of about thirty, with a glow of health in her cheek.  the maid be a lyonoise of twenty, and as brisk and lively a french girl as ever move. - there be difficulty every way, - and the obstacle of the stone in the road, which bring we into the distress, great as it appear whilst the peasant be remove it, be but a pebble to what lie in our way now. - I have only to add, that it do not lessen the weight which hang upon our spirit, that we be both too delicate to communicate what we feel to each other upon the occasion.
we sit down to supper; and have we not have more generous wine to it than a little inn in Savoy could have furnish'd, our tongue have be tie up, till necessity herself have set they at liberty; - but the lady have a few bottle of Burgundy in her voiture, send down her fille de chambre for a couple of they; so that by the time supper be over, and we be leave alone, we feel ourselves inspire with a strength of mind sufficient to talk, at least, without reserve upon our situation.  we turn'd it every way, and debate and consider it in all kind of light in the course of a two hour' negotiation; at the end of which the article be settle finally betwixt we, and stipulate for in form and manner of a treaty of peace, - and I believe with as much religion and good faith on both side as in any treaty which have yet have the honour of be hand down to posterity.
they be as follow: -
First, as the right of the bed-chamber be in Monsieur, - and he think the bed next to the fire to be the warm, he insist upon the concession on the lady's side of take up with it.
grant, on the part of Madame; with a proviso, that as the curtain of that bed be of a flimsy transparent cotton, and appear likewise too scanty to draw close, that the fille de chambre shall fasten up the opening, either by cork pin, or needle and thread, in such manner as shall be deem'd a sufficient barrier on the side of Monsieur.
2dly.  it be require on the part of Madame, that Monsieur shall lie the whole night through in his robe de chambre.
reject: inasmuch as Monsieur be not worth a robe de chambre; he have nothing in his portmanteau but six shirt and a black silk pair of breech.
the mention the silk pair of breech make an entire change of the article, - for the breech be accept as an equivalent for the robe de chambre; and so it be stipulate and agree upon, that I should lie in my black silk breech all night.
3dly.  it be insist upon and stipulate for by the lady, that after Monsieur be get to bed, and the candle and fire extinguish, that Monsieur should not speak one single word the whole night.
grant; provide Monsieur's say his prayer might not be deem an infraction of the treaty.
there be but one point forget in this treaty, and that be the manner in which the lady and myself should be oblige to undress and get to bed; - there be but one way of do it, and that I leave to the reader to devise; protest as I do it, that if it be not the most delicate in nature, 'tis the fault of his own imagination, - against which this be not my first complaint.
now, when we be get to bed, whether it be the novelty of the situation, or what it be, I know not; but so it be, I could not shut my eye; I try this side, and that, and turn'd and turn'd again, till a full hour after midnight; when nature and patience both wear out, - o, my God! say I.
- you have break the treaty, Monsieur, say the lady, who have no more slept than myself. - I begg'd a thousand pardon - but insist it be no more than an ejaculation.  she maintain 'twas an entire infraction of the treaty - I maintain it be provide for in the clause of the third article.
the lady would by no mean give up her point, though she weaken'd her barrier by it; for in the warmth of the dispute, I could hear two or three cork pin fall out of the curtain to the ground.
upon my word and honour, Madame, say I, - stretch my arm out of bed by way of asseveration. -
(I be go to have add, that I would not have trespass against the remotest idea of decorum for the world); -
but the fille de chambre hear there be word between we, and fear that hostility would ensue in course, have creep silently out of her closet, and it be totally dark, have steal so close to our bed, that she have get herself into the narrow passage which separate they, and have advance so far up as to be in a line betwixt her mistress and I: -
so that when I stretch'd out my hand I catch hold of the fille de chambre's -

