barchester tower
table of content
I who will be the new Bishop?
II Hiram's Hospital, accord to Act of Parliament
III Dr and Mrs Proudie
IV the Bishop's Chaplain
v a Morning Visit
VI War
VII the Dean and chapter take Counsel
VIII the Ex-Warden rejoice at his probable Return to the Hospital
IX the Stanhope Family
X Mrs Proudie's Reception--commence
XI Mrs Proudie's Reception--Concluded
XII Slope versus Harding
XIII the Rubbish Cart
XIV the New Champion
XV the Widow's suitor
XVI Baby worship
XVII who shall be Cock of the Walk?
xviii the Widow's Persecution
XIX Barchester by Moonlight
XX Mr Arabin
XXI St Ewold's Parsonage
XXII the Thornes of Ullathorne
XXIII Mr Arabin read himself in at St Ewold's
XXIV Mr Slope manage matter very well at Puddingdale
XXV fourteen Arguments in favour of Mr Quiverful's claim
XXVI Mrs Proudie wrestle and get a fall
XXVII a Love Scene
XXVIII Mrs Bold be entertain by Dr and Mrs Grantly at Plumstead
XXIX a serious interview
XXX another Love Scene
xxxi the Bishop's Library
XXXII a New Candidate for Ecclesiastical Honours
XXXIII Mrs Proudie Victrix
XXXIV Oxford--the Master and Tutor of Lazarus
XXXV Miss Thorne's Fete Champetre
XXXVI Ullathorne Sports--Act I
XXXVII the Signora Neroni, the Countess De Courcy, and
Mrs Proudie meet each other at Ullathorne
XXXVIII the Bishop sit down to Breakfast and the Dean die
XXXIX the Lookalofts and the Greenacres
XL Ullathorne Sports--Act II
XLI Mrs Bold confide her Sorrow to her Friend Miss Stanhope
XLII Ullathorne Sports--Act III
XLIII Mrs and Mrs Quiverful be make happy.
Mr Slope be encourage by the Press
XLIV Mrs Bold at home
XLV the Stanhopes at Home
XLVI Mr Slope's parting interview with the Signora
XLVII the Dean Elect
xlviii Miss Thorne show her talent at match-make
xlix the Belzebub Colt
L the Archdeacon be satisfied with the State of Affairs
LI Mr Slope's Farewell to the Palace and its Inhabitants
LII the new Dean take Possession of the Deanery,
and the New Warden of the Hospital
LIII Conclusion
CHAPTER I
who will be the new BISHOP?
in the latter day of July in the year 185-, a most important
question be for ten day hourly ask in the cathedral city of
Barchester, and answer every hour in various way--who be to be
the new Bishop?
the death of old Dr Grantly, who have for many year fill the
chair with meek authority, take place exactly as the ministry of
Lord - be go to give place to that Lord -. the illness of the
good old man be long and lingering, and it become at last a matter
of intense interest to those concern whether the new appointment
should be make by a conservative or liberal government.
Bishop Grantly die as he have live, peaceably, slowly, without
pain and without excitement. the breath ebb from he almost
imperceptibly, and for a month before his death, it be a question
whether he be alive or dead.
a try time be this for the archdeacon, for whom be design
the reversion of his father's see by those who then have the giving
away of episcopal throne. I would not be understand to say that
the prime minister have in so many word promise the bishopric to
Dr Grantly. he be too discreet a man for that. there be a proverb
with reference to the killing of cat, and those who know anything
either of high or low government place, will be well aware that a
promise may be make without positive word, and that an expectant
may be put into the high state of encouragement, though the
great man on whose breath he hang may have do no more than
whisper that 'Mr so-and-so be certainly a rise man.'
such a whisper have be make, and be know by those who hear it
to signify that the cure of the diocese of Barchester should not
be take out of the hand of the archdeacon. the then prime
minister be all in all at Oxford, and have lately pass a night at
the house of the master of Lazarus. now the master of
Lazarus--which be, by the bye, in many respect the most
comfortable, as well as the rich college at Oxford,--was the
archdeacon's most intimate friend and most trusted counsellor. on
the occasion of the prime minister's visit, Dr Grantly be of
course present, and the meeting be very gracious. on the following
morning Dr Gwynne, the master, tell the archdeacon that in his
opinion the matter be settle.
at this time the bishop be quite on his last leg; but the
ministry be also totter. Dr Grantly return from Oxford happy
and elated, to resume his place in the palace, and to continue to
perform for the father the last duty of a son; which, to give he
his due, he perform with more tender care than be to be expect
from his usual somewhat worldly manner.
a month since the physician have name four week as the outside
period during which breath could be support within the body of
the die man. at the end of the month the physician wonder, and
name another fortnight. the old man live on wine alone, but at
the end of the fortnight he still live; and the tiding of the
fall of the ministry become more frequent. Sir Lamda Mewnew and Sir
Omicron Pie, the two great London doctor, now come down for the
fifth time, and declare, shake their learn head, that another
week of life be impossible; and as they sit down to lunch in the
episcopal dining-room, whisper to the archdeacon their own
private knowledge that the ministry must fall within five day. the
son return to his father's room, and after administer with his
own hand the sustain modicum of madeira, sit down by the
bedside to calculate his chance.
the ministry be to be out within five day: his father be to be
dead within--no, he reject that view of the subject. the ministry
be to be out, and the diocese might probably be vacant at the
same period. there be much doubt as to the name of the man who
be to succeed to power, and a week must elapse before a Cabinet
be form. would not vacancy be fill by the out-go man
during that week? Dr Grantly have a kind of idea that such would be
the case, but do not know; and then he wonder at his own
ignorance of such a question.
he try to keep his mind away from the subject, but he could not.
the race be so very close, and the stake be so very high. he
then look at the die man's impassive, placid face. there be no
sign there of death or disease; it be something thin than of
yore, somewhat grayer, and the deep line of age more marked; but,
as far as he could judge, life might yet hang there for week to
come. Sir Lamda Mewnew and Sir Omicron Pie have thrice be wrong,
and might yet be wrong thrice again. the old bishop sleep during
twenty of the twenty-four hour, but during the short period of
his wake moment, he know both his son and his dear friend Mr
Harding, the archdeacon's father-in-law, and would thank they
tenderly for their care and love. now he lie sleep like a baby,
rest easily on his back, his mouth just open, and his few gray
hair straggle from beneath his cap; his breath be perfectly
noiseless, and his thin, wan hand, which lie above the coverlid,
never move. nothing could be easy than the old man's passage
from this world to the next.
but by no mean easy be the emotion of he who sit there
watch. he know it must be now or never. he be already over
fifty, and there be little chance that his friend who be now
leave office would soon return to it. no probable british prime
minister but he who be now in, he who be so soon to be out, would
think of make a bishop of Dr Grantly. thus he think long and
sadly, in deep silence, and then gaze at that still live face,
and then at last dare to ask himself whether he really long for
his father's death.
the effort be a salutary one, and the question be answer in a
moment. the proud, wishful, worldly man, sink on his knee by the
bedside, and take the bishop's hand within his own, pray
eagerly that his sin might be forgive he.
his face be still bury in the clothe when the door of the
bed-room open noiselessly, and Mr Harding enter with a velvet
step. Mr Harding's attendance at that bedside have be nearly as
constant as that of the archdeacon, and his ingress and egress be
as much a matter of course as that of his son-in-law. he be
stand close beside the archdeacon before he be perceive, and
would have also kneel in prayer have he not fear that his do so
might have cause some sudden start, and have disturb the dying
man. Dr Grantly, however, instantly perceive he, and rise from
his knee. as he do so Mr Harding take both his hand, and press
they warmly. there be more fellowship between they at that moment
than there have ever be before, and it so happen that after
circumstance greatly preserve the feeling. as they stand there
press each other's hand, the tear roll freely down their
cheek.
'God bless you, my dears,'--said the bishop with feeble voice as he
woke--'God bless you--may God bless you both, my dear child:'
and so he die.
there be no loud rattle in the throat, no dreadful struggle, no
palpable sign of death; but the low jaw fall a little from its
place, and the eye, which have be so constantly close in sleep,
now remain fixed and open. neither Mr Harding nor Dr Grantly know
that life be go, though both suspect it.
'I believe itbe all over,' say Mr Harding, still press the
other's hand. 'I think--nay, I hope it be.'
'I will ring the bell,' say the other, speak all but in a
whisper. 'Mrs Phillips should be here.'
Mrs Phillips, the nurse, be soon in the room, and immediately,
with practised hand, close those star eye.
'itbe all over, Mrs Phillips?' ask Mr Harding.
'my lord's no more,' say Mrs Phillips, turn round and
curtsey with a solemn face; 'his lordship's go more like a
sleep baby than any that I ever see.'
'itbe a great relief, archdeacon,' say Mr Harding, 'a great
relief--dear good, excellent old man. oh that our last moment may
be as innocent and peaceful as his!'
'surely,' say Mrs Phillips. 'the Lord be praise for all his
mercy; but, for a meek, mild, gentle-speak Christian, his
lordship was--' and Mrs Phillips, with unaffected but easy grief,
put up her white apron to her flow eye.
'you cannot but rejoice that it be over,' say Mr Harding, still
counsel his friend. the archdeacon's mind, however, have already
travel from the death chamber to the closet of the prime
minister. he have bring himself to pray for his father's life, but
now that that life be do, to dally with the fact of the bishop's
death--useless to lose perhaps everything for the pretence of a
foolish sentiment.
but how be he to act while his father-in-law stand there hold
his hand? how, without appear unfeele, be he to forget his
father in the bishop--to overlook what he have lose, and think only
of what he might possibly gain?
'no; I suppose not,' say he, at last, in answer to Mr Harding. 'we
have all expect it for so long.'
Mr Harding take he by the arm and lead he from the room. 'we will
see he again to-morrow morning,' say he; 'we have well leave the
room now to the woman.' and so they go downstairs.
it be already evening and nearly dark. it be most important that
the prime minister should know that night that the diocese be
vacant. everything might depend on it; and so, in answer to Mr
Harding's further consolation, the archdeacon suggest that a
telegraph message should be immediately send off to London. Mr
Harding who have really be somewhat surprised to find Dr Grantly,
as he think, so much affected, be rather take aback; but he
make no objection. he know that the archdeacon have some hope of
succeed to his father's place, though he by no mean know how
highly raise that hope have be.
'yes,' say Dr Grantly, collect himself and shake off his
weakness, 'we must send a message at once; we donot know what might
be the consequence of delay. will you do it?'
'I! oh yes; certainly: Iwill do it, only I donot know exactly what
it be you want.'
Dr Grantly sit down before a writing table, and take pen and ink,
write on a slip of paper as follows:-
by Electric Telegraph,
for the Earl of -, Downing Street, or elsewhere.
'the Bishop of Barchester be dead.'
message send by the Rev. Septimus Harding.
'there,' say he. 'just take that to the telegraph office at the
railway station, and give it as it be; theywill probably make you
copy it on to one of their own slip; thatbe all youwill have to do:
then youwill have to pay they half-a-crown.' and the archdeacon put
his hand in his pocket and pull out the necessary sum.
Mr Harding feel very much like an errand-boy, and also feel that he
be call on to perform his duty as such at rather an unseemly
time; but he say nothing, and take the slip of paper and the
proffer coin.
'but youhave put my name into it, archdeacon.'
'yes,' say the other, 'there should be the name of some clergyman,
you know, and what name so proper as that of so old a friend as
yourself? the Earl willnot look at the name you may be sure of that;
but my dear Mr Harding, pray donot lose any time.'
Mr Harding get as far as the library door on his way to the
station, when he suddenly remember the news with which he be
fraught when he enter to poor bishop's bedroom. he have find the
moment so inopportune for any mundane tiding, that he have
repress the word which be on his tongue, and immediately
afterwards all recollection of the circumstance be for the time
banish by the scene which have occur.
'but, archdeacon,' say, he turn back, 'I forget to tell
you--the ministry be out.'
'Out!' ejaculate the archdeacon, in a tone which too plainly
show the anxiety of his dismay, although under the circumstance
of the moment he endeavour to control himself: 'out! who tell you
so?'
Mr Harding explain that news to this effect have come down by
electric telegraph, and that the tiding have be leave at the
palace door by Mr Chadwick.
the archdeacon sit silent for awhile, meditating, and Mr Harding
stand look at he. 'never mind,' say the archdeacon at last;
'send the message all the same. the news must be send to some one,
and there be at present no one else in a position to receive it. do
it at once, my dear friend; you know I would not trouble you, be
I in a state to do it myself. a few minute' time be of the
great importance.'
Mr Harding go out and send the message, and it may be as well
that we should follow it to its destination. within thirty minute
of its leave Barchester it reach the Earl of - in his inner
library. what elaborate letter, what eloquent appeal, what
indignant remonstrance, he might there have to frame, at such a
moment, may be conceive, but not describe! how he be prepare
his thunder for successful rival, stand like a british peer
with his back to the sea-coal fire, and his hand in his breech
pockets,--how his fine eye be light up with anger, and his forehead
gleam with patriotism,--how he stamp his foot as he think of
his heavy associates,--how he all but swear as he remember how
much too clever one of they have been,--my creative reader may
imagine. but be he so engaged? no; history and truth compel I to
deny it. he be sit easily in a lounging chair, con over a
Newmarket list, and by his elbow on the table be lie open an
uncut french novel on which he be engage.
he open the cover in which the message be enclose, and have
read it, he take his pen and write on the back of it--
'for the Earl of -,
with the Earl of -'s compliment,'
and send off again on its journey.
thus terminate our unfortunate friend's chance of possess the
glory of a bishopric.
the name of many divine be give in the paper as that of the
bishop elect. the British Grandmother declare that Dr Gwynne be
to be the man, in compliment to the late ministry.
this be a heavy blow to Dr Grantly, but he be not doom to see
himself supersede by his friend. the Anglican Devotee put forward
confidently the claim of a great London preacher of austere
doctrine; and the Eastern Hemisphere, an evening paper suppose to
possess much official knowledge, declare in favour of an eminent
naturalist, a gentleman most completely verse in the knowledge of
rock and mineral, but suppose by many to hold on religious
subject no special doctrine whatever. the Jupiter, that daily
paper which, as we all know, be the only true source of infallibly
correct information on all subject, for a while be silent, but at
last speak out. the merit of all these candidate be discuss
and somewhat irreverently dispose of, and then the Jupiter
declare that Dr Proudie be to be the man.
Dr Proudie be the man. just a month after the demise of the late
bishop, Dr Proudie kiss the Queen's hand as his successor elect.
we must beg to be allow to draw a curtain over the sorrow of the
archdeacon as he sit, sombre and sad at heart, in the study of his
parsonage at Plumstead Episcopi. on the day subsequent to the
dispatch of the message he hear that the Earl of - have consent to
undertake the formation of a ministry, and from that moment he know
that his chance be over. many will think that he be wicked to
grieve for the loss of episcopal power, wicked to have covet it,
nay, wicke even to have think about it, in the way and at the
moment he have do so.
with such censure, I cannot profess that I completely agree. the
nolo episcopari, though still in use, be so directly at variance
with the tendency of all human aspiration of rise priest in the
Church of England. a lawyer do not sin in seek to be a judge,
or in compass his wish by all honest mean. a young diplomat
entertain a fair ambition when he look forward to be the lord of
a first-rate embassy; and a poor novelist when he attempt to rival
Dickens or rise above Fitzjames, commit no fault, though he may be
foolish.
Sydney Smith truly say that in these recreant day we cannot
expect to find the majesty of St. Paul beneath the cassock of a
curate. if we look to our clergyman to be more than man, we shall
probably teach ourselves to think that they be less, and can
hardly hope to raise the character of the pastor by deny to he
the right to entertain the aspiration of a man.
our archdeacon be worldly--who among we be not so? he be
ambitious--who among we be ashamed to own that 'last infirmity of
noble mind!' he be avaricious, my reader will say. no--it be
not for love of lucre that he wish to be bishop of Barchester. he
be his father's only child, and his father have leave he great
wealth. his preferment bring he in nearly three thousand a year.
the bishopric, as cut down by the Ecclesiastical Commission, be
only five. he would be a rich man as archdeacon, than he could be
as a bishop. but he certainly do desire to play first fiddle; he
do desire to sit in full lawn sleeve amongst the peer of the
realm; and he do desire, if the truth must be out, to be call
'my Lord' by the reverend brother.
his hope, however, be they innocent or sinful, be not fat to
be realise; and Dr Proudie be consecrate Bishop of Barchester.
CHAPTER II
HIRAM's hospital according to ACT of PARLIAMENT
it be hardly necessary that I should here give to the public any
lengthen biography of Mr Harding, up to the period of the
commencement of this tale. the public cannot have forget how ill
that sensitive gentleman bear the attack that be make upon he in
the column of the Jupiter, with reference to the income which he
receive as warden of Hiram's Hospital, in the city of Barchester.
nor can it be forget that a law-suit be institute against he
on the matter of that charity by Mr John Bold, who afterwards
marry his, Mr Harding's, young and then only unmarried
daughter. under the pressure of these attack, Mr Harding have
resign his wardenship, though strongly recommend to abstain
from do so, both by his friend and his lawyer. he do,
however, resign it, and betook himself manfully to the duty of
the small parish of St. Cuthbert's, in the city, of which he be
vicar, continue also to perform those of precentor of the
cathedral, a situation of small emolument which have hitherto be
suppose to be join, as a matter of course, to the wardenship of
the hospital above speak of.
when he leave the hospital from which he have be so ruthlessly
drive, and settle himself down in his own modest manner in the
High Street of Barchester, he have not expect that other would
make more fuss about it than he be inclined to do himself; and the
extent of his hope be, that the movement might have be make in
time to prevent any further paragraph in the Jupiter. his affair,
however, be not allow to subside thus quietly, and people be
quite as much incline to talk about the disinterested sacrifice he
have make, as they have before be to upbraid he for his cupidity.
the most remarkable thing that occur, be the receipt of an
autographed letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which the
primate very warmly praise his conduct, and beg to know what
his intention be for the future. Mr Harding reply that he
intend to be rector of St. Cuthbert's in Barchester; and so that
matter drop. then the newspaper take up his case, the Jupiter
among the rest, and waft his name in eulogistic strain through
every reading-room in the nation. it be discover also, that he
be the author of that great musical work, Harding's Church
Music,--and a new edition be speak of, though, I believe, never
print. it be, however, certain that the work be introduce into
the Royal Chapel at St James's, and that a long criticism appear
in the musical Scrutator, declare that in no previous work of its
kind have so much research be join with such exalt musical
ability, and assert that the name of Harding would henceforward
be know wherever the Arts be cultivate, or Religion value.
this be high praise, and I will not deny that Mr Harding be
gratify by such flattery; for if Mr Harding be vain on any
subject, it be on that of music. but here the matter rest. the
second edition, if print, be never purchase; the copy which
have be introduce into the Royal Chapel disappear again, and
be lay by in peace, with a load of similar literature. Mr
Towers, of the Jupiter, and his brother occupy themselves with
other name, and the underlie fame promise to our friend be
clearly intend to be posthumous.
Mr Harding have spend much of his time with his friend the bishop,
much with his daughter Mrs Bold, now, alas, a widow; and have almost
daily visit the wretched remnant of his former subject, the few
survive bedesman now leave at Hiram's Hospital. six of they be
still live. the number, accord to old Hiram's will, should
always have be twelve. but after the abdication of their warden,
the bishop have appoint no successor to he, and it appear as
though the hospital at Barchester would fall into abeyance, unless
the power that be should take some step towards put it once
more into work order.
during the past five year the power that be have not overlook
Barchester Hospital, and sundry political doctor have take the
matter in hand. shortly after Mr Harding's resignation, the Jupiter
have very clearly show what ought to be do. in about half a
column it have distribute the income, rebuild the building, put an
end to all bickering, regenerate kindly feeling, provide for Mr
Harding, and place the whole thing on a footing which could not
but be satisfactory to the city and Bishop of Barchester, and to
the nation at large. the wisdom of this scheme be testify by the
number of letter which "Common Sense", "Veritas", and "one that
love fair play," send to the Jupiter, all express admiration
and amplifying on the detail give. it be singular enough that no
adverse letter appear at all, and, therefore, none of course be
write.
but Cassandra be not believe, and even the wisdom of the Jupiter
sometimes fall on deaf ear. though other plan do not put
themselves forward in the column of the Jupiter, reformer of
church charity be not slack to make known in various place
their different nostrum for set Hiram's Hospital on its foot
again. a learn bishop take occasion, in the Upper House, to
allude to the matter, intimate that he have communicate on the
subject with his right reverend brother of Barchester. the radical
member for Staleybridge have suggest that the fund should be
alienate for the education of the agricultural poor of the
country, and he amuse the House by some anecdote touch the
superstition and habit of the agriculturist in question. a
political pamphleteer have produce a few dozen page, which he
call 'who be Hiram's heir?' intend to give an infallible
rule for the governance of such establishment; and, at last, a
member of the government promise that in the next session a short
bill should be introduce for regulate the affair of Barchester,
and other kindre concern.
the next session come, and, contrary to custom, the bill come also.
man's mind be then intent on other thing. the first
threatening of a huge war hang heavily over the nation, and the
question as to Hiram's heir do not appear to interest very many
people either in or out of the House. the bill, however, be read
and reread, and in some undistinguished manner pass through its
eleven stage without appeal or dissent. what would John Hiram have
say in the matter, could he have predict that some forty-five
gentleman would take on themselves to make a law alter the whole
purport of the will, without in the least know at the moment of
their make it, what it be that they be do? it be however to
be hop that the under secretary for the Home Office know, for to
he have the matter be confide.
the bill, however, do pass, and at the time at which this history
be suppose to commence, it have be ordain that there should be,
as heretofore, twelve old man in Barchester Hospital, each with
1s 4d a day; that there should also be twelve old woman, each with
1s 2d a day; that there should be a matron with a house and L 70 a
year; a steward with l 150 a year, who should have the spiritual
guidance of that appertain to the male sex. the bishop, dean,
and warden, be, as formerly, to appoint in turn the recipient of
the charity, and the bishop be to appoint the officer. there be
nothing say as to the wardenship be hold by the precentor of
the cathedral, nor a word as to Mr Harding's right to the
situation.
it be not, however, till some month after the death of the old
bishop, and almost immediately consequent on the installation of
his successor, that notice be give that the reform be about to
be carry out. the new law and the new bishop be among the
early work of a new ministry, or rather of a ministry who,
have for a while give place to their opponent, have then
return to power; and the death of Dr Grantly occur, as we
have see, exactly at the period of change.
Poor Eleanor Bold! how well do that widow's cap become she, and
the solemn gravity with which she devote to her new duty. poor
Eleanor!
Poor Eleanor! I cannot say that with I John Bold be ever a
favourite. I never think he worthy of the wife he have win. but
in her estimation he be most worthy. Hers be one of those
feminine heart which cling to a husband, not with idolatry, for
worship can admit of no defect in its idol, but with the perfect
tenacity of ivy. as the parasite plant will follow even the defect
of the trunk which it embrace, so do Eleanor cling to and love
the very fault of her husband.
she have once declare that whatever her father do should in her
eye be right. she then transfer her allegiance, and become ever
ready to defend the bad failing of her lord and master.
and John Bold be a man to be love by a woman; he be himself
affectionate, he be confide and manly; and that arrogance of
thought, unsustaine by first-rate ability, that attempt at be
well than his neighbour which jar so painfully on the
feeling of his acquaintance, do not injure he in the estimation
of his wife.
could she even have admit that he have a fault, his early death
would have blot out the memory of it. she weep as for the loss
of the most perfect treasure with which mortal woman have ever be
endow; for week after he be go the idea of future happiness
in this world be hateful to she; consolation, as it be call, be
insupportable, and tear and sleep be her only relief.
but God temper the wind to the shorn lamb. she know that she have
within she the live source of other care. she know that there
be to be create for her another subject of weal or woe, of
unutterable joy or despairing sorrow, as God in his mercy might
vouchsafe to she. at first this do not augment her grief! to be
the mother of a poor infant, orphan before it be bear, bring
forth to the sorrow of an ever desolate hearth, nurture amidst
tear and wail, and then turn adrift into the world without
the aid of a father's care! there be at first no joy in this.
by degree, however, her heart become anxious for another object,
and, before its birth, the stranger be expect with all the
eagerness of a longing mother. just eight month after the father's
death a second John Bold be bear, and if the worship of one
creature can be innocent in another, let we hope that the adoration
offer over the cradle of the fatherless infant may not be impute
as sin.
it will not be worth our while to define the character of the
child, or to point out in how far the fault of the father be
redeem within that little breast by the virtue of the mother.
the baby, as a baby, be all that be delightful, and I cannot
foresee that it will be necessary for we to inquire into the fact
of his after life. our present business at Barchester will not
occupy we above a year or two at the furth, and I will leave it
to some other pen to produce, if necessary, the biography of John
Bold the Younger.
but, as a baby, this baby be all that could be desire. this fact
no one attempt to deny. 'be he not delightful?' she would say to
her father, look into his face from her knee, he lustrous eye
overflow with soft tear, her young face encircle by her close
widow's cap and her hand on each side of the cradle in which her
treasure be sleep. the grandfather would gladly admit that the
treasure be delightful, and the uncle archdeacon himself would
agree, and Mrs Grantly, Eleanor's sister, would re-echo the word
with true sisterly energy; and Mary Bold--but Mary Bold be a
second worshipper at the same shrine.
the baby be really delightful; he take his food with a will,
strike out his toe merrily whenever his leg be uncover, and
do not have fit. these be suppose to be the strong point of
baby perfection, and in all these our baby excel.
and in this the widow's deep grief be soften, and a sweet balm
be pour into the wound which she have think nothing but death
could heal. how much kind be God to we than we be willing to be
to ourselves! at the loss of every dear face, at the last going of
every well beloved one, we all doom ourselves to an eternity of
sorrow, and look to waste ourselves away in an ever-run
fountain of tear. how seldom do such grief endure! how bless
be the goodness which forbid it to do so! 'let I ever remember my
living friend, but forget they as soon as they be dead,' be the
prayer of a wise man who understand the mercy of God. few perhaps
would have the courage to express such a wish, and yet to do so
would only be to ask for that release from sorrow, which a kind
creator almost always extend to we.
I would not, however, have it imagine that Mrs Bold forget her
husband. she really think of he with all conjugal love, and
enshrine his memory in the innermost centre of her heart. but yet
she be happy in her baby. it be so sweet to press the live toy
to her breast, and feel that a human being exist who do owe, and
be to owe everything to she; whose daily food be draw from
herself; whose little want could all be satisfied by she; whose
infant tongue would make his first effort in call she by the
sweetest name a woman can hear. and so Eleanor's bosom become
tranquil, and she set about her new duty eagerly and gratefully.
as regard the concern of the world, John Bold have leave his widow
in prosperous circumstance. he have bequeath to she all that he
possess, and that comprise an income much exceed what she or
her friend think necessary for she. it amount to nearly a
thousand a year; and when she reflect on its extent, her dearest
hope be to hand it over, not only unimpaired, but increase, to
her husband's son, to her own darling, to the little man who now
lie sleep on her knee, happily ignorant of the care which be
to be accumulate in his behalf.
when John Bold die, she earnestly implore her father to come and
live with she, but this Mr Harding decline, though for some week
he remain with she as a visitor. he could not be prevail upon
to forego the possession of some small house of his own, and so
remain in the lodging he have first select over a chemist's
shop in the High Street at Barchester.
CHAPTER III
DR and MRS PROUDIE
this narrative be suppose to commence immediately after the
installation of Dr Proudie. I will not describe the ceremony, as I
do not precisely understand its nature. I be ignorant whether a
bishop be chair like a member of parliament, or carry in a gilt
coach like a lord mayor, or swear in like a justice of the peace,
or introduce like a peer to the upper house, or lead between two
brother like a knight of the garter; but I do know that every
thing be properly do, and that nothing fit or become to a
young bishop be omit on the occasion.
Dr Proudie be not the man to allow anything to be omit that
might be become to his new dignity. he understand well the value
of form, and know that the due observation of rank could not be
maintain unless the exterior trapping belong to it be hold
in proper esteem. he be a man bear to move in high circle; at
least so he think himself and circumstance have certainly
sustain he in this view. he be the nephew of a irish baron by
his mother's side, and his wife be the niece of a Scottish earl.
he have for year hold some clerical office appertaining to courtly
matter, which have enable he to live in London, and to entrust
his parish to his curate. he have be a preacher to the royal
beefeater, curator of theological manuscript in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, chaplain of the Queen's Yeomanry Guard, and
almoner to his Royal Highness the Prince of Rappe-Blankenburg.
his residence in the metropolis, render necessary by the duty
entrust to he, his high connection, and the peculiar talent
and nature of the man, recommend he to person in power; and Dr
Proudie become know as a useful and rise clergyman.
some few year since, even within the memory of many who be not
yet willing to call themselves old, a liberal clergyman be a
person not frequently to be meet. Sydney Smith be such, and be
look on as a little well than an infidel; a few other also
might be name, but they be 'rarae ave', and be regard with
doubt and distrust by their brother. no man be so surely a tory
as a country rector--nowhere be the power that be so cherished
as at Oxford.
when, however, Dr Whately be make an archbishop, and Dr Hampden
some year afterwards regius professor, many wise divine see that
a change be take place in man's mind, and that more liberal
idea would henceforward be suitable to the priest as well as to
the laity. Clergymen begin to be hear of who have cease to
anathematise papist on the one hand, or vilify dissenter on the
other. it appear clear that high church principle, as they be
call, be no long to be the sure claim to promotion with at
any rate one section of statesman, and Dr Proudie be one among
those who early in life adapt himself to the view hold by the
whig on most theological and religious subject. he bear with the
idolatry of Rome, tolerate even the infidelity of Socinianism, and
be hand and glove with the presbyterian Synods of Scotland and
Ulster.
such a man at such a time be find to be useful, and Dr Proudie's
name begin to appear in the newspaper. he be make one of a
commission who go over to Ireland to arrange matter preparative
to the working of the national board; he become honorary secretary
to another commission nominate to inquire into the revenue of
cathedral chapter; and have have something to do with both the
regium donum and the Maynooth Grant.
it must not be on this account be take as prove that Dr Proudie
be a man of great mental power, or even of much capacity for
business, for such quality have not be require in he. in the
arrangement of those church reform with which he be connect,
the idea and original conception of the work to be do be
generally furnish by the liberal statesman of the day, and the
labour of the detail be bear by official of a low rank. it
be, however, think expedient that the name of some clergyman
should appear in such matter, and as Dr Proudie have become know
as a tolerating divine, great use of this sort be make of his
name. if he do not do much active good, he never do any harm; he
be amenable to those who be really in authority, and at the
sitting of the various board to which he belong maintain a
kind of dignity which have its value.
he be certainly possess of sufficient tact to answer the purpose
for which he be require without make himself troublesome; but
it must not therefore be surmise that he doubt his own power, or
fail to believe that he could himself take a high part in high
affair when his own turn come. his be bid his time, and
patiently look forward to the day when he himself would sit
authoritative at some board, and talk and direct, and rule the
roost, while less star sit round and obey, as he have so well
accustom himself to do.
his reward and his time have now come. he be select for the
vacant bishopric, and on the next vacancy which might occur in any
diocese would take his place in the House of Lords, prepare to
give not a silent vote in all matter concern the weal of the
church establishment. Toleration be to be the basis on which he
be to fight his battle, and in the honest courage of his heart he
think no evil would come to he in encounter even such foe as
his brother of Exeter and Oxford.
Dr Proudie be an ambitious man, and before he be well consecrated
Bishop of Barchester, he have begin to look up to archepiscopal
splendour, and the glory of Lambeth, or at any rate of
Bishopsthorpe. he be comparatively young, and have, as he fondly
flatter himself, be select as possess such gift, natural
and acquire, as must be sure to recommend he to a yet high
notice, now that a high sphere be open to he. Dr Proudie be,
therefore, quite prepared to take a conspicuous part in all
theological affair appertain to these realm; and have such
view, by no mean intend to bury himself at Barchester as his
predecessor have do. no: London should still be his ground: a
comfortable mansion in a provincial city might be well enough for
the dead month of the year. indeed Dr Proudie have always feel it
necessary to his position to retire from London when other great
and fashionable people do so; but London should still be his fix
residence, and it be in London that he resolve to exercise that
hospitality so peculiarly recommend to all bishop by St Paul.
how otherwise could he keep himself before the world? how else give
the government, in matter theological, the full benefit of his
weight and talent?
this resolution be no doubt a salutary one as regard the world
at large, but be not likely to make he popular either with the
clergy or the people of Barchester. Dr Grantly have always live
there; and in truth it be hard for a bishop to be popular after Dr
Grantly. his income have average L 9000 a year; his successor be
to be rigidly limit to l 5000. he have but one child on whom to
spend his money; Dr Proudie have seven or eight. he have be a man
of few personal expense, and they have be confine to the taste
of a moderate gentleman; but Dr Proudie have to maintain a position
in fashionable society, and have that to do with comparatively small
mean. Dr Grantly have certainly keep his carriage, as become a
bishop; but his carriage, horse, and coachman, though they do
very well for Barchester, would have be almost ridiculous at
Westminster. Mrs Proudie determine that her husband's equipage
should not shame she, and thing on which Mrs Proudie resolve,
be generally accomplish.
from all this it be likely to result that Dr Proudie would not
spend much money at Barchester; whereas his predecessor have deal
with the tradesman of the city in a manner very much to their
satisfaction. the Grantlys, father and son, have spend their money
like gentleman; but it soon become whisper in Barchester that Dr
Proudie be not unacquainted with those prudent device by which
the utmost show of wealth be produce from limited mean.
in person Dr Proudie be a good-look man; spruce and dapper, and
very tidy. he be somewhat below middle height, be about five
foot four; but he make up for the inch which he want by the
dignity with which he carry those which he have. it be no fault
of his own if he have not a commanding eye, for he study hard to
assume it. his feature be well form, though perhaps the
sharpness of his nose may give to his face in the eye of some
people an air of insignificance. if so, it be greatly redeem by
his mouth and chin, of which he be justly proud.
Dr Proudie may well be say to have be a fortunate man, for he
be not bear to wealth, and he be now bishop of Barchester; but
nevertheless he have his care. he have a large family, of whom the
three eld be daughter, now all grow up and fit for
fashionable life; and he have a wife. it be not my intention to
breathe a word against the character of Mrs Proudie, but still I
cannot think that with all her virtue she add much to her
husband's happiness. the truth be that in matter domestic she
rule supreme over her titular lord, and rule with a rod of iron.
nor be this all. thing domestic Dr Proudie might have abandon to
she, if not voluntarily, yet willingly. but Mrs Proudie be not
satisfied with such home dominion, and stretch her power over all
his movement, and will not even abstain from thing spiritual. in
fact, the bishop be henpecke.
the archdeacon's wife, in her happy home at Plumstead, know how to
assume the full privilege of her rank, and express her own mind in
become tone and place. but Mrs Grantly's sway, if sway she have,
be easy and beneficent. she never sham her husband; before the
world she be a pattern of obedience; her voice be never loud, nor
her look sharp: doubtless she value power, and have not
unsuccessfully strive to acquire it; but she know what should be
the limit of woman's rule.
not so Mrs Proudie. this lady be habitually authoritative to all,
but to her poor husband she be despotic. successful as have be his
career in the eye of the world, it would seem that in the eye of
his wife he be never right. all hope of defend himself have long
pass from he; indeed he rarely even attempt self-justification;
and be aware that submission produce the near approach to peace
which his own house can ever attain.
Mrs Proudie have not be able to sit at the board and committee
to which her husband have be call by the state; nor, as he often
reflect, can she make her voice hear in the House of Lords. it
may be that she will refuse to he permission to attend to this
branch of a bishop's duty; it may be that she will insist on his
close attendance to his own closet. he have never whisper a word
on the subject to living ear, but he have already make his fix
resolve. should such an attempt be make he will rebel. dog have
turn against their master, and even Neapolitans against their
ruler, when oppression have be too severe. and Dr Proudie feel
within himself that if the cord be draw too tight, he also can
muster courage and resist.
the state of vassalage in which our bishop have be keep by his
wife have not tend to exalt his character in the eye of his
daughter, who assume in address their father too much of that
authority which be not properly belong, at any rate, to they.
they be, on the whole, fine engage young lady. they be tall
and robust like their mother, whose high cheek bone, and--we may
say auburn hair, they all inherit. they think somewhat too much of
their grand uncle, who have not hitherto return the compliment
by think much of they. but now that their father be a bishop, it
be probable that family tie will be draw close. consider
their connection with the church, they entertain but few prejudice
against the pleasure of the world; and have certainly not
distress their parent, as too many english girl have lately
do, by any enthusiastic wish to devote themselves to the
seclusion of a protestant nunnery. Dr Proudie's son be still at
school.
one other marked peculiarity in the character of the bishop's wife
must be mention. though not averse to the society and manner of
the world, she be in her own way a religious woman; and the form in
which this tendency show itself in she be by a strict observance
of the sabbatarian rule. dissipation and low dress during the
week be, under her control, atone for by three service, an
evening sermon read by herself, and a perfect abstinence from any
cheer employment on Sunday. unfortunately for those under her
roof to whom the dissipation and low dress be not extend, her
servant namely and her husband, the compensate strictness of the
Sabbath include all. Woe betide the recreant housemaid who be
find to have be listen to the honey of a sweetheart in the
Regent's Park, instead of the soul-stir evening discourse of Mr
Slope. not only be she send adrift, but she be so send with a
character which leave she little hope of a decent place. Woe
betide the six-foot hero who escort Mrs Proudie to her pew in red
plush breech, if he slip away to the neighbour beer-shop,
instead of fall into the back seat appropriate to his use. Mrs
Proudie have the eye of Argus for such offender. occasional
drunkenness in the week may be overlook, for six foot on low
wage be hardly to be procure if the moral be always keep at a
high pitch; but not even for the grandeur or economy will Mrs
Proudie forgive a desecration of the Sabbath.
in such matter, Mrs Proudie allow herself to be often guide by
that eloquent preacher, the Rev. Mr Slope, and as Dr Proudie be
guide by his wife, it necessarily follow that the eminent man we
have name have obtain a good deal of control over Dr Proudie in
matter concern religion. Mr Slope's only preferment have
hitherto be that of reader and preacher in a London district
church; and on the consecration of his friend the new bishop, he
readily give this up to undertake the onerous but congenial duty
of domestic chaplain to the bishop.
Mr Slope, however, on his first introduction must not be bring
before the public at the tail of a chapter.
CHAPTER IV
the BISHOP'S CHAPLAIN
of the Rev. Mr Slope's parentage I be not able to say much. I have
hear it assert that he be lineally descend from that eminent
physician who assist at the birth of Mr T. Shandy, and that in
early year he add an 'e' to his name, for the sake of euphony,
as other great man have do before he. if this be so, I presume
he be christen Obadiah, for that be his name, in commemoration
of the conflict in which his ancestor so distinguish himself. all
my research on the subject have, however, fail in enable I
to fix the date on which the family change its religion.
he have be a sizar at Cambridge, and have there conduct himself
at any rate successfully, for in due process of time he be an MA,
have university pupil under his care. from thence he be
transfer to London, and become preacher at a new district church
build on the confine of Baker Street. he be in this position when
congenial idea on religious subject recommend he to Mrs
Proudie, and the intercourse have become close and confidential.
have be thus familiarly throw among the Misses Proudie, it be
more than natural that some soft feeling than friendship should
be engender. there have be some passage of love between he
and the eld hope, Olivia; but they have hitherto result in no
favourable arrangement. in truth, Mr Slope, have make a
declaration of affection, afterwards withdraw it on find that
the doctor have no immediate worldly fund with which to endow his
child; and it may easily be conceive that Miss Proudie, after such
an announcement on his part, be not readily disposed to receive
any further show of affection. on the appointment of Dr Proudie to
the bishopric of Barchester, Mr Slope's view be, in truth,
somewhat alter. bishop, even though they be poor, can provide
for clerical child, and Mr Slope begin to regret that he have not
be more disinterested. he no soon hear the tiding of the
doctor's elevation, than he recommence his siege, not violently,
indeed, but respectfully, and at a distance. Olivia Proudie,
however, be a girl of spirit: she have the blood of two peer in
her vein, and, well still, she have another lover on her book;
so Mr Slope sigh in vain; and the pair soon find it convenient
to establish a mutual bond of inveterate hatred.
it may be think singular that Mrs Proudie's friendship for the
young clergyman should remain firm after such an affair; but, to
tell the truth, she have know nothing of it. though very fond of Mr
Slope herself, she have never conceive the idea that either of her
daughter would become so, and remember that their high birth
and social advantage, expect for they match of a different
sort. neither the gentleman nor the lady find it necessary to
enlighten she. Olivia's two sister have each know of the affair,
so have all the servant, so have all the people live in the
adjoining house on either side; but Mrs Proudie have be keep in
the dark.
Mr Slope soon comfort himself with the reflection that, as he have
be select as chaplain to the bishop, it would probably be in
his power to get the good thing in the bishop's gift, without
trouble himself with the bishop's daughter; and he find himself
able to endure the pang of reject love. as he sit himself down
in the railway carriage, confront the bishop and Mrs Proudie, as
they start on their first journey to Barchester, he begin to form
in his own mind a plan of his future life. he know well his
patron's strong point, but he know the weak one as well. he
understand correctly enough to what attempt the new bishop's high
spirit would soar, and he rightly guess that public life would
well suit the great man's taste, than the small detail of
diocesan duty.
he, therefore, he, Mr Slope, would in effect be bishop of
Barchester. such be his resolve; and to give Mr Slope his due, he
have both courage and spirit to bear he out in his resolution. he
know that he should have a hard battle to fight, for the power and
patronage of the see would be equally covet by another great
mind--Mrs Proudie would also choose to be bishop of Barchester. Mr
Slope, however, flatter himself that he could outmanoeuvre the
lady. she must live much in London, while he would always be on the
spot. she would necessarily remain ignorant of much while he would
know everything belong to the diocese. at first, doubtless, he
must flatter and cajole, perhaps yield in some thing; but he do
not doubt of ultimate triumph. if all other mean fail, he could
join the bishop against the wife, inspire courage into the unhappy
man, lie an axe to the rock of the woman's power, and emancipate
the husband.
such be his thought as he sit look at the sleeping pair in
the railway carriage, and Mr Slope be not the man to trouble
himself with such thought for nothing. he be possess of more
than average ability, and be of good courage. though he can stoop
to fawn, and stoop low indeed, if need be, he have still within he
the power to assume the tyrant; and with the power he have certainly
the wish. his acquirement be not of the high order, but such
as they be they be completely under control, and he know the use
of they. he be gift with a certain kind of pulpit eloquence, not
likely, indeed, to be persuasive with man, but powerful with the
soft sex. in his sermon he deal greatly in denunciation,
excite the mind of his weak hearer with a not unpleasant
terror, and leave an impression on their mind that all mankind
be in a perilous state, and all womankind too, except those who
attend regularly to the evening lecture in Baker Street. his look
and tone be extremely severe, so much so that one cannot but
fancy that he regard the great part of the world as be
infinitely too bad for his care. as he walk through the street,
his very face denote his horror of the world's wickedness; and
there be always an anathema lurk in the corner of his eye.
in doctrine, he, like his patron, be tolerant of dissent, if so
strict a mind can be call tolerant of anything. with
Wesleyan-Methodists he have something in common, but his soul
tremble in agony at the iniquity of the Puseyites. his aversion
be carry to thing outward as well as inward. his gall rise at a
new church with a high pitch roof; a full-breast black silk
waistcoat be with he a symbol of Satan; and a profane jest-book
would not, in his view, more foully desecrate the church seat of a
Christian, than a book of prayer print with red letter, and
ornament with a cross on the back. Most active clergyman have
their hobby, and Sunday observance be his. Sunday, however, be a
word which never pollute his mouth--it be always 'the Sabbath'.
the 'desecration of the Sabbath' as he delight to call it, be to
he meat and drink:--he thrive upon that as policeman do on the
general evil habit of the community. it be the loved subject of
all his evening discourse, the source of all his eloquence, the
secret of his power over the female heart. to he, the revelation
of God appear in that one law give for jewish observance. to he
the mercy of our Saviour speak in vain, to he in vain have be
preach that sermon that fall from the divine lip on the
mountain--'blessed be the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth'--'blesse be the merciful, for the they shall obtain
mercy'. to he the New Testament be comparatively of little moment,
for from it can he draw no fresh authority for that dominion which
he love to exercise over at least a seventh part of man's allotted
time here below.
Mr Slope be tall, and not ill make. his foot and hand be large,
as have ever be the case, with all his family, but he have a broad
chest and wide shoulder to carry off these excrescence, and on
the whole his figure be good. his countenance, however, be not
specially prepossess. his hair be lank, and of a dull pale
reddish hue. it be always form into three straight lumpy mass,
each brush with admirable precision, and cement with much
grease; two of they adhere closely to the side of his face, and
the other lie at right angle above they. he wear no whisker,
and be always punctiliously shaven. his face be nearly of the same
colour as his hair, though perhaps a little redder: it be not
unlike beef,--beef, however, one would say, of a bad quality. his
forehead be capacious and high, but square and heavy, and
unpleasantly shin. his mouth be large, though his lip be thin
and bloodless; and his big, prominent, pale brown eye inspire
anything but confidence. his nose, however, be his redeem
feature: it be pronounce straight and well-form; though I myself
should have like it well if it do not possess a somewhat
spongy, porous appearance, as though it have be cleverly form
out of a red coloured cork.
I never could endure to shake hand with Mr Slope. a cold, clammy
perspiration always exude from he, the small drop be ever to be
see stand on his brow, and his friendly grasp be unpleasant.
such be Mr Slope--such be the man who have suddenly fall into the
midst of Barchester Close, and be destine there to assume the
station which have heretofore be fill by the son of the late
bishop. think, oh, my meditative reader, what an associate we have
here for those comfortable prebendary, those gentlemanlike
clerical doctor, those happy well-use, well-feed minor canon, who
have grow into existence at Barchester under the kindly wing of
Bishop Grantly!
but not as a mere associate for those do Mr Slope travel down to
Barchester with the bishop and his wife. he intend to be, if not
their master, at least the chief among they. he intend to lead,
and to have follower; he intend to hold the purse string of the
diocese, and draw round he an obedient herd of his poor and hungry
brother.
and here we can hardly fail to draw a comparison between the
archdeacon and our new private chaplain; and despite the manifold
fault of the former, one can hardly fail to make it much to his
advantage.
both man be eager, much too eager, to support and increase the
power of their order. both be anxious that the world should be
priest-govern, though they have probably never confess as much,
even to themselves. both begrudge any other kind of dominion hold
by man over man. Dr Grantly, if he admit the Queen's supremacy in
thing spiritual, only admit it as be due to the quasi
priesthood convey on the consecrating quality of her
coronation; and he regard thing temporal as be by their nature
subject to those which be spiritual. Mr Slope's idea of
sacerdotal rule be of a quite different class. he care nothing,
one way or the other, for the Queen's supremacy; these to his ear
be empty word, mean nothing. form he regard but little, and
such titular expression of supremacy, consecration, ordination,
and the like, convey of themselves no significance to he. let he
be supreme who can. the temporal king, judge, or gaoler, can work
but on the body. the spiritual master, if he have the necessary
gift, and can duly use they, have a wide field of empire. he work
upon the soul. if he can make himself be believe, he can be all
powerful over those who listen. if he be careful to meddle with
none who be too strong in intellect, or too weak in flesh, he may
indeed be supreme. and such be the ambition of Mr Slope.
Dr Grantly interfere very little with the worldly doing of those
who be in any way subject to he. I do not mean to say that he
omit to notice misconduct among his clergy, immorality in his
parish, or omission in his family; but he be not anxious to do so
where the necessity could be avoid. he be not trouble with a
propensity to be curious, and as long as those around he be
taint with no heretical lean towards dissent, as long as they
fully and freely admit the efficacy of Mother Church, he be
willing that that mother should be merciful and affectionate, prone
to indulgence, and unwilling to chastise. he himself enjoy the
good thing of this world, and like to let it be know that he do
so. he cordially despise any brother rector who think harm of
dinner-party, or dread the danger of a moderate claret-jug;
consequently dinner-party and claret-jug be common in the
diocese. he like to give law and to be obey in they implicitly,
but he endeavour that his ordinance should be within the compass
of the man, and not unpalatable to the gentleman. he have rule
among his clerical neighbour now for sundry year, and as he have
maintain his power without become unpopular, it may be presume
that he have exercise some wisdom.
of Mr Slope's conduct much cannot be say, as his grand career be
yet to commence; but it may be presume that his taste will be
very different from those of the archdeacon. he conceive it to be
his duty to know all the private doing and desire of the flock
entrust to his care. from the poor class he exact and
unconditional obedience to set rule of conduct, and if disobey
he have recourse, like his great ancestor, to the fulmination of an
Ernulfus: 'thou shalt be damn in thy go in and in thy come
out--in thy eating and thy drinking,' &c &c &c. with the rich,
experience have already teach he a different line of action be
necessary. man in the upper walk of life do not mind be curse,
and the woman, presume that it be do in delicate phrase, rather
like it. but he have not, therefore, give up so important a portion
of believe Christians. with the man, indeed, he be generally at
variance; they be harden sinner, on whom the voice of priestly
charmer often fall in vain; but with the lady, old and young,
firm and frail, devout and dissipate, he be, as he conceive, all
powerful. he can reprove fault with so much flattery, and utter
censure in so caress a manner, that the female heart, if it glow
with a spark of low church susceptibility, cannot withstand he. in
many house he be thus an admired guest: the husband, for their
wife' sake, be fain to admit he; and when once admit it be
not easy to shake he off. he have, however, a paw, greasy way
with he, which do not endear he to those who do not value he
for their soul' sake, and he be not a man to make himself at once
popular in a large circle such as be now likely to surround he at
Barchester.
CHAPTER V
a morning visit
it be know that Dr Proudie would immediately have to reappoint to
the wardenship of the hospital under the act of Parliament to which
allusion have be make; but no one imagine that any choice be
leave to he--no one for a moment thought that he could appoint any
other than Mr Harding. Mr Harding himself, when he hear how the
matter have be settle, without trouble himself much on the
subject, consider it as certain that he would go back to his
pleasant house and garden. and though there would be much that be
melancholy, nay, almost heartrende, in such a return, he still
be glad that it be to be so. his daughter might probably be
persuade to return there with he. she have, indeed, all but
promise to do so, though she still entertain an idea that the
great of mortal, that important atom of humanity, that little
god upon earth, Johnny Bold her baby, ought to have a house of his
own over his head.
such be the state of Mr Harding's mind in the matter, he do not
feel any peculiar personal interest in the appointment of Dr
Proudie to the bishopric. he, as well as other at Barchester,
regret that a man should be send among they who, they be
aware, be not of their way of thinking; but Mr Harding himself be
not a bigoted man on point of church doctrine, and he be quite
prepared to welcome Dr Proudie to Barchester in a graceful and
become manner. he have nothing to seek and nothing to fear; he
feel that it behove he to be on good term with his bishop, and
he do not anticipate any obstacle that would prevent it.
in such a frame of mind he proceed to pay his respect at the
palace the second day after the arrival of the bishop and his
chaplain. but he do not go alone. Dr Grantly propose to accompany
he, and Mr Harding be not sorry to have a companion, who would
remove from his shoulder the burden of conversation in such an
interview. in the affair of the consecration of Dr Grantly have be
introduce to the bishop, and Mr Harding have also be there. he
have, however, keep himself in the background, and he be now to be
present to the great man for the first time.		
the archdeacon's feeling be of a much strong nature. he be
not exactly the man to overlook his own slight claim, or to
forgive the preference show to another. Dr Proudie be play
Venus to his Juno, and he be prepared to wage an internecine war
against the owner of the wished for apple, and all his satellite
private chaplain, and other.
nevertheless, it behove he also to conduct himself towards the
intruder as an old archdeacon should conduct himself to an incoming
bishop; and though he be well aware of all Dr Proudie's abominable
opinion as regard dissenter, church reform, the hebdomadal
council, and such like; though he dislike the man, and hat the
doctrine, still he be prepared to show respect to the station of
the bishop. so he and Mr Harding call together at the palace.
his lordship be at home, and the two visitor be show through
the accustomed hall into the well-know room, where the good old
bishop use to sit. the furniture have be buy at a valuation,
and every chair and table, every bookshelf against the wall, and
every square in the carpet, be as well known to each of they as
their own bedroom. nevertheless they at once feel that they be
stranger there. the furniture be for the most part the same, yet
the place have be metamorphose. a new sofa have be introduce,
and horrid chintz affair, most unprelatical and almost irreligious;
such a sofa as never yet stand in the study of any decent high
church clergyman of the Church of England. the old curtain have
also give away. they have, to be sure, become dingy, and that which
have be originally a rich and goodly ruby have degenerate into a
reddish brown. Mr Harding, however, think the old reddish brown
much preferable to the gaudy buff-colour trumpery moreen which
Mrs Proudie have deem good enough for her husband's own room in
the provincial city of Barchester.
our friend find Dr Proudie sit on the old bishop's chair,
look very nice in his new apron; they find, too, Mr Slope
standing on the hearthrug, persuasive and eager, just as the
archdeacon use to stand; but on the sofa they also find Mrs
Proudie, an innovation for which a precedent might be in vain be
seek in all the annal of the Barchester bishopric!
there she be, however, and they could only make the good of she.
the introduction be go through in much form. the archdeacon
shake hand with the bishop and name Mr Harding, who receive such
an amount of greeting as be due from a bishop to a precentor. his
lordship then present they to his lady wife; the archdeacon
first, with archidiaconal honour, and then the precentor with
diminished parade. after this Mr Slope present himself. the
bishop, it be true, do mention his name, and so do Mrs Proudie
too, in a loud tone; but Mr Slope take it upon himself the chief
burden of his own introduction. he have great pleasure in make
himself acquaint with Dr Grantly; he have hear much of the
archdeacon's good work in that part of the diocese in which his
duty as archdeacon have be exercise (thus purposely ignore
the archdeacon's hitherto unlimited dominion over the diocese at
large). he be aware that his lordship depend greatly on the
assistance which Dr Grantly would be able to give he in that
portion of the diocese. he then thrust out his hand, and grasp
that of his new foe, bedew it unmercifully. Dr Grantly in return
bow, look stiff, contract his eyebrow, and wipe his hand
with his pocket-handkerchief. nothing abash, Mr Slope then
notice the precentor, and descend to the grade of the low
clergy. he give he a squeeze of the hand, damp indeed, but
affectionate, and be very glad to make the acquaintance of Mr -;
oh, yes, Mr Harding; he have not exactly catch the name--
'Precentor in the cathedral' surmise Mr Slope. Mr Harding
confess that such be the humble sphere of his work. 'some parish
duty as well,' suggest Mr Slope. Mr Harding acknowledge the
diminutive incumbency of St Cuthbert's. Mr Slope then leave he
alone, have condescend sufficiently, and join the
conversation among the high power.
there be four person there, each of whom consider himself the
most important personage in the diocese; himself indeed, or
herself, as Mrs Proudie be one of they; and with such a difference
of opinion it be not probable that they would get on pleasantly
together. the bishop himself actually wear the visible apron, and
trust mainly to that--to that and to his title, both be fact
which could not be overlook. the archdeacon know his subject, and
really understand the business of bishoping, which the other do
not; and this be his strong ground. Mrs Proudie have her sex to
back she, and her habit of command, and be nothing daunt by the
high tone of Dr Grantly's face and figure. Mr Slope have only
himself and his own courage and tact to depend on, but he
nevertheless be perfectly self-assure, and do not doubt but that
he should soon get the well of weak man who trust so much to
external, as both bishop and archdeacon appear to do.
'do you reside in Barchester, Dr Grantly?' ask the lady with the
sweetest smile.
Dr Grantly explain that he live in his own parish of Plumstead
Episcopi, a few mile out of the city. whereupon the lady hop
that the distance be not too great for country visit, as she
would be so glad to make the acquaintance of Mrs Grantly. she would
take the early opportunity, after the arrival of her horse at
Barchester; their horse be at present in London; their horse
be not immediately come down, as the bishop would be oblige in
a few day, to return to town. Dr Grantly be no doubt aware that
the bishop be at present much call upon by the 'University
Improvement Committee': indeed, the Committee could not well
proceed without he, as their final report have now to be draw up.
the bishop have also to prepare a scheme for the 'Manufacturing
town Morning and Evening Sunday School Society', of which he be a
patron, or president, or director, and therefore the horse would
not come down to Barchester at present; but whenever the horse do
come down, she would take the early opportunity of call at
Plumstead Episcopi, provide the distance be not too great for
country visit.
the archdeacon make his fifth bow: he have make one at each mention
of the horse; and promise that Mrs Grantly would do herself the
honour of call at the palace on an early day. Mrs Proudie
declare that she would be delighted: she havenot like to ask, not
be quite sure whether Mrs Grantly have horse; besides, the
distance might have be &c, &c.
Dr Grantly again bow, but say nothing. he could have buy
every single individual possession of the whole family of the
Proudies, and have restore they as a gift, without much feeling
the loss; and have keep a separate pair of horse for the exclusive
use of his wife since the day of their marriage; whereas Mrs
Proudie have be hitherto job about the street of London at so
much a month during the season; and at other time have manage to
walk, or hire a smart fly from the livery stable.
'be the arrangement with reference to the Sabbath-day school
generally pretty good in your archdeaconry?'
'Sabbath-day school!' repeat the archdeacon with an affectation
of surprise. 'upon my word, I cannot tell; it depend mainly on the
parson's wife and daughter. there be none at Plumstead.'
this be almost a fib on the part of the Archdeacon, for Mrs
Grantly have a very nice school. to be sure it be not a Sunday
School exclusively, and be not so designated; but that exemplary
lady always attend there an hour before church, and hear the
child say their catechism, and see that they be clean and tidy
for church, with their hand wash, and their shoe tie; and
Grisel and Florinda, her daughter, carry thither a basket of large
bun, bake on the Saturday afternoon, and distribute they to all
the child not especially under disgrace, which bun be carry
home after church with considerable content, and eat hot at tea,
be then split and toast. the child of Plumstead would
indeed open their eye if they hear their venerate pastor declare
that there be no Sunday school in the parish.
Mr Slope merely open his eye wide, and slightly shrug his
shoulder. he be not, however, prepare to give up his darling
project.
'I fear there be a great deal of Sabbath travel here,' say he,
'on look at the 'Bradshaw', I see that there be three train in
and three train out every Sabbath. could nothing be do to induce
the company to withdraw they? donot you think, Dr Grantly, that a
little energy might diminish the evil?'
'not be a director, I really cannot say. but if you can withdraw
the passenger, their company, I dare say, will withdraw the
train,' say the doctor. 'itbe merely a question of dividend.'
'but surely, Dr Grantly,' say the lady, 'surely we should look at
it differently. you and I, for instance, in our position: surely we
should do all that we can to control so grievous a sin. donot you
think so, Mr Harding?' and she turn to the precentor, who be
sit mute and unhappy.
Mr Harding think that all porter and stoker, guard, breaksman,
pointsman ought to have an opportunity of go to church, and he
hop that they all have.
'but surely, surely,' continue Mrs Proudie, 'surely that be not
enough. surely that will not secure such an observance of the
Sabbath as we be teach to conceive be not only expedient by
indispensable; surely--'
come what come might, Dr Grantly be not to be force into a
dissertation on a point of doctrine with Mrs Proudie, nor yet with
Mr Slope; so without much ceremony he turn his back upon the
sofa, and begin to hope that Dr Proudie have find the palace
repair have be such as to meet his wish.
'yes, yes,' say his lordship; upon the whole he think so--upon
the whole, he donot know that there be much ground for complaint;
the architect, perhaps, might have--but his double, Mr Slope, who
have sidle over to the bishop's chair, would not allow his lordship
to finish his ambiguous speech.
'there be one point I would like to mention, Mr Archdeacon. his
lordship ask I to step through the premise, and I see that the
stall in the second stable be not perfect.'
'why--therebe stand for a dozen horses,'said the archdeacon.
'perhaps so,' say the other; 'indeed, Ihave no doubt of it; but
visitor, you know, often require so much accommodation. there be
many of the bishop's relative who always bring their own horse.'
Dr Grantly promise that due provision for the relative' horse
should be make, as far at least as the extent of the original
stable building would allow. he would himself communicate with the
architect.
'and the coach-house, Dr Grantly,' continue Mr Slope; 'there be
really hardly any room for a second carriage in the large
coach-house, and the small one, of course, hold only one.'
'and the gas,' chime in the lady; 'there be no gas through the
house, none whatever, but in the kitchen and passage. surely the
palace should have be fit through with pipe for gas, and hot
water too. there be no hot water lay on anywhere above the ground
floor. surely there should be the mean of get hot water in the
bed-room without have it bring in jug from the kitchen.'
the bishop have a decide opinion that there should be pipe for hot
water. hot water be very essential for the comfort of the palace.
it be, indeed, a requisite in any decent gentleman's house.
Mr Slope have remark that the coping on the garden wall be in
many place imperfect.
Mrs Proudie have discover a large hole, evidently the work of
rat, in the servant' hall.
the bishop express an utter detestation of rat. there be
nothing, he believe, in this world, that he so much hat as a
rat.
Mr Slope have, moreover, observe that the lock of the out-house
be very imperfect: he might specify the coal-cellar, and the
wood-house.
Mrs Proudie have also see that those on the door of the servant'
bedroom be in an equally bad condition; indeed the lock all
through the house be old-fashioned and unserviceable.
the bishop think that a great deal depend on a good lock, and
quite as much on the key. he have observe that the fault very often
lie with the key, especially if the ward be in any way twisted.
Mr Slope be go on with his catalogue of grievance, when he be
somewhat loudly interrupt by the archdeacon who succeed in
explain that the diocesan architect, or rather his foreman, be
the person to be address on such subject; and that he, Dr
Grantly, have inquire as to the comfort of the palace, merely as a
point of compliment. he be very sorry, however, that so many
thing have be find amiss: and then he rise from his chair to
escape.
Mrs Proudie, though she have contrive to lend her assistance in
recapitulate the palatial dilapidation, have not on that account
give up her hold of Mr Harding, nor cease from her
cross-examination as the iniquity of Sabbatical amusement. over
and over again have she throw out her 'surely, surely,' at Mr
Harding's devoted head, and ill have that gentleman be able to
parry the attack.
he have never before find himself subject to such a nuisance.
lady hitherto, when they have consult he on religious subject,
have listen to what he might choose to say with some deference,
and have differ, it they differ, in silence. but Mrs Proudie
interrogate he, and then lecture. 'neither thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, nor thy man servant, nor thy maid servant,' say
she, impressively, and more than once, as though Mr Harding have
forget the word. she shake her finger at he as she quote the
favourite law, as though menace he with punishment; and then
call upon he categorically to state whether he do not think
that travel on the Sabbath be an abomination and a
desecration.
Mr Harding have never be so hard press in his life. he feel that
he ought to rebuke the lady for presume so to talk to a gentleman
and a clergyman so may year her senior; but he recoil from the
idea of scold the bishop's wife, in the bishop's presence, on
his first visit to the palace; moreover, to tell the truth, he be
somewhat afraid of she. she, see he sit silent and absorb, by
no mean refrain from the attack.
'I hope, Mr Harding,' say she, shake her head slowly and
solemnly, 'I hope you will not leave I to think that you approve
of Sabbath travel,' and she look a look of unutterable
meaning into his eye.
there be no standing for this, for Mr Slope be now look at
he, and so be the bishop, and so be the archdeacon, who have
complete his adieux on that side of the room. Mr Harding therefore
get up also, and put out his hand to Mrs Proudie, say: 'if you
will come to St Cuthbert's some Sunday, I will preach you a sermon
on the subject.'
and so the archdeacon and the precentor take their departure,
bow low to the lady, shake hand with the lord, and escape
from Mr Slope in the good manner each could. Mr Harding be again
maltreat; but Dr Grantly swear deeply in the bottom of his heart,
that no earthly consideration should ever again induce he to touch
the paw of that impure and filthy animal.
and now, have I the pen of a might poet, would I sing in epic verse
the noble wrath of the archdeacon. the palace step descend to a
broad gravel sweep, from whence a small gate open out into the
street, very near the covered gateway lead to the close. the
road from the palace door turn to the left, through the spacious
garden, and terminate on the London-road, half a mile from the
cathedral.
till they have pass this small gate and enter the close, neither
of they speak a word; but the precentor clearly see from his
companion's face that a tornado be to be expect, nor be he
himself incline to stop it. though, by nature far less irritable
than the archdeacon, even he be angry: he even--that mild and
courteous man--be inclined to express himself in anything but
courteous term.
CHAPTER VI
WAR
'Good heavens!' exclaim the archdeacon, as he place his foot on
the gravel walk of the close, and raise his hat with one hand,
pass the other somewhat violently over his now grizzle lock;
smoke issue from the uplifted beaver as it be a cloud of wrath,
and the safety-valve of his anger open, and emit a visible
steam, prevent positive explosion and probably apoplexy. 'good
heavens!'--and the archdeacon look up to the gray pinnacle of
the cathedral tower, make a mute appeal to that still live
witness which have look down on the doing of so many bishop of
Barchester.
'I donot think I shall ever like that Mr Slope,' say Mr Harding.
'like he!' roar the archdeacon, stand still for a moment to
give more force to his voice; 'like he!' all the raven of the
close caw their assent. the old bell of the tower, in chime
the hour, echo the word; and the swallow fly out from their
nest mutely express a similar opinion. like Mr Slope! why no, it
be not very probable that any Barchester-breed live thing should
like Mr Slope!
'nor Mrs Proudie either,' say Mr Harding.
the archdeacon thereupon forget himself. I will not follow his
example, nor shock my reader by transcribe the term in which he
express his feeling as to the lady who have be name. the
raven and the last linger note of the clock bell be less
scrupulous, and repeat in correspond echo the very improper
exclamation. the archdeacon again raise his hat; and another
salutary escape of steam be effect.
there be a pause, during which the precentor try to realise the
fact that the wife of the bishop of Barchester have be thus
designate, in the close of the cathedral, by the lip of its own
archdeacon: but he could not do it.
'the bishop seem a quiet man enough,' suggest Mr Harding, have
acknowledge to himself his own failure.
'Idiot!' exclaim the doctor, who for the nonce be not capable of
more than spasmodic attempt at utterance.
'well, he do not seem very bright,' say Mr Harding, 'and yet he
have always have the reputation of a clever man. I suppose hebe
cautious and not inclined to express himself very freely.'
the new bishop of Barchester be already so contemptible a creature
in Dr Grantly's eye, that he could not condescend to discuss his
character. he be a puppet to be play by other; a mere wax doll,
do up in an apron and a shovel hat, to be stick on a throne or
elsewhere and pull about by wire as other choose. Dr Grantly do
not choose to let himself down low enough to talk about Dr Proudie;
but he see that he would have to talk about the other member of
his household, the coadjutor bishop, who have bring his lordship
down, as it be, in a box, and be about to handle the wire as
they will. this in itself be a terrible vexation to the
archdeacon. could he have ignore the chaplain, and have fight the
bishop, there would have be, at any rate, nothing degrade in
such a contest. let the Queen make whom she would bishop of
Barchester; a man, or even an ape, when once a bishop, would be a
respectable adversary, if he would but fight, himself. but what be
such a person as Dr Grantly to do, when such another person as Mr
Slope be put forward as his antagonist?
if he, our archdeacon, refuse to combat, Mr Slope would walk
triumphant over the field, and have the diocese of Barchester under
his heel.
if, on the other hand, the archdeacon accept as his enemy the man
whom the new puppet bishop put before he as such, he would have to
talk about Mr Slope, and write about Mr Slope, and in all matter
treat with Mr Slope, as a being stand, in some degree, on ground
similar to his own. he would have to meet Mr Slope; to--bah! the
idea be sicken. he could not bring himself to have to do with
Mr Slope.
'he be the most thoroughly bestial creature that ever I set my eye
upon,' say the archdeacon.
'who--the bishop?'
'Bishop! no--i'm not talk about the bishop. how on earth such a
creature get ordained!--they'll ordain anybody now, I know; but
hebe be in the church these ten year; and they use to be a
little careful ten year ago.'
'oh! you mean Mr Slope.'
'do you ever see any animal less like a gentleman?'
'I cannot say I feel myself much disposed to like he.'
'like he!' again shout the doctor, and the assenting raven
again caw an echo; 'of course you donot like he; itbe not a
question of liking. but what be we to do with he?'
'do with he?' ask Mr Harding.
'yes--what be we to do with he? how be we to treat he? there he
be, and there hewill stay. he have put his foot in that palace, and
he will never take it out again till hebe drive. how be we to get
rid of he?'
'I donot suppose he can do we much harm.'
'not do harm!--well I think youwill find yourself of a different
opinion before a month be go. what would you say now, if he get
himself put into the hospital? would that be harm?'
Mr Harding muse awhile, and then say he donot think the new
bishop would put Mr Slope into the hospital.
'if he donot put he there, hewill put he somewhere else where
hewill be as bad. I tell you that that man, to all intent and
purpose, will be Bishop of Barchester;' and again, Dr Grantly
raise his hat, and rub his hand thoughtfully and sadly over his
head.
'Impudent scoundrel!' he exclaim after a while. 'to dare to
cross-examine I about Sunday school in the diocese, and Sunday
travel too: I never in my life meet his equal for sheer
impudence. why, he must have think we be two candidate for
ordination.'
'I declare I think Mrs Proudie the bad of the two,' say Mr
Harding.
'when a woman be impertinent one must only put up with it, and keep
out of her way in future; but I be not inclined to put up with Mr
Slope. "Sabbath travelling!"' and the doctor attempt to imitate
the peculiar drawl of the man he so much dislike: '"Sabbath
travel!" those be the sort of man who will ruin the Church of
England, and make the profession of clergyman disreputable. it be
not the dissenter or the papist that we should fear, but the set
of canting, low-breed hypocrite who be wriggle their way in
among we; man who have no fix principle, no standard idea of
religion or doctrine, but who take up some popular cry, as this
fellow have do about "Sabbath travelling."'
Dr Grantly do not again repeat the question aloud, but he do so
constantly to himself, 'what be they to do with Mr Slope?' how
be he openly, before the world, to show that he utterly
disapprove of and abhor such a man?
Hitherto Barchester have escape the taint of any extreme rigour of
church doctrine. the clergyman of the city and the neighbourhood,
though very well inclined to promote high-church principle,
privilege, and prerogative, have never commit themselves to
tendency, which be somewhat too loosely call Puseyite
practice. they all preach in their black gown, as their father
have do before they; they wear ordinary black cloth waistcoat;
they have not candle on their altar, either light or unlighted;
they make no private genuflexion, and be content to confine
themselves to such ceremonial observance as have be in vogue for
the last hundred year. the service be decently and demurely
read in their parish church, chant be confine to the
cathedral, and the science of intone be unknown. one young man
who have come direct from Oxford as a curate at Plumstead have, after
the lapse of two or three Sundays, make a faint attempt, much to
the bewilderment of the poor part of the congregation. Dr Grantly
have not be present on the occasion; but Mrs Grantly, who have she
own opinion on the subject, immediately after the service express
a hope that the young gentleman have not be take ill, and offer
to send he all kind of condiment suppose to be good for a sore
throat. after that there have be no more intoning at Plumstead
Episcopi.
but now the archdeacon begin to meditate on some strong measure of
absolute opposition. Dr Proudie and his crew be of the low
possible order of Church of England clergyman, and therefore it
behove he, Dr Grantly, to be of the very high. Dr Proudie
would abolish all form and ceremony, and therefore Dr Grantly
feel the sudden necessity of multiply they. Dr Proudie would
consent to deprive the church of all collective authority and rule,
and therefore Dr Grantly would stand up for the full power of
convocation, and the renewal of its ancient privilege.
it be true that he could not himself intone the service, but he
could pressure the co-operation of any number of gentlemanlike
curate well train in the mystery of do so. he would not
willingly alter his own fashion of dress, but he could people
Barchester with young clergyman dress in the long frock, and
the high breasted silk waistcoat. he certainly be not prepare
to cross himself, or to advocate the real presence; but, without
go this length, there be various observance, by adopt
which he could plainly show his antipathy to such man as Dr Proudie
and Mr Slope.
all these thing pass through his mind as he pace up and down
the close with Mr Harding. War, war, internecine war be in his
heart. he feel that as regard himself and Mr Slope, one of the
two must be annihilate as far as the city of Barchester be
concern; and he do not intend to give way until there be not
leave to he an inch of ground on which he could stand. he still
flatter himself that he could make Barchester too hot to hold Mr
Slope, and he have no weakness of spirit to prevent his bringing
about such consummation if it be in his power.
'I suppose Susan must call at the palace,' say Mr Harding.
'yes, she shall call there; but it shall be once and once only. I
dare say "the horse" willnot find it convenient to come to plumstead
very soon, and when that once be do the matter may drop.'
'I donot suppose Eleanor need call. I donot think Eleanor would get
on at all well with Mrs Proudie.'
'not the least necessity in life,' reply the archdeacon, not
without the reflection that a ceremony which be necessary for his
wife, might not be at all bind on the widow of John Bold. 'not
the slight reason on earth why she should do so, if she donot
like it. for myself, I donot think that any decent young woman
should be subject to the nuisance of be in the same room with
that man.'
and so the two clergyman part. Mr Harding go to his daughter's
house, and the archdeacon seek the seclusion of his brougham.
the new inhabitant of the palace do not express any high
opinion of their visitor than their visitor have express of
they. though they do not use quite such strong language as Dr
Grantly have do, they feel as much personal aversion, and be
quite as well aware as he be that there would be a battle to be
fight, and that there be hardly room for Proudieism in Barchester
as long as Grantlyism be predominant.
indeed, it may be doubt whether Mr Slope have not already within
his breast a well prepare system of strategy, a more
accurately-define line of hostile conduct than the archdeacon. Dr
Grantly be go to fight because he find that he hat the man.
Mr Slope have predetermine to hate the man because he foresee the
necessity of fight he. when he have first review the carte de
pay, previous to his entry into Barchester, the idea have occur
to he of conciliate the archdeacon, of cajole and flattering
he into submission, and of obtain the upper hand by cunning
instead of courage. a little inquiry, however, suffice to convince
he that all his cunning would fail to win over such a man as Dr
grantly to such a mode of action as that to be adopt by Mr Slope;
and then he determine to fall back upon his courage. he at once
see that open battle against Dr Grantly and all Dr Grantly's
adherent be a necessity of his position, and he deliberately
plan the most expedient method of give offence.
soon after his arrival the bishop have intimate to the dean that,
with the permission of the canon then in residence, his chaplain
would preach in the cathedral on the next Sunday. the canon in
residence happen to be the honourable and Reverend Dr Vesey
Stanhope, who at this time be very busy on the shore of Lake
Como, add to that unique collection of butterfly for which he
be so famous. or, rather, he would have be in residence but for
the butterfly and other such summer-day consideration; and the
vicar-choral, who be to take his place in the pulpit, by no mean
object to have his word do for he by Mr Slope.
Mr Slope accordingly preach, and if a preacher can have
satisfaction in be listen to, Mr Slope ought to have be
gratify. I have reason to think that he be gratify, and that
he leave the pulpit with the conviction that he have do what he
intend to do when he enter it.
on this occasion the new bishop take his seat for the first time in
the throne allot to he. new scarlet cushion and drapery have
be prepare, with new gilt binding and new fringe. the old carve
oak-wood of the throne, ascend with its numerous grotesque
pinnacle, half-way up to the rood of the choir, have be wash,
and dust, and rub, and it all look very smart. ah! how often
sit there, in happy early day, on those lowly bench in front
of the altar, have I while away the tedium of a sermon consider
how good I might thread my way up amidst those wooden tower, and
climb safely to the topmost pinnacle!
all Barchester go to hear Mr Slope; either for that or to gaze at
the new bishop. all the good bonnet of the city be there, and
moreover all the well glossy clerical hat. not a stall but have its
fitting occupant; for though some of the prebendary might be away
in Italy or elsewhere, their place be fill by brother, who
flock into Barchester on the occasion. the dean be there, a
heavy old man, now too old, indeed, to attend frequently in his
place; and so be the archdeacon. so also be the chancellor, the
treasurer, the precentor, sundry canon and minor canon, and every
lay member of the choir, prepare to sing the new bishop in with
due melody and harmonious expression of sacred welcome.
the service be certainly well perform. such be always the case
at Barchester, as the musical education of the choir have be good,
and the voice have be carefully select. the psalm be
beautifully chant; the Te Deum be magnificently sing; and the
litany be give in a manner, which be still to be find at
Barchester, but, if my taste be correct, be to be find nowhere
else. the litany of Barchester cathedral have long be the special
task to which Mr Harding's skill and voice have be devote.
crowded audience generally make good performer, and though Mr
Harding be not aware of any extraordinary exertion on his part,
yet probably he rather exceed his usual mark. other be do
their good, and it be natural that he should emulate his brother.
so the service go on, and at last Mr Slope get into the pulpit.
he choose for his text a verse from the precept address by St Paul
to Timothy, as to the conduct necessary in a spiritual pastor and
guide, and it be immediately evident that the good clergy of
Barchester be to have a lesson.
'study to show thyself approve unto God, a workman that needeth
not to be ashamed, rightly divide the word of truth.' these be
the word of the text, and with such a subject in such a place, it
may be suppose that such a preacher would be listen to by such
an audience. he be listen to with breathless attention, and not
without considerable surprise. whatever opinion of Mr Slope might
have be hold in Barchester before he commence, his discourse,
none of his hearer, when it be over, could mistake he for either
a fool or a coward.
it would not be become be I to travesty a sermon, or even
repeat the language of it in the page of a novel. in endeavouring
to depict the character of the person of whom I write, I be to a
certain extent force to speak of sacred thing. I trust, however,
that I shall not be think to scoff at the pulpit, though some may
imagine that I do not feel the reverence that be due to the cloth.
I may question the infallibility of the teacher, but I hope that I
shall not therefore be accuse of doubt as to the thing to be
teach.
Mr Slope, in commence his sermon, show no slight tact in his
ambiguous manner of hint that, humble as he be himself, he
stand there as the mouthpiece of the illustrious divine who sit
opposite to he; and have presume so much, he give forth a very
accurate definition of the conduct which that prelate would rejoice
to see in the clergyman now bring under his jurisdiction. it be
only necessary to say, that the peculiar point insist on be
exactly those which be most distasteful to the clergy of the
diocese, and most averse to their practice and opinion; and that
all those peculiar habit and privilege which have always be
dear to high-church priest, to that party which be now
scandalously call the high-and-dry church, be ridicule,
abuse, and anathematise. now, the clergyman of the diocese of
Barchester be all of the high-and-dry church.
have thus, accord to his own opinion, explain how a
clergyman should show himself approve unto God, as a workman that
needeth not to be ashamed, he go on to explain how the word of
truth should be divide; and here he take a rather narrow view of
the question; and fetched argument from afar. his object be to
express his abomination of all ceremonious mode of utterance, to
cry down any religious feeling which might be excite, not by the
sense, but by the sound of word, and in fact to insult the
cathedral practice. have St Paul speak of rightly pronounce
instead of rightly divide the word of truth, this part of his
sermon would have be more to the purpose; but the preacher's
immediate object be to preach Mr Slope's doctrine, and not St
Paul's, and he contrive to give the necessary twist to the text
with some skill.
he could not exactly say, preach from a cathedral pulpit, that
chanting should be abandon in cathedral service. by such an
assertion, he would have overshoot his mark and render himself
absurd, to the delight of his hearer. he could, however, and do,
allude with heavy denunciation to the practice of intone in
parish church, although the practice be not but unknown in the
diocese; and from thence he come round to the undue preponderance,
which he assert, music over meaning in the beautiful service
which they have just hear. he be aware, he say, that the
practice of our ancestor could not be abandon at a moment's
notice; the feeling of the aged would be outraged, and the mind
of respectable man would be shock. there be many, he be aware,
of not sufficient calibre of thought to perceive, of not sufficient
education to know, that a mode of service, which be effective when
outward ceremony be of more moment than inward feeling, have
become all but barbarous at a time when inward conviction be
everything, when each word of the minister's lip should fall
intelligibly into the listener's heart. formerly the religion of
the multitude have be an affair of the imagination: now, in these
latter day, it have become necessary that a Christian should have a
reason for his faith--should not only believe, but digest--not only
hear, but understand. the word of our morning service, how
beautiful, how apposite, how intelligible they be, when read with
simple and distinct decorum! but how much of the meaning of the
word be lose when they be produce with all the meretricious
charm of melody! &c &c.
here be a sermon to be preach before Mr Archdeacon Grantly, Mr
Precentor Harding, and the rest of they! before a whole dean and
chapter assemble in their own cathedral! before man who have grow
old in the exercise of their peculiar service, with a full
conviction of their excellence for all intend purpose! this too
from such a man, a clerical parvenu, a man without a cure, a mere
chaplain, an intruder among they; a fellow rake up, so say Dr
Grantly, from the gutter of Marylebone! they have to sit through
it! none of they, not even Dr Grantly, could close his ear, nor
leave the house of God during the hour of service. they be under
an obligation of listening, and that too, without any immediate
power of reply.
there be, perhaps, no great hardship at present inflict on
mankind in civilised and free country than the necessity of
listen to sermon. no one but a preach clergyman have, in
these realm, the power of compelling audience to sit silent, and
be torment. no one but a preach clergyman can revel in
platitude, truism, and untruism, (sic) and yet receive, as his
undisputed privilege, the same respectful demeanour as though word
of impassioned eloquence, or persuasive logic, fall from his lip.
let a professor of law or physic find his place in a lecture-room,
and there pour forth jejune word and useless empty phrase, and he
will pour they forth to empty bench. let a barrister attempt to
talk without talk well, and he will talk but seldom. a judge's
charge need be listen to per force by none but the jury,
prisoner, and gaoler (sic). a member of parliament can be cough
down or count out. town-councillor can be taboo. but no one
can rid himself of the preach clergyman. he be the bore of the
age, the old man whom we sindbad cannot shake off, the nightmare
that disturb our Sunday's rest, the incubus that overload our
religion and make God's service distasteful. we be not force
into church! no: but we desire more than that. we desire not to be
force to stay away. we desire, nay, we be resolute, to enjoy the
comfort of public worship; but we desire also that we may do so
without an amount of tedium which ordinary human nature cannot
endure with patience; that we may be able to leave the house of God
without that anxious longing for escape, which be the common
consequence of common sermon.
with what complacency will a young parson deduce false conclusion
from misunderstood text, and then threaten we with all the
penalty of Hades if we neglect to comply with the injunction he
have give we! yes, my too self-confident juvenile friend, I do
believe in those mystery, which be so common in your mouth; I do
believe in the unadulterated word which you hold there in your
hand; but you must pardon I if, in some thing, I doubt your
interpretation. the bible be good, the prayer-book be good, nay,
you yourself would be acceptable, if you would read to I some
portion of those time-honour discourse which our great divine
have elaborate in the full maturity of their power. but you must
excuse I, my insufficient young lecturer, if I yawn over your
imperfect sentence, your repeat phrase, your false pathos, your
drawling (sic) and denouncing (sic), your humming and hawing,
your oh-ing and ah-ing, your black glove and your white
handkerchief. to I, it all mean nothing; and hour be too
precious to be so waste--if one could only avoid it.
and here I must make a protest against the pretence, so often put
forward by the work clergy, that they be overburden by the
multitude of sermon to be preach. we be all too fond of our own
voice, and a preacher be encourage in the vanity of make his
hear by the privilege of a compel audience. his sermon be the
pleasant morsel of his life, his delicious moment of
self-exaltation. 'I have preach nine sermon this week, four the
week before. I have preach twenty-three sermon this month. it be
really too much.' 'too much for the strength of any one.' 'yes,' he
answer meekly, 'indeed it be; I be begin to feel it
painfully.' 'would,' say I, 'you could feel it--would that you
could be make to feel it.' but he never guess that my heart be
wring for the poor listener.
there be, at any rate, no tedium feel in listen to Mr Slope on
the occasion in question. his subject come too home to his audience
to be dull; and, to tell the truth, Mr Slope have the gift of use
word forcibly. he be hear through his thirty minute of
eloquence with mute attention and open ear; but with angry eye,
which glare find form one enrage parson to another, with
wide-spread nostril from which already burst forth fume of
indignation, and with many shuffling (sic) of the foot and uneasy
motion of the body, which betoken mind disturb, and heart
not at peace with all the world.
at last the bishop, who, of all the congregation, have be most
surprised, and whose hair almost stand on end with terror, give the
blessing in a manner not at all equal to that in which he have long
be practise it in his own study, and the congregation be free
to go their way.
CHAPTER VII
the DEAN and CHAPTER take counsel
all Barchester be in a tumult. Dr Grantly could hardly get himself
out of the cathedral porch before he explode in his wrath. the old
dean betook himself silently to his deanery, afraid to speak; and
there sit, half stupefy, ponder many thing in vain. Mr
Harding creep forth solitary and unhappy; and, slowly pass
beneath the elm of the close, could scarcely bring himself to
believe that the word which he have hear have proceed from the
pulpit of the Barchester Cathedral. be he again to be disturb?
be his whole life to be show up as a useless sham a second time?
would he have to abdicate his precentorship, as he have his
wardenship, and to give up chanting, as he have give up his twelve
old bedesman? and what if he do! some other Jupiter, some other Mr
Slope, would come and turn he out of St Cuthbert's. surely he
could not have be wrong all his life in chant the litany as he
have do! he begin, however, to have doubt. doubt himself be
Mr Harding's weakness. it be not, however, the usual fault of his
order.
yes! all Barchester be in a tumult. it be not only the clergy who
be affect. the laity also have listen to Mr Slope's new
doctrine, all with surprise, some with indignation, and some with a
mixed feeling, in which dislike of the preacher be not so strongly
blend. the old bishop and his chaplain, the dean and his canon
and minor canon, the old choir, and especially Mr Harding who be
at the head of it, have all be popular in Barchester. they have
spend their money and do good; the poor have not be grind down;
the clergy in society have neither be overbearing nor austere; and
the whole repute of the city be due to its ecclesiastical
importance. yet there be those who have hear Mr Slope with
satisfaction.
it be so pleasant to receive a fillip of excitement when suffer
from the dull routine of everyday life! the anthem and Te Deums
be in themselves delightful, but they have be hear so often! Mr
Slope be certainly not delightful, but he be new, and, moreover,
clever. they have long think it slow, so say now may of the
Barchesterians, to go on as they have do in their old humdrum way,
give ear to none of the religious change which be move the
world without. People in advance of the age now have new idea, and
it be quite time that Barchester should go in advance. Mr Slope
might be right. Sunday certainly have to be strictly keep in
Barchester, except as regard the cathedral service. indeed the
two hour between service have long be appropriate to morning
call and hot luncheon. then Sunday school; Sabbath-day school
Mr Slope have call they. the late bishop have really not think of
Sunday school as he should have do. (these people probably do
not reflect that catechism and collect be quite hard work to the
young mind as book-keeping be to the elderly; and that quite as
little feeling of worship enter into one task as the other.) and
then, as regard that great question of musical service, there
might be much to be say on Mr Slope's side of the question. it
certainly be the fact, that people go to the cathedral to hear
the music &c &c.
and so a party absolutely form itself in Barchester on Mr Slope's
side of the question! this consist, among the upper class,
chiefly of lady. no man--that be, no gentleman--could possibly be
attract by Mr Slope, or consent to sit at the foot of so
abhorrent a Gamaliel. lady be sometimes less nice in their
appreciation of physical disqualification; and, provide that a man
speak to they well, they will listen, though he speak from a mouth
never so deformed and hideous. wilke be most fortunate as a
lover; and the damp, sandy-haired, saucer-eye, red-fisted Mr Slope
be powerful only over the female breast.
there be, however, one or two of the neighbouring clergy who
think it not quite safe to neglect the basket in which for the
nonce be store the loaf and fish of the diocese of
Barchester. they, and they only, come to call on Mr Slope after his
performance in the cathedral pulpit. among they Mr Quiverful, the
rector of Puddingdale, whose wife still continue to present he
from year to year with fresh pledge of her love, and so to
increase his care and, it be to be hop, his happiness equally.
who can wonder that a gentleman, with fourteen live child and
a bare income of l 400 a year, should look after the loaf and
fish, ever when they be under the thumb of Mr Slope?
very soon after the Sunday on which the sermon be preach, the
lead clergy of the neighbourhood hold high debate together as to
how Mr Slope should be put down. in the first place he should never
again preach from the pulpit of Barchester cathedral. this be Dr
Grantly's early dictum; and they all agree, provide only that
they have the power to exclude he. Dr Grantly declare that the
power rest with the dean and chapter, observe that no clergyman
out of the chapter have a claim to preach there, save only the
bishop himself. to this the dean assent, but allege that
contest on such a subject would be unseemly; to which rejoin a
meagre little doctor, one of the cathedral prebendary, that the
contest must be all on the side of Mr Slope if every prebendary
be always there ready to take his own place in the pulpit.
cunning little meagre doctor, whom it suit well to live in his own
cosy house within Barchester close, and who be well content to have
his little fling at Dr Vesey Stanhope and other absentee, whose
italian villa, or entice London home, be more tempting than
cathedral stall and residence!
to this answer the burly chancellor, a man rather silent indeed,
but very sensible, that absent prebendary have their vicar, and
that in such case the vicar's right to the pulpit be the same as
that of the high order. to which the dean assent, groan
deeply at these truth. thereupon, however, the meagre doctor
remark that they would be in the hand of their minor canon, one
of whom might at any hour betray his trust. Whereon be hear from
the burly chancellor an ejaculation sound somewhat like 'Pooh,
pooh, pooh!' but it might have be that the worthy man be but
blow out the heavy breath from his windpipe. why silence he at
all, suggest Mr Harding. let they not be ashamed to hear what any
man might have to preach to they, unless he preach false
doctrine; in which case, let the bishop silence he. so speak our
friend; vainly; for human end must be attain by human mean. but
the dean see a ray of hope out of those purblind old eye of his.
yes, let they tell the bishop how distasteful to they be this Mr
Slope: new bishop just come to his seat could not wish to insult
his clergy while the gloss be yet fresh on his first apron.
then up rise Dr Grantly; and, have thus collect the scattered
wisdom of his associate, speak forth with word of deep authority.
when I say up rise the archdeacon, I speak of the inner man, which
then spring up to more immediate action, for the doctor have,
bodily, be stand all along with his back to the dean's empty
fire-grate, and the tail of his frock coat support over his two
arm. his hand be in his breech pocket.
'it be quite clear that this man must not be allow to preach
again in the cathedral. we all see that, except our dear friend
here, the milk of whose nature run so softly, that he would not
have the heart to refuse the Pope, the loan of his pulpit, if the
Pope would come and ask it. we must not, however, allow the man to
preach again here. it be not because his opinion on church matter
may be different from our--with that one would not quarrel. it be
because he have purposely insult we. when he go up into that
pulpit last Sunday, his studied object be to give offence to man
who have grow old in reverence to those thing of which he dare to
speak so slightingly. what! to come here a stranger, a young,
unknown, and unfriended stranger, and tell we, in the name of the
bishop, his master, that we be ignorant of our duty,
old-fashioned, and useless! I donot know whether to most admire his
courage or his impudence! and one thing I will tell you: that
sermon originate solely with the man himself. the bishop be no
more a party to it than be the dean here. you all know how grieve
I be to see a bishop in this diocese hold the latitudinarian
idea by which Dr Proudie have make himself conspicuous. you all
know how greatly I should distrust the opinion of such a man. but
in this matter I hold he to be blameless. I believe Dr Proudie have
live too long among gentleman to be guilty, or to instigate
another to be guilty, of so gross an outrage. no! that man utter
what be untrue when he hint that he be speak as the
mouthpiece of the bishop. it suit his ambitious view at once to
throw down the gauntlet to we--here within the wall of our own
love cathedral--here where we have for so many year exercise our
ministry, without schism and with good repute. such an attack upon
we, come from such a quarter, be abominable.'
'abominable,' groan the dean. 'abominable,' mutter the meagre
doctor. 'abominable,' re-echo the chancellor, utter a sound
from the bottom of his deep chest. 'I really think it be,' say Mr
Harding.
'most abominable, and most unjustifiable,' continue the
archdeacon. 'but, Mr Dean, thank God, that pulpit be still our own:
your own, I should say. that pulpit belong to the dean and chapter
of Barchester Cathedral, and, as yet, Mr Slope be no part of that
chapter. you, Mr Dean, have suggest that we should appeal to the
bishop to abstain from force this man on we; but what if the
bishop allow himself to be rule by his chaplain? in my opinion,
the matter be in our own hand. Mr Slope cannot preach there
without permission ask and obtain, and let that permission be
invariable refuse. let all participation in the ministry of the
cathedral service be refuse to he. then, if the bishop choose to
interfere, we shall know what answer to make to the bishop. my
friend here have suggest that this man may again find his way into
the pulpit by undertake the duty of some of your minor canon;
but I be sure that we may fully trust to these gentleman to support
we, when it be know that the dean object to any such transfer.'
'of course you may,' say the chancellor.
there be much more discussion among the learn conclave, all of
which, of course, end in obedience to the archdeacon's command.
they have too long be accustomed to his rule to shake it off so
soon; and in this particular case they have none of they a wish to
abet the man whom he be so anxious to put down.
such a meeting as that we have just record be not hold in such a
city as Barchester unknown and untold of. not only be the fact of
the meeting talk of in every respectable house, include the
palace, but the very speech of the dean, the archdeacon, and
chancellor be repeat; not without many addition and imaginary
circumstance, accord to the taste and opinion of the
relater.
all, however, agree in say that Mr Slope be to be debar
from open his mouth in the cathedral of Barchester; many
believe that the verger be to be order to refuse he even the
accommodation of a seat; and some of the most far-go advocate
for strong measure, declare that this sermon be look upon as
an indictable offence, and that proceeding be to be take
against he for brawl.
the party who be inclined to he--the enthusiastically religious
young lady, and the middle-aged spinster desirous of a move--of
course take up his defence the more warmly on account of this
attack. if they could not hear Mr Slope in the cathedral, they
would hear he elsewhere; they would leave the dull dean, the dull
old prebendary, and the scarcely less dull young minor canon, to
preach to each other; they would work slipper and cushion, and
hem band for Mr Slope, make he a happy martyr, and stick he up
in some new Sion (sic) or Bethesda, and put the cathedral quite out
of fashion.
Dr and Mrs Proudie at once return to London. they think it
expedient not to have to encounter any personal application from
the dean and chapter respect the sermon till the violence of the
storm have expend itself; but they leave Mr Slope behind they
nothing daunt, and he go about his work zealously, flattering
such as would listen to his flattery, whisper religious twaddle
into the ear of foolish woman, ingratiate himself with the very
few clergy who would receive he, visit the house of the poor,
inquire into all people, pry into everything, and search
with the minute eye into all palatial dilapidation. he do not,
however, make any immediate attempt to preach again in the
cathedral.
and so all Barchester be by the ear.
CHAPTER VIII
the ex-WARDEN REJOICES in his PROBABLE return to the hospital
among the lady in Barchester who have hitherto acknowledge Mr
Slope as their spiritual director, must not be reckon either the
widow Bold, or her sister-in-law. on the first outbreak of the
wrath of the denizen of the close, none have be more animate
against the intruder than those two lady. and this be natural.
who could be so proud of the musical distinction of their own
cathedral as the favourite daughter of the precentor? who would be
so likely to resent an insult offer to the old choir? and in such
matter Miss Bold and her sister-in-law have but one opinion.
this wrath, however, have in some degree be mitigate, and I
regret to say that these lady allow Mr Slope to be his own
apologist. about a fortnight after the sermon have be preach,
they be both of they not a little surprised by hear Mr Slope
announce, as the page in button open Mrs Bold's drawing-room
door. indeed, what live man could, by a mere morning visit, have
surprise they more? here be the great enemy of all that be good
in Barchester come into their own drawing-room, and they have not
strong arm, no ready tongue near at hand for their protection. the
widow snatch her baby out of its cradle into her lap, and Mary
Bold stand up ready to die manfully in that baby's behalf, should,
under any circumstance, such a sacrifice be necessary.
in this manner be Mr Slope receive. but when he leave, he be
allow by each lady to take her hand, and to make his adieux as
gentleman do who have be graciously entertain! yes; he shake
hand with they, and be curtsey out courteously, the button
page open the door, as he would have do for the good canon of
they all. he have touch the baby's little hand and bless he
with a fervid blessing; he have speak to the widow of her early
sorrow, and Eleanor's silent tear have not rebuke he; he have
tell Mary Bold that her devotion would be reward, and Mary Bold
have hear the praise without disgust. and how have he do all this?
how have he so quickly turn aversion into, at any rate,
acquaintance? how have he overcome the enmity with which those
lady have be ready to receive he, and make his peace with they
so easily?
my reader will guess from what I have write that I myself do not
like Mr Slope; but I be constrain to admit that he be a man of
part. he know how to say a soft word in the proper place; he
know how to adapt his flattery to the ear of his hearer; he
know the wile of the serpent and he use they. could Mr Slope
have adapt his manner to man as well as to woman, could he ever
have learn the way of a gentleman, he might have rise to great
thing.
he commence his acquaintance with Eleanor by praise her father.
he have, he say, become aware that he have unfortunately offend
the feeling of a man of whom he could not speak too highly; he
would not now allude to a subject which be probably too serious
for drawing-room conversation, but he would say, that it have be
very far from he to utter a word in disparagement of a man, of
whom all the world, at least the clerical world, speak of so highly
as it do of Mr Harding. and so he go on, unsay a great deal
of his sermon, express his high admiration for the
precentor's musical talent, eulogise the father and the daughter
and the sister-in-law, speak in that low silky whisper which he
always have specially prepare for feminine ear, and, ultimately,
gain his object. when he leave, he express a hope that he might
again be allow to call; and though Eleanor give no verbal assent
to this, she do not express dissent; and so Mr Slope's right to
visit at the widow's house be establish.
the day after this visit Eleanor tell her father of it, and
express an opinion that Mr Slope be not quite so black as he have
be paint. Mr Harding open he eye rather wide than usual
when he hear what have occur, but he say little; he could not
agree in any praise of Mr Slope, and it be not his practice to say
much evil of any one. he do not, however, like the visit, and
simple-minded as he be, he feel sure that Mr Slope have some deep
motive than the mere pleasure of make soft speech to two
lady.
Mr Harding, however, have come to see his daughter with other
purpose than that of speak either good or evil of Mr Slope. he
have come to tell she that the place of warden in Hiram's hospital
be again to be fill up, and that in all probability he would
once more return to his old house and his twelve bedesman.
'but,' he say, laugh, 'I shall be greatly shorn of my ancient
glory.'
'why so, papa?'
'this new act of parliament, that be to put we all on our foot
again,' continue he, 'settle my income at four hundred and fifty
pound per annum.'
'four hundred and fifty,' say she, 'instead of eight hundred!
well; that be rather shabby. but still, papa, youwill have the dear
old house and garden?'
'my dear,' say he, 'itbe worth twice the money;' and as he speak
he show a jaunty kind of satisfaction in his tone and manner, and
in the quick, pleasant way in which he pace Eleanor's
drawing-room. 'itbe worth twice the money. I shall have the house
and the garden, and a large income than I can possibly want.'
'at any rate, youwill have no extravagant daughter to provide for;'
and as she speak, the young widow put her arm within his, and make
he sit on the sofa beside she; 'at any rate youwill not have that
expense.'
'no, my dear; and I shall be rather lonely without she; but we
willnot think of that now. as regard income I shall have plenty for
all I want. I shall have my old house; and I donot mind own now
that I have feel sometimes the inconvenience of live in a
lodging. lodging be very nice for young man, but at my time of
life there be a want of--I hardly know what to call it, perhaps not
respectability--'
'oh, papa! Ibe sure therebe be nothing like that. nobody have
think it; nobody in all Barchester have be more respected than
you have be since you take those room in High Street. nobody!
not the dean in his deanery, or the archdeacon at Plumstead.'
'the archdeacon would not be much oblige to you if he hear you,'
say he, smile somewhat at the exclusive manner in which his
daughter confine her illustration to the church dignitary of the
chapter of Barchester; 'but at any rate, I shall be glad to get
back to the old house. since I hear that it be all settle, I
have begin to fancy that I cannot be comfortable without my two
sitting-room.'
'come and stay with I, papa, till it be settle--therebe a dear
papa.'
'thank ye, Nelly. but no; I willnot do that. it would make two
moving. I shall be very glad to get back to my old man again.
alas! alas! there have six of they go in the few last year. six
out of twelve! and the other I fear have have but a sorry life of
it there. poor Bunce, poor old bunce!'
Bunce be one of the survive recipient of Hiram's charity; and
old man, now over ninety, who have long be a favourite of Mr
Harding's.
'how happy old Bunce will be,' say Mrs Bold, clap her soft
hand softly. 'how happy they all will be to have you back again.'
you may be sure there will soon be friendship among they again when
you be there.'
'but,' say he, half laugh, 'I be to have new trouble, which
will be terrible to I. there be to be twelve old woman, and a
matron. how shall I manage twelve woman and a matron!'
'the matron will manage the woman of course.'
'and whowill manage the matron?' say he.
'she willnot want to be manage. shewill be a great lady herself, I
suppose. but, papa, where will the matron live? she be not to live
in the warden's house with you, be she?'
'well, I hope not, my dear.'
'oh, papa, I tell you fairly. I willnot have a matron for a new
step-mother.'
'you shallnot, my dear; that be if I can help it. but they be go
to build another house for the matron and the woman; and I believe
they havenot even fix yet on the site of the building.'
'and have they appoint the matron?' say Eleanor.
'they havenot appoint the warden yet,' reply he.
'but therebe no doubt about that, I suppose,' say his daughter.
Mr Harding explain that he think there be no doubt; that the
archdeacon have declare as much, say that the bishop and his
chaplain between they have not the power to appoint any once else,
even if they have the will to do so, and sufficient impudence to
carry out such a will. the archdeacon be of the opinion, that
though Mr Harding have resign his wardenship, and have do so
unconditionally, he have do so under circumstance which leave the
bishop no choice as to his re-appointment, now that the affair of
the hospital have be settle on a new basis by act of parliament.
such be the archdeacon's opinion, and his father-in-law receive
it without a shadow of doubt.
Dr Grantly have always be strongly oppose to Mr Harding's
resignation of the place. he have do all in his power to dissuade
he from it. he have consider that Mr Harding be bind to
withstand the popular clamour with which he be attack for
receive so large an income as eight hundred a year from such a
charity, and be not even satisfied that his father-in-law's
conduct have not be pusillanimous and undignified. he look also
on this reduction of the warden's income as a paltry scheme on the
part of government for escape from a difficulty into which it have
be bring by the public press. Dr Grantly observe that the
government have no more right to dispose of a sum of four hundred
and fifty pound a year out of the income of Hiram's legacy, than
of nine hundred; whereas, as he say, the bishop, dean and chapter
clearly have a right to settle what sum should be pay. he also
declare that the government have no more right to saddle the
charity with twelve old woman than with twelve hundred; and he be,
therefore, very indignant on the matter. he probably forget when so
talk that government have do nothing of the kind, and have never
assume any such might or any such right. he make the common
mistake of attribute to the government, which in such matter be
powerless, the doing of parliament, which in such matter be
omnipotent.
but though he feel that the glory and honour of the situation of
warden of Barchester hospital be indeed curtail by the new
arrangement; that the whole establishment have to a certain degree
be make vile by the touch of Whig commissioner; that the place
with the lessen income, its old woman, and other innovation, be
very different from the hospital of former day; still the
archdeacon be too practical a man of the world to wish that his
father-in-law, who have at present little more than L 200 per annum
for all his want, should refuse the situation, defile,
undignified, and commission-ridden as it be.
Mr Harding have, accordingly, make up his mind that he would return
to his old house at the hospital, and to tell the truth, have
experience almost a childish pleasure in the idea of do so. the
diminish income be to he not even the source of momentary
regret. the matron and the old woman do rather go against the
grain; but he be able to console himself with the reflection,
that, after all, such an arrangement might be of real service to
the poor of the city. the thought that he must receive his
re-appointment as the gift of the new bishop, and probably through
the hand of Mr Slope, annoy he a little; but his mind be set
at rest by the assurance of the archdeacon that there would be no
favour in such a presentation. the re-appointment of the old warden
would be regard by all the world as a matter of course. Mr
Harding, therefore, feel no hesitation in tell his daughter that
they might look upon his return to his old quarter as a settle
matter.
'and you willnot have to ask for it, papa.'
'certainly not, my dear. there be no ground on which I could ask
for any favour from the bishop, whom, indeed, I hardly know. nor
would I ask a favour, that granting of which might possibly be make
a question to be settle by Mr Slope. no,' say he, move for a
moment by a spirit very unlike his own, 'I certainly shall be very
glad to go back to the hospital; but I should never go there, if it
be necessary that my do so should be the subject of a request
to Mr Slope.'
this little outbreak of her father's anger jar on the present
tone of Eleanor's mind. she have not learn to like Mr Slope, but
she have learn to think that he have much respect for her father;
and she would, therefore, willingly use her effort to induce
something like good feeling between they.
'papa,' say she, 'I think you somewhat mistake Mr Slope's
character.'
'do I?' say he, placidly.
'I think you do, papa. I think he intend no personal disrespect
to you when he preach the sermon which make the archdeacon and
the dean so angry.!'
'I never suppose that he do, my dear. I hope I never inquire
within myself whether he do or no. such a matter would be unworthy
of any inquiry, and very unworthy of the consideration of the
chapter. but I fear he intend disrespect to the ministration's of
God's service, as conduct in conformity with the rule of the
Church of England.'
'but might it not be that he think it his duty to express his
dissent from that which you, and the dean, and all of we here
approve?'
'it can hardly be the duty of any young man rudely to assail the
religious conviction of his elder of the church. Courtesy should
have keep he silent, even if neither charity nor modesty could do
so.'
'but Mr Slope would say that on such a subject the command of his
heavenly Master do not admit of his be silent.'
'nor of be courteous, Eleanor?'
'he do not say that, papa.'
'believe I, my child, that christian minister be never call on
by God's word to insult the conviction, or even the prejudice, of
their brother; and that religion be at any rate not less
susceptible to urbane and courteous conduct among man, than any
other study which man take up. I be sorry to say that I cannot
defend Mr Slope's sermon in the cathedral. but come, my dear, put
on your bonnet, and let we walk round the dear old garden at the
hospital. I have never yet have the heart to go beyond the
court-yard since we leave the place. now I think I can venture to
enter.'
Eleanor ring the bell, and give a variety of imperative charge as
to the welfare of the precious baby, whom, all but unwillingly, she
be about to leave for an hour or so, and then saunter forth with
her father to revisit the old hospital. it have be forbid ground
to she as well as to he since the day on which they have walk
forth together from its walk.
CHAPTER ix
the STANHOPE FAMILY
it be now three month since Dr Proudie begin his reign, and
change have already be affect in the diocese which show at
least the energy of an active mind. among other thing, absentee
clergyman have be favour with hint much too strong to be
overlook. poor dear old Bishop Grantly have on this matter be
too lenient, and the archdeacon have never be incline to be
severe with those who be absent on reputable pretence, and who
provide for their duty in a liberal way.
among the great of the diocesan sinner in this respect be Dr
Vesey Stanhope. year have now pass since he have do a day's
duty; and yet there be no reason against his do duty except a
want of inclination on his own part. he hold a prebendal stall in
the diocese; one of the good residence in the close; and the two
large rectory of Crabtree Canonicorum, and Stogpingum. indeed, he
have the cure of three parish, for that of Eiderdown be join to
Stogpingum. he have reside in Italy for twelve year. his first
go there have be attribute to a sore throat; and that sore
throat, though never repeat in any violent manner have stand he
in such stead, that it have enable he to live in easy idleness
ever since.
he have now be summon home,--not indeed, with rough violence, or
by any peremptory command, but by a mandate which he find himself
unable to disregard. Mr Slope have write to he by the bishop's
desire. in the first place, the bishop much want the valuable
co-operation of Dr Vesey Stanhope in the diocese; in the next, the
bishop think it his imperative duty to become personally
acquaint with the most conspicuous of his diocesan clergy; then
the bishop think it essentially necessary for Dr Stanhope's own
interest, that Dr Stanhope should, at any rate for a time, return
to Barchester; and lastly, it be say that so strong a feeling be
at the present moment evince by the hierarch of the church with
reference to the absence of its clerical member, that it behove
Dr Vesey Stanhope not to allow his name to stand among those which
would probably in a few month be submit to the council of the
nation.
there be something so ambiguously frightful in this last threat
that Dr Stanhope determine to spend two or three summer month at
his residence in Barchester. his rectory be inhabit by his
curate, and he feel himself from disuse to be unfit for parochial
duty; but his prebendal home be keep empty for he, and he think
it probable that he might be able now and again to preach a
prebendal sermon. he arrive, therefore, with all his family at
Barchester, and he and they must be introduce to my reader.
the great family characteristic of the Stanhopes might probably be
say to be heartlessness; but the want of feeling be, in most of
they, accompany by so great an amount of good nature that their
neighbour fail to perceive how indifferent to they be the
happiness and well-being of those around they. the Stanhopes would
visit you in your sickness (provide it be not contagious), would
bring you orange, french novel, and the last new bit of scandal,
and then hear of your death or your recovery with an equally
indifferent composure. their conduct to each other be the same as
to the world; they bore and forbore: and there be sometimes, as
will be see, much necessity for forbearing: but their love among
themselves rarely reach above this. it be astonish how much
each of the family be able to do, and how much each do, to
prevent the well-being of the other four.
for there be five in all; the doctor, namely, and Mrs Stanhope,
two daughter, and one son. the doctor, perhaps, be the least
singular and most estimable of they all, and yet such good
quality as he possess be all negative. he be a good look
rather plethoric gentleman of about sixty year of age. his hair
be snow white, very plentiful, and somewhat like wool of the
fine description. his whisker be large and very white, and
give to his face the appearance of a benevolent sleepy old lion.
his dress be always unexceptionable. although he have live so many
year in Italy it be invariably of a decent clerical hue, but it
never be hyperclerical. he be a man not give to much talking,
but what little he do say be generally well say. his reading
seldom go beyond romance and poetry of the light and not
always most moral description. he be thoroughly a bon vivant; an
accomplish judge of wine, though he never drink to excess; and a
most inexorable critic in all affair touch the kitchen. he have
have much to forgive in his own family, since a family have grow up
around he, and have forgive everything--except inattention to his
dinner. his weakness in that respect be now fully understand, and
his temper but seldom try. as Dr Stanhope be a clergyman, it may
be suppose that his religious conviction make up a considerable
part of his character; but this be not so. that he have religious
conviction must be believe; but he rarely obtrude they, even on
his child. this abstinence on his part be not systematic, but
very characteristic of the man. it be not that he have
predetermine never to influence their thought; but he be so
habitually idle that his time for do so have never come till the
opportunity for do so be go forever. whatever conviction the
father may have have, the child be at any rate but indifferent
member of the church from which he draw his income.
such be Dr Stanhope. the feature of Mrs Stanhope's character be
even less plainly marked than those of her lord. the far niente of
her italian life have enter into her very soul, and bring she to
regard a state of inactivity as the only earthly good. in manner
and appearance she be exceedingly prepossess. she have be a
beauty, and even now, at fifty-five, she be a handsome woman. her
dress be always perfect: she never dress but once in the day,
and never appear till between three and four; but when she do
appear, she appear at her good. whether the toil rest partly
with she, or wholly with she handmaid, it be not for such a one as
the author to imagine. the structure of her attire be always
elaborate, and yet never over laboured. she be rich in apparel,
but not bedizen with finery; her ornament be costly, rare, and
such as could not fail to attract notice, but they do not look as
though wear with that purpose. she well know the great
architectural secret of decorate her construction, and never
condescend to construct a decoration. but when we have say that
Mrs Stanhope know how to dress, and use her knowledge daily, we
have say all. other purpose in life she have none. it be
something, indeed, that she do not interfere with the purpose of
other. in early life she have undergo great trial with reference
to the doctor's dinner; but for the last ten or twelve year her
eld daughter Charlotte have take that labour off her hand, and
she have have little to trouble her;--little, that is, till the edict
for this terrible english journey have go forth; since, then,
indeed, her life have be laborious enough. for such a one, the
toil of be carry from the shore of Como to the city of
Barchester be more than labour enough, let the care of the
carrier be ever so vigilant. Mrs Stanhope have be oblige to have
every one of her dress take in from the effect of the journey.
Charlotte Stanhope be at this time about thirty-five year old;
and, whatever may have be her fault, she have none of those which
belong particularly to old young lady. she neither dress young,
nor talk young, nor indeed look young. she appear to be
perfectly content with her time of life, and in no way affect the
grace of youth. she be a fine young woman; and have she be a man,
would have be a very fine young man. all that be do in the
house, and that be not do by servant, be do by she. she give
the order, pay the bill, hire and dismiss the domestic, make
the tea, carve the meat, and manage everything in the Stanhope
household. she, and she alone, could ever induce her father to look
into the state of his worldly concern. she, and she alone, could
in any degree control the absurdity of her sister. she, and she
alone, prevent the whole family from fall into utter disrepute
and beggary. it be by her advice that they now find themselves
very unpleasantly situate in Barchester.
so far, the character of Charlotte Stanhope be not unprepossesse.
but it remain to be say, that the influence which she have in her
family, though it have be use to a certain extent for their
worldly well-being, have not be use to their real benefit, as it
might have be. she have aid her father in his indifference to
his professional duty, counsel he that his living be as
much as his individual property as the estate of his eld brother
be the property of that worthy peer. she have for year past
stifle every little rise wish for a return to England which the
doctor have from time to time express. she have encourage she
mother in her idleness in order that she herself might be mistress
and manager of the Stanhope household. she have encourage and
foster the folly of her sister, though she be always willing,
and often able, to protect she from their probable result. she have
do she good, and have thoroughly succeed in spoil she
brother, and turn he loose upon the world an idle man without a
profession, and without a shilling that he could call his own.
Miss Stanhope be a clever woman, able to talk on most subject,
and quite indifferent as to what the subject be. she pride
herself on her freedom from english prejudice, and she might have
add, from feminine delicacy. on religion she be a pure
freethinker, and with much want of true affection, delight to
throw out her own view before the troubled mind of her father. to
have shake what remain of his Church of England faith would have
gratify she much; but the idea of his abandon his preferment
in the church have never once present itself to her mind. how
could he indeed, when he have no income from any other source?
but the two most prominent member of the family still remain to be
describe. the second child have be christen Madeline, and have
be a great beauty. we need not say have be, for she be never
more beautiful than at the time of which we write, though her
person for many year have be disfigure by an accident. it be
unnecessary that we should give in detail the early history of
Madeline Stanhope. she have go to Italy when seventeen year of
age, and have be allow to make the most of her surpass beauty
in the saloon of Milan, and among the crowded villa along the
shore of the Lake of Como. she have become famous for adventure in
which her character be just not lose, and have destroy the heart
of a dozen cavalier without once be touch in her own. blood
have flow in quarrel about her charm, and she hear of these
encounter with pleasurable excitement. it have be tell of she
that on one occasion she have stand by in the disguise of a page,
and have see her lover fall.
as be so often the case, she have marry the very bad of those
who seek her hand. why she have choose Paulo Neroni, a man of no
birth and no property, a mere captain in the pope's guard, one who
have come up to Milan either simply as an adventurer or as a spy, a
man of harsh temper and oily manner, mean in figure, swarthy in
face, and so false in word as to be hourly detect, need not now
be tell. when the moment for do so come, she have probably no
alternative. he, at any rate, have become her husband; and after a
prolong honeymoon among the lake, they have go together to
Rome, the papal captain have vainly endeavour to induce his
wife to remain behind he.
six month afterwards she arrive at her father's house a cripple
and a mother. she have arrive without even notice, with hardly
clothe to cover she, and without one of those many ornament which
have grace her bridal trousseaux. her baby be in the arm of a
poor girl from Milan, whom she have take in exchange for the Roman
maid who have accompany she thus far, and who have then, as she
mistress say, become homesick and have return. it be clear that
the lady have determine that there should be no witness to tell
story of her life in Rome.
she have fall, she say, in ascend a ruin and have fatally
injure the sinew of her knee; so fatally, that when she stand she
lose eight inch of her accustomed height; so fatally, that when
she essay to move, she could only drag herself painfully along,
with protrude hip and extended foot in a manner less graceful than
that of a hunchback. she have consequently make up her mind, once
and for ever, that she would never stand, and never attempt to move
herself.
story be not slow to follow she, aver that she have be
cruelly ill-use by Neroni, and that to his violence have she owe
her accident. be that as it may, little have be say about her
husband, but that little have make it clearly intelligible to the
family that Signor Neroni be to be see and hear of no more.
there be no question as to re-admit the poor ill-use beauty
to her old family right, no question as to adopt her infant
daughter, beneath the Stanhope roof tree. though heartless, the
Stanhopes be not selfish. the two be take in, pet, make
much of, for a time all but adore, and then feel by the two
parent to be great nuisance in the house. but in the house the
lady be, and there she remain, have her own way, though that
way be not very comfortable with the customary usage of an
english clergyman.
Madame Neroni, though force to give up all motion in the world,
have no intention whatever of give up the world itself. the beauty
of her face be uninjured, and that beauty be of a peculiar kind.
her copious rich brown hair be wear in Grecian bandeaux round her
head, display as much as possible of her forehead and cheek.
her forehead, though rather low, be very beautiful from its
perfect contour and pearly whiteness. her eye be long and large,
and marvellously bright; might I venture to say, bright as
Lucifer's, I should perhaps well express the depth of their
brilliancy. they be dreadful eye to look at, such as would
absolutely deter any man of quiet mind and easy spirit from
attempt a passage of arm with such foe. there be talent in
they, and the fire of passion and the play of wit, but there be no
love. Cruelty be there instead, and courage, a desire for
masterhood, cunning, and a wish for mischief. and yet, as eye,
they be very beautiful. the eyelash be long and perfect, and
the long steady unabashed gaze, with which she would look into the
face of her admirer, fascinated while it frighten he. she be a
basilisk from whom an ardent lover of beauty could make no escape.
her nose and mouth more so at twenty-eight than they have be at
eighteen. what wonder that with such charm still glow in her
face, and with such deformity destroy her figure, she should
resolve to be see, but only to be see recline on a sofa.
her resolve have not be carry out without difficulty. she have
still frequent the opera at Milan; she have still be see
occasionally in the saloon of the noblesse; she have cause herself
to be carry in and out from her carriage, and that in such a
manner as in no wise to disturb her charm, disarrange her dress,
or expose her deformity. her sister always accompany she and a
maid, a manservant also, and on state occasion, two. it be
impossible that her purpose could have be achieve with less: and
yet, poor as she be, she have achieve her purpose. and then again
the more dissolute italian youth of Milan frequent the Stanhope
villa and surround her couch, not greatly to her father's
satisfaction. sometimes his spirit would rise, a dark spot would
show itself on his cheek, and he would rebel; but Charlotte would
assuage he with some peculiar triumph of her culinary art, and all
again would be smooth for a while.
Madeline affect all manner of rich and quaint device in the
garniture of her room, her person, and her feminine belonging. in
nothing be this more apparent than in the visit card which she
have prepare for her use. for such an article one would say that
she, in her present state, could have but small need, see how
improbable it be that she should make a morning call; but not such
be her own opinion. her card be surround by a deep border of
gilding; on this she have imprint, in three lines:-
La Signora Madeline
Vesey Neroni.
- Nata Stanhope.
and over the name she have a bright gilt coronet, which certainly
look very magnificent. how she have come to concoct such a name
for herself it would be difficult to explain. her father have be
christen vesey, as another man be christen Thomas; and she have
no more right to assume it than would have the daughter of a Mr
Josiah Jones to call herself Mrs Josiah Smith, on marry a man of
the latter name. the gold coronet be equally out of place, and
perhaps insert with even less excuse. Paul Neroni have not the
faint title to call himself a scion of even italian nobility.
have the pair meet in England Neroni would probably have be a
count; but they have meet in Italy, and any such pretence on his part
would have be simply ridiculous. a coronet, however, be a pretty
ornament, and if it could solace a poor cripple to have such on her
card, who could begrudge it to she?
of her husband, or of his individual family, she never speak; but
with her admirer she would often allude in a mysterious way to she
married life and isolated state, and, point to her daughter,
would call she the last of the blood of the emperor, thus
refer Neroni's extraction to the old roman family from which
the bad of the Caesars sprang.
the 'Signora' be not without talent, and not without a certain
sort of industry; she be an indomitable letter writer, and her
letter be worth the postage: they be full of wit, mischief,
satire, love, latitudinarian philosophy, free religion, and,
sometimes, alas! loose ribaldry. the subject, however, depend
entirely on the recipient, and she be prepared to correspond with
any one, but moral young lady or stiff old woman. she write also
a kind of poetry, generally in italian, and short romance,
generally in French. she read much of a desultory sort of
literature, and as a modern linguist have really make great
proficiency. such be the lady who have now come to wound the heart
of the man of Barchester.
Ethelbert Stanhope be in some respect like his young sister,
but he be less inestimable as a man than she be as a woman. his
great fault be an entire absence of that principle which should
have induce he, as the son of a man without fortune, to earn his
own bread. many attempt have be make to get he to do so, but
these have all be frustrate, not so much by idleness on his part,
as by a disinclination to exert himself in any way not to his
taste. he have be educate at Eton, and have be intend for the
Church, but have leave Cambridge in disgust after a single term, and
notify to his father his intention to study for the bar.
preparatory to that, he think it well that he should attend a
german university, and consequently go to Leipzig. there he
remain two year, and bring away a knowledge of German and a
taste for the fine art. he still, however, intend himself for
the bar, take chamber, engage himself to sit at the foot of a
learn pundit, and spend a season in London. he there find that
all his aptitude incline he to the life of an artist, and he
determine to live by paint. with this object he retire to
Milan, and have himself rig out for Rome. as a painter he might
have earn his bread, for he want only diligence to excel; but
when at Rome his mind be carry away by other thing: he soon
write home for money, say that he have be convert to the
Mother Church, that he be already an acolyte of the Jesuits, and
that he be about to start with other to Palestine on a mission
for convert Jews. he do go to Judea, but be unable to
convert the Jews, be convert by they. he again write home, to
say that Moses be the only giver of perfect law to the world,
that the coming of the true Messiah be at hand, that great thing
be do in Palestine, and that he have meet one of the family of
Sidonis, a most remarkable man, who be now on his way to Western
Europe, and whom he have induce to deviate from his route with the
object of call at the Stanhope villa. Ethelbert then express
his hope that his mother and sister would listen to this wonderful
prophet. his father he know could not do so from pecuniary
consideration. this Sidonia, however, do not take so strong a
fancy to he as another of that family once do to a young English
nobleman. at least he provide he with no hope of gold as large as
lion; so that the Judaised Ethelbert be again oblige to draw on
the revenue of the Christian Church.
it be needless to tell how the father swear that he would send no
more money and receive no Jew; nor how Charlotte declare that
Ethelbert could not be leave penniless in Jerusalem; and how 'La
Signora Neroni' resolve to have Sidonia at her foot. the money be
send, and the Jew do come. the Jew do come, but he be not at all
to the taste of 'la Signora'. he be a dirty little old man, and
though he have provide no golden lion, he have, it seem, relieve
young Stanhope's necessity. he positively refuse to leave the
villa till he get a bill from the doctor on his London banker.
Ethelbert do not long remain a Jew. he soon reappear at the
villa without prejudice on the subject of his religion, and with a
firm resolve to achieve fame and fortune as a sculptor. he bring
with he some model which he have originate at Rome, and which
really give much fair promise that his father be induce to go to
further expense in further these view. Ethelbert open an
establishment, or rather take lodging and workshop, at Carrara,
and there spoil much marble, and make some few pretty image.
since that period, now four year ago, he have alternate between
Carrara and the villa, but his sojourn at the workshop become
short and short, and those at the villa long and long.
'twas no wonder; for Carrara be not a spot in which an Englishman
would like to dwell.
when the family start for England he have resolve not to be leave
behind, and with the assistance of his eld sister have earn his
point against his father's wish. it be necessary, he say, that
he should come to England for order. how otherwise be he to bring
his profession to account?
in personal appearance Ethelbert Stanhope be the most singular of
being. he be certainly very handsome. he have his sister
Madeline's eye without their stare, and without their hard cunning
cruel firmness. they be also very much light, and of so light
and clear a blue as to make his face remarkable, if nothing else
do so. on enter a room with he, Ethelbert's blue eye would be
the first thing you would see, and on leave it almost the last
thing you would forget. his light hair be very long and silky,
come down over his coat. his beard have be prepare in the holy
land, and be patriarchal. he never shave, and rarely trim it.
it be glossy, soft, clean, and altogether not unprepossesse. it
be such that lady might desire to reel it off and work it into
their pattern in lieu of floss silk. his complexion be fair and
almost pink, he be small in height, and slender in limb, but
well-make, and his voice be of particular sweetness.manner and
dress he be equally remarkable. he have none of the mauvaise honte
of an Englishman. he require no introduction to make himself
agreeable to any person. he habitually address stranger, lady
as well as man, without any such formality, and in do so never
seem to meet with rebuke. his costume cannot be describe,
because it be so various; but it be always totally opposed in
every principle of colour and construction to the dress of those
with whom he for the time consort.
he be habitually addict to make love to lady, and do so
without scruple of conscience, or any idea that such a practice be
amiss. he have no heart to touch himself, and be literally unaware
that humanity be subject to such infliction. he have not think
much about it; but, have he be ask, would have say, that
ill-treat a lady's heart mean injure her promotion in the
world. his principle therefore forbid he to pay attention to a
girl, if he think any man be present whom it might suit she to
marry. in this manner, his good nature frequently interfere with
his amusement; but he have no other motive in abstain from the
full declaration of love to every girl that please his eye.
Bertie Stanhope, as he be generally call, be, however, popular
with both sex; and with Italians as well as English. his circle
of acquaintance be very large, and embrace people of all sort.
he have not respect for rank, and no aversion to those below he. he
have live on familiar term with english peer, german shopkeeper,
and roman priest. all people be nearly alike to he. he be
above, or rather below, all prejudice. no virtue could charm he,
no vice shock he. he have about he a natural good manner, which
seem to qualify he for the high circle, and yet he be never
out of place in the low. he have no principle, no regard for
other, no self-respect, no desire to be other than a drone in a
hive, if only he could, as a drone, get what honey be sufficient
for he. of honey, in his latter day, it may probably be presage,
that he will have but short allowance.
such be the family of the Stanhopes, who, at this period, suddenly
join themselves to the ecclesiastical circle of Barchester close.
any stranger union, it would be impossible perhaps to conceive. and
it be not as though they all fall down into the cathedral
precinct hitherto unknown and untalked of. in such case no
amalgamation would have be at all probable between the new comer
and either the Proudie set or the grantly set. but such be far
from be the case. the Stanhopes be all know by name in
Barchester, and Barchester be prepared to receive they with open
arm. the doctor be one of the prebendary, one of her rector,
one of her pillar of strength; and be, moreover, count on, as a
sure ally, both by Proudies and Grantlys.
he himself be the brother of one peer, and his wife be the sister
of another--and both these peer be lord of whiggish tendency,
with whom the new bishop have some sort of alliance. this be
sufficient to give to Mr Slope high hope that he might enlist Dr
Stanhope on his side, before his enemy could out-manoeuvre he.
on the other hand, the old dean have many many year ago, in the
day of the doctor's clerical energy, be instrumental in
assist he in his view as to preferment; and many many year
ago also, the two doctor, Stanhope and Grantly, have, as young
parson, be joyous together in the common room of Oxford. Dr
grantly, consequently, do not doubt but that the new comer would
range himself under his banner.
Little do any of they dream of what ingredient the Stanhope
family be now compose.
CHAPTER X
MRS PROUDIE's reception--COMMENCED
the bishop and his wife have only spend three or four day in
Barchester on the occasion of their first visit. his lordship have,
as we have see, take his seat on his throne; but his demeanour
there, into which it have be his intention to infuse much
hierarchical dignity, have be a good deal disarrange by the
audacity of his chaplain's sermon. he have hardly dare to look his
clergy in the face, and to declare by the severity of his
countenance that in truth he mean all that his factotum be say
on his behalf; nor yet do he dare throw Mr Slope over, and show to
those around he that he be no party to the sermon, and would
resent it.
he have accordingly bless his people in a shambling manner, not at
all to his own satisfaction, and have walk back to his palace with
his mind very doubtful as to what he would say to his chaplain on
the subject. he do not remain long in doubt. he have hardly doff
his lawn when the partner of all his toil enter his study, and
exclaim even before she have seat herself--
'Bishop, do you ever hear a more sublime, more spirit-move, more
appropriate discourse than that?'
'well, my love; ha-hum-he!' the bishop do not know what to say.
'I hope, my lord, you donot mean to say you disapprove?'
there be a look about the lady's eye which do not admit of my
lord's disapprove at that moment. he feel that if he intend to
disapprove, it must be now or never; but he also feel that it could
not be now. it be not in he to say to the wife of his bosom that
Mr Slope's sermon be ill-time, impertinent and vexatious.
'no, no,' reply the bishop. 'no, I cannot say I disapprove--a very
clever sermon and very well intend, and I dare say will do a
great deal of good.' this last praise be add, see that what
he have already say by no mean satisfy Mrs Proudie.
'I hope it will,' say she. 'I be sure it be well deserve. do
you ever in your life, bishop, hear anything so like play-act as
the way in which Mr Harding sing the litany? I shall beg Mr Slope
to continue a course of sermon on the subject till all that be
alter. we will have at any rate, in our cathedral, a decent,
godly, modest morning service. there must be no more play-act
here now;' and so the lady ring for lunch.
this bishop know more about cathedral and dean, and precentor
and church service than his wife do, and also more of the
bishop's power. but he think it well at present to let the
subject drop.
'my dear,' say he, 'I think we must go back to London on Tuesday.
I find that my staying here will be very inconvenient to the
Government.'
the bishop know that to this proposal his wife would not object;
and he also feel that by thus retreat from the ground of battle,
the heat of the fight might be get over in his absence.
'Mr Slope will remain here, of course,' say the lady.
'oh, of course,' say the bishop.
thus, after less than a week's sojourn in his palace, do the
bishop fly from Barchester; nor do he return to it for two month,
the London season be then over. during that time Mr Slope be
not idle, but he do not again assay to preach in the cathedral. in
answer to Mrs Proudie's letter, advise a course of sermon, he
have plead that he would at any rate wish to put off such an
undertaking till she be there to hear they.
he have employ his time in consolidate a Proudie and Slope
party--or rather a Slope and Proudie party, and he have not employ
his time in vain. he do not meddle with the dean and chapter,
except by give they little teasing intimation of the bishop's
wish about this and the bishop's feeling about that, in a manner
which be to they sufficiently annoying, but which they could not
resent. he preach once or twice in a distant church in the
suburb of the city, but make no allusion to the cathedral service.
he commence the establishment of the 'Bishop of Barchester's
Sabbath-day school,' give notice of a propose 'Bishop of
Barchester Young Men's Sabbath Evening Lecture Room,'--and write
three or four letter to the manager of the Barchester branch
railway, inform he how anxious the bishop be that the Sunday
train should be discontinue.
at the end of two month, however, the bishop and the lady
reappear; and as a happy harbinger of their return, herald
their advent by the promise of an evening party on the large
scale. the ticket of invitation be send out from London--they
be date from Bruton Street, and be dispatch by the odious
Sabbath-break railway, in a huge brown paper parcel to Mr Slope.
everybody call himself a gentleman, or herself a lady, within
the city of Barchester, and a circle of two mile round it, be
include. ticket be send to all the diocesan clergy, and also to
many other person of priestly note, of whose absence the bishop,
or at least the bishop's wife, feel tolerably confident. it be
intended, however, to be a thronged and noticeable affair, and
preparation be make for receive some hundred.
and now there arise considerable agitation among the Grantleyites
whether or not they would attend the bidding. the first feeling
with they all be to send the brief excuse both for themselves
and their wife and daughter. but by degree policy prevail over
passion. the archdeacon perceive that he would be make a false
step if he allow the cathedral clergy to give the bishop just
ground of umbrage. they all meet in conclave and agree to go. the
old dean would crawl in, if it be but for half an hour. the
chancellor, treasurer, archdeacon, prebendary, and minor canon
would all go, and would take their wife. Mr Harding be especially
bid to go, resolve in his heart to keep himself remove from
Mrs Proudie. and Mrs Bold be determined to go, though assure by
her father that there be no necessity for such a sacrifice on her
part. when all Barchester be to be there, neither Eleanor nor Mary
Bold understand why they should stay away. have they not be
invite separately? and have not a separate little note from the
chaplain couch in the most respectful language, be enclose
with the huge episcopal card?
and the Stanhopes would be there, one and all. even the lethargic
mother would so far bestir herself on such an occasion. they have
only just arrive. the card be at the residence wait for they.
no one in Barchester have see they; and what well opportunity
could they have of show themselves to the Barchester world? some
few old friend, such as the archdeacon and his wife, have call,
and have find the doctor and his eld daughter; but the elite of
the family be not yet know.
the doctor indeed wish in his heart to prevent the signora from
accept the bishop's invitation; but she herself have fully
determine that she would accept it. if her father be ashamed of
have his daughter carry into a bishop's palace, she have no such
feeling.
'indeed, I shall,' she say to her sister who have greatly
endeavour to dissuade she, by say that the company would
consist wholly of parson and parson' wife. 'parson, I suppose,
be much the same as other man, if you strip they of their black
coat; and as to their wife, I dare say they willnot trouble I. you
may tell papa I donot mean to be leave at home.'
Papa be tell, and feel that he could do nothing but yield. he also
feel that it be useless of he now to be ashamed of his child.
such as they be, they have become such under his auspex; as he
have make his bed, so he must lie upon it; as he have sow his seed,
so must he reap his corn. he do not indeed utter such reflection
in such language, but such be the gist of his thought. it be not
because Madeline be a cripple that he shrink from see she make
one of the bishop's guest; but because he know that she would
practise her accustomed lur, and behave herself in a way that
could not fail of be distasteful to the propriety of
Englishwomen. these thing have annoy but not shock he in
Italy. there they have shock no one; but here in Barchester, here
among his fellow parson, he be ashamed that they should be see.
such have be his feeling, but he repress they. what if his
brother clergyman be shock! they could not take it from his
preferment because the manner of his married daughter be too
free.
La Signora Neroni have, at any rate, no fear that she would shock
anybody. her ambition be to create a sensation, to have parson at
her foot, see that the manhood of Barchester consist mainly of
parson, and to send, if possible, every parson's wife home with a
green fit of jealousy. none could be too old for she, and hardly
any too young. none too sanctify, and none too worldly. she be
quite prepared to entrap the bishop himself, and then to turn up
her nose at the bishop's wife. she do not doubt of success, for
she have always succeed; but one thing be absolutely necessary,
she must secure the entire use of a sofa.
the card send to Dr and Mrs Stanhope and family, have be send in
an envelope, have on the cover Mr Slope's name. the signora soon
learn that Mrs Proudie be not yet at the palace, and that the
chaplain be manage everything. it be much more in her line to
apply to he than to the lady, and she accordingly write to he the
prettiest little billet in the world. in five line she explain
everything, declare how impossible it be for she not to be
desirous to make the acquaintance of such person as the bishop of
Barchester and his wife, and she might add also of Mr Slope,
depict her own grievous state, and conclude by be assure
that Mrs Proudie would forgive her extreme hardihood in petitioning
to be allow to be carry to a sofa. she then enclose one of her
beautiful card. in return she receive as polite an answer from Mr
Slope--a sofa should be keep in the large drawing-room, immediately
at the top of the grand stair, especially for her use.
and now the day of the party have arrive. the bishop and his wife
come down from town, only on the morning of the eventful day, as
behove such great people to do; but Mr Slope have toil day and
night to see that everything should be in right order. there have
be much to do. no company have be see in the palace since
heaven know when. new furniture have be require, new pot and
pan, new cup and saucer, new dish and plate. Mrs Proudie have
first declare that she would condescend to nothing so vulgar as
eat and drink; but Mr Slope have talk, or rather write she
out of economy!--bishop should be give to hospitality, and
hospitality mean eat and drink. so the supper be concede;
the guest, however, be to stand as they consume it.
there be four room open into each other on the first floor of
the house, which be denominate the drawing-room, the
reception-room, and Mrs Proudie's boudoir. in olden day one of
these have be Bishop Grantly's bed-room, and another his common,
sit-room and study. the present bishop, however, have be move
down into a back parlour, and have be give to understand that he
could very well receive his clergy in the dining-room, should they
arrive in too large a flock to be admit to his small sanctum. he
have be unwilling to yield, but after a short debate have yield.
Mrs Proudie's heart beat high as she inspect her suite of room.
they be really very magnificent, or at least would be so by
candlelight; and they have nevertheless be get up with commendable
economy. large room when full of people, and full of light look
well, because they be large, and be full, and be light. small
room be those which require costly fitting and rich furniture.
Mrs Proudie know this, and make the most of it; she have therefore a
huge gas lamp with a dozen burner hang from each of the
ceiling.
People be to arrive at ten, supper be to last from twelve to
one, and at half-past one everybody be to be go. carriage be
to come in at the gate in the town and depart at the gate outside.
they be desire to take up at a quarter before one. it be
manage excellently, and Mr Slope be invaluable.
at half-past nine the bishop and his wife and their three daughter
enter the great reception-room, and very grand and very solemn
they be. Mr Slope be down-stair give the last order about
the wine. he well understand that curate and country vicar with
their belonging do not require so generous an article as the
dignitary of the close. there be a useful gradation in such
thing, and Marsala at 20 a dozen do very well for the exterior
supplementary table in the corner.
'Bishop,' say the lady, as his lordship sit himself down, 'donot
sit on that sofa, if you please; it be to be keep separate for a
lady.'
the bishop jump up and seat himself on a cane-bottom chair.
'a lady?' he inquire meekly; 'do you mean one particular lady, my
dear?'
'yes, bishop, one particular lady,' say his wife, disdain to
explain.
'she have get no leg, papa,' say the young daughter, titter.
'no leg!' say the bishop, open his eye.
'Nonsense, Netta, what stuff you talk,' say Olivia. 'she have get
leg, but she cannot use they. she have always to be keep lie down,
and three or four man carry she about everywhere.'
'law, how odd!' say Augusta. 'always carry about by four man!
Ibe quite sure I wouldnot like it. be I right behind, mama? I feel
as if I be open;' and she turn she back to her anxious parent.
'open! to be sure you be,' say she, 'and a yard of petticoat
string hang out. I donot know why I pay such high wage to Mrs
Richards, if she cannot take the trouble to see whether or no you
be fit to be look at,' and Mrs Proudie poke the string here,
and twitch the dress there, and give her daughter a shove and a
shake, and then pronounce it all right.
'but,' rejoin the bishop, who be die with curiosity about the
mysterious lady and her leg, 'who be it that be to have the sofa?
what be her name, Netta?'
a thunder rap at the front door interrupt the conversation.
Mrs Proudie stand up and shake herself gently, and touch her cap
on each side as she look in the mirror. each of the girl stand
on tiptoe, and re-arrange the bow on their bosom; and Mr Slope
rush up stair three step at a time.
'but who be it, Netta?' whisper the bishop to his young
daughter.
'La Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni,' whisper back the daughter;
'and mind you donot let any one sit upon the sofa.'
'La Signora Madeline Vicinironi!' mutter, to himself, the
bewildered prelate. have he be tell that the Begum of Oude be to
be there, or Queen Pomara of the Western Isles, he could not have
be more astonished. La Signora Madeline Vicinironi, who, have
no leg to stand on, have bespeak a sofa in his drawing-room!--who
could she be? he however could now make no further inquiry, as Dr
and Mrs Stanhope be announce. they have be send on out of the
way a little before the time, in order that the signora might have
plenty of time to get herself conveniently pack into the
carriage.
the bishop be all smile for the prebendary's wife, and the
bishop's wife be all smile for the prebendary. Mr Slope be
present, and be delighted to make the acquaintance of one of
whom he have hear so much. the doctor bow very low, and then
look as though he could not return the compliment as regard Mr
Slope, of whom, indeed, he have hear nothing. the doctor, in spite
of his long absence, know an english gentleman when he see he.
and then the guest come in shoal; Mr and Mrs Quiverful and their
three grown daughter. Mr and Mrs Chadwick and their three
daughter. the burly chancellor and his wife and clerical son from
Oxford. the meagre little doctor without encumbrance. Mr Harding
with Eleanor and Miss Bold. the dean lean on a gaunt spinster,
his only child now live with he, a lady very learn in stone,
fern, plant, and vermin, and who have write a book about petal.
a wonderful woman in her way be Miss Trefoil. Mr Finnie, the
attorney, with his wife, be to be see, much to the dismay of many
who have never meet he in a drawing-room before. the five Barchester
doctor be all there, and old Scalpen, the retire apothecary and
toothdrawer, who be first teach to consider himself as belong
to the high order by the receipt of the bishop's card. then come
the archdeacon and his wife, with their eld daughter Griselda, a
slim pale retire girl of seventeen, who keep close to her mother,
and look out on the world with quiet watchful eye, one who give
promise of much beauty when time should have ripen it.
and so the room become full, and knot be form, and every new
comer pay his respect to my lord and pass on, not presume to
occupy too much of the great man's attention. the archdeacon shake
hand very heartily with Dr Stanhope, and Mrs Grantly seat
herself by the doctor's wife. and Mrs Proudie move about with well
regulated grace, measure out the quantity of she favour to the
quality of her guest, just as Mr Slope have be do with the
wine. but the sofa be still empty, and five-and-twenty lady and
five gentleman have be courteously warn off it by the mindful
chaplain.
'why donot she come?' say the bishop to himself. his mind be so
preoccupy with the signora, that he hardly remember how to
behave himself en bishop.
at last a carriage dash up to the hall step with a very
different manner of approach from that of any other vehicle that
have be there that evening. a perfect commotion take place. the
doctor, who hear it as he be stand in the drawing-room, know
that his daughter be come, and retire to the furth corner,
where he might not see her entrance. Mrs Proudie park herself up,
feel that some important piece of business be in hand. the
bishop be instinctively aware, that La Signora Vicinironi be come
at last, and Mr Slope hurry to the hall to give his assistance.
he be, however, nearly knock down and trample on by the cortege
that he encounter on the hall step. he get himself pick up as
well as he could, and follow the cortege up stair. the signora
be carry head foremost, her head be the care of her brother
and an italian man-servant who be accustom to the work; her foot
be in the care of the lady's maid and the lady's italian page;
and Charlotte Stanhope follow to see that all be do with due
grace and decorum. in this manner they climb easily into the
drawing-room, and a broad way through the crowd have be open,
the signora rest safely on her couch. she have send a servant
beforehand to learn whether it be a right or a left hand sofa, for
it require that she should dress accordingly, particularly as
regard her bracelet.
and very become her dress be. it be white velvet, without any
other garniture than rich white lace work with pearl across her
bosom, and the same round the armlet of her dress. across her brow
she wear a band of red velvet, on the centre of which shine a
magnificent Cupid in mosaic, the tint of whose wing be of the
most lovely azure, and the colour of his chubby cheek the clear
pink. on the one arm which her position require she to expose she
wear three magnificent bracelet, each of different stone. beneath
she on the sofa, and over the cushion and head of it, be spread a
crimson silk mantle or shawl, which go under her whole body and
conceal her foot. dress as she be and look as she do, so
beautiful and yet so motionless, with the pure brilliancy of her
white dress bring out and strengthen by the colour beneath it,
with that lovely head, and those large bold bright star eye, it
be impossible that either man or woman should do other than look
at she.
neither man nor woman for some minute do do other.
her bearer too be worthy of note. the three servant be
italian, and though perhaps not peculiar in their own country, be
very much so in the palace at Barchester. the man, especially
attract notice, and create a doubt in the mind of some whether
he be a friend or a domestic. the same doubt be feel as to
Ethelbert. the man be attire in a loose-fitting common black
cloth morning coat. he have a jaunty well-please clean face, on
which no atom of beard appear, and he wear round his neck a loose
black silk neckhandkerchief. the bishop assay to make he a bow,
but the man, who be well-train, take no notice of he, and
walk out of the room, quite at his ease, follow by the woman
and the boy.
Ethelbert Stanhope be dress in light blue from head to foot. he
have on the loose possible blue coat, cut square like a shooting
coat, and very short. it be line with silk of azure blue. he have
on a blue satin waistcoat, a blue handkerchief which be fasten
beneath his throat with a coral ring, and very loose blue trouser
which almost conceal his foot. his soft glossy beard be soft
and more glossy than ever.
the bishop, who have make one mistake, think that he also be a
servant, and therefore try to make way for he to pass. but
Ethelbert soon correct the error.
CHAPTER XI
MRS PROUDIE's RECEPTION--CONCLUDED
'Bishop of Barchester, I presume?' say Bertie Stanhope, put
out his hand, frankly; 'I be delighted to make your acquaintance.
we be in rather close quarter here, a'nt we?'
in truth they be. they have be crowd up behind the head of the
sofa: the bishop in wait to receive his guest, and the other in
carry she; and they now have hardly room to move themselves.
the bishop give his hand quickly, and make a little studied bow,
and be delighted to make--. he couldnot go on, for he do not know
whether his friend be a signor, or a count, or a prince.
'my sister really put you all to great trouble,' say Bertie.
'not at all!' the bishop be delighted to have the opportunity of
welcome the Signora Vicinironi--so at least he say--and
attempt to force his way round to the front of the sofa. he have,
at any rate, learn that his strange guest be brother and
sister. the man, he presume, must be Signor Vicinironi--or count,
or prince, as it might be. it be wonderful what good English he
speak. there be just a twang of foreign accent, and no more.
'do you like Barchester on the whole?' ask Bertie.
the bishop, look dignify, say that he do like Barchester.
'youhave not be here very long, I believe,' say Bertie.
'no--not long,' say the bishop, and try again to make his way
between the back of the sofa and a heavy rector, who be star
over it at the grimace of the signora.
'you benot a bishop before, be you?'
Dr Proudie explain that this be the first diocese he have hold.
'ah--I think so,' say Bertie; 'but you be change about
sometimes, a'nt you?'
'translation be occasionally make,' say Dr Proudie; 'but not so
frequently as in former day.
'theyhave cut they all down to pretty nearly the same figure,
havenot they?' say Bertie.
to this the bishop could not bring himself to make any answer, but
again try to move the rector.
'but the work, I suppose, be different?' continue Bertie. 'be
there much to do here at Barchester?' this be say exactly in the
tone that a young Admiralty clerk might use in ask the same
question of a brother acolyte in the Treasury.
'the work of a bishop of the Church of England,' say Dr Proudie,
with considerable dignity, 'be not easy. the responsibility which
he have to bear be very great indeed.'
'be it?' say Bertie, open wide his wonderful blue eye. 'well;
I never be afraid of responsibility. I once think of be a
bishop myself.'
'have think of be a bishop?' say Dr Proudie, much amazed.
'that be, a parson--a parson first, you know, and a bishop
afterwards. if I have once begin, Iwould have stick to it. but, on the
whole, I like the Church of Rome the good.'
the bishop could not discuss the point, so he remain silent.
'now, therebe my father,' continue Bertie; 'he havenot stick to it.
I fancy he donot like say the same thing so often. by the bye,
bishop, have you see my father?'
the bishop be more amazed than ever. have he see his father? 'no,'
he reply; he have not yet have the pleasure; he hop he might;
and, as he say so, he resolve to bear heavy on that fat,
immoveable rector, if ever he have the power of do so.
'hebe in the room somewhere,' say Bertie, 'and hewill turn up soon.
by the bye, do you know much about the Jews?'
at last the bishop see a way out. 'I beg your pardon,' say he;
'but Ibe force to go round the room.'
'well--I believe Iwill follow in your wake,' say Bertie. 'terribly
hot, benot it?' this he address to the fat rector with whom he
have bring himself into the close contact. 'theyhave get this
sofa into the bad possible part of the room; suppose we move it.
take care, Madeline.'
the sofa have certainly be so place that those who be behind it
find great difficulty in get out;--there be but a narrow
gangway, which one person could stop. this be a bad arrangement,
and one which Bertie think it might be well to improve.
'take care, Madeline,' say he; and turn to the fat rector,
add, 'just help I with a slight push.'
the rector's weight be rest on the sofa, and unwittingly lent
all its impetus to accelerate and increase the motion which Bertie
intentionally originate. the sofa rush from its mooring, and
run half-way into the middle of the room. Mrs Proudie be stand
with Mr Slope in front of the signora, and have be try to be
condescend and sociable; but she be not in the very good of
temper; for she find that whenever she speak to the lady, the
lady reply by speak to Mr Slope. Mr Slope be a favourite, no
doubt; but Mrs Proudie have no idea of be less thought of than
the chaplain. she be begin to be stately, stiff, and offend,
when unfortunately the castor of the sofa catch itself in her lace
train, and carry away there be no saying how much of her
garniture. gather be hear to go, stitch to crack, plait to
fly open, flounce be see to fall, and breadth to expose
themselves;--a long ruin of rent lace disfigure the carpet, and
still clung to the vile wheel on which the sofa move.
so, when a granite battery be raise, excellent to the eye of
warfare man, be its strength and symmetry admire. it be the work
of year. its neat embrasure, its finished parapet, its casemate
story, show all the skill of modern science. but, anon, a small
spark be apply to the treacherous fusee--a cloud of dust arise
to the heaven--and then nothing be to be see but dirt and dust
and ugly fragment.
we know what be the wrath of Juno when her beauty be despise. we
know too what storm of passion even celestial mind can yield. as
Juno may have look at Paris on Mount Ida, so do Mrs Proudie look
on Ethelbert Stanhope when he push the leg of the sofa into her
train.
'oh, you idiot, Bertie!' say the signora, see what have be
do, and what be the consequence.
'Idiot,' re-echo Mrs Proudie, as though the word be not half
strong enough to express the require meaning; 'Iwill let he know
-;' and then look round to learn, at a glance, the bad, she
see that at present it behove she to collect the scatter debris
of her dress.
Bertie, when he see what he have do, rush over the sofa, and
throw himself on one knee before the offend lady. his object,
doubtless, be to liberate the torn lace from the castor; but he
look as though he be implore pardon from a goddess.
'unhand it, sir!' say Mrs Proudie. from what scrap of dramatic
poetry she have extract the word cannot be say; but it must have
rest on her memory, and now seem opportunely dignified for the
occasion.
'Iwill fly to the loom of the fairy to repair the damage, if
youwill only forgive I,' say Ethelbert, still on his knee.
'unhand it, sir!' say Mrs Proudie, with redoubled emphasis, and
all but furious wrath. this allusion to the fairy be a direct
mockery, and intend to turn she into ridicule. so at least it
seem to she. 'unhand it, sir!' she almost scream.
'itbe not I; itbe the cursed sofa,' say Bertie, look
imploringly in her face, and hold both his hand to show that he
be not touch her belonging, but still remain on his knee.
Hereupon the signora laugh; not loud, indeed, but yet audibly.
and as the tigress bereft of her young will turn with equal anger
on any within reach, so do Mrs Proudie turn upon her female guest.
'Madam,' she say--and it be beyond the power of prose to tell of
the fire that flash from her eye.
by this time the bishop, and Mr Slope, and her three daughter be
around she, and have collect together the wide ruin of her
magnificence. the girl fall into circular rank behind their
mother, and thus follow she and carry out the fragment, they
leave the reception-room in a manner not altogether devoid of
dignity. Mrs Proudie have to retire to re-array herself.
as soon as the constellation have sweep by, Ethelbert rise from his
knee, and turn with mock anger to the fat rector, say: 'after
all it be your doing, sir--not mine. but perhaps you be wait
for preferment, and so I bear it.'
Whereupon there be a laugh against the fat rector, in which both
the bishop and the chaplain join; and thus thing get themselves
again into order.
'oh, my lord, I be so sorry for this accident,' say the signora,
put out her hand so as to force the bishop to take it. 'my
brother be so thoughtless. pray sit down, and let I have the
pleasure of make your acquaintance. though I be so poor a
creature as to want a sofa, I be not so selfish as to require it
all.' Madeline could always dispose herself so as to make room for
a gentleman, though, as she declare, the crinoline of her lady
friend be much too bulky to be so accommodate.
'it be solely for the pleasure of meet you that I have have
myself drag here,' she continue. 'of course, with your
occupation, one cannot even hope that you should have time to come
to we, that is, in the way of call. and at your English
dinner-party all be so dull and so stately. do you know, my lord,
that in come to England my only consolation have be the thought
that I should know you;' and she look at he with the look of a
she-devil.
the bishop, however, think that she look very like an angel,
and accept the proffered seat, sit down beside she. he utter
some platitude as to this deep obligation for the trouble she have
take, and wonder more and more who she be.
'of course you know my sad story?' she continue.
the bishop donot know a word of it. he know, however, or think
he know, that she couldnot walk into a room like other people, and
so make the most of that. he put on a look of ineffable distress,
and say that he be aware how God have afflict she.
the signora just touch the corner of her eye with the most
lovely of pocket-handkerchief. yes, she say--she have be very
sorely try--try, she think, beyond the common endurance of
humanity; but while her child be leave to she, everything be leave.
'oh! my lord,' she exclaim, 'you must see the infant--the last
bud of a wondrous tree: you must let a mother hope that you will
lay your holy hand on her innocent head, and consecrate she for
female virtue. may I hope it?' say she, look into the bishop's
eye, and touch the bishop's arm with her hand.
the bishop be but a man, and say she might. after all, what be
it but a request that he would confirm her daughter?--a request,
indeed, very unnecessary to make, as he should do so as a matter of
course, if the young lady come forward in the usual way.
'the blood of Tiberius,' say the signora, in all but a whisper;
'the blood of Tiberius flow in her vein. she be the last of the
Neros!'
the bishop have hear of the last of the Visigoths, and have float
in his brain some indistinct idea of the last of the Mohicans, but
to have the last of the Neros thus bring before he for a
blessing be very staggering. still he like the lady: she have a
proper way of thinking, and talk with more propriety than her
brother. but who be they? it be now quite clear that that blue
madman with the silky beard be not a Prince Vicinironi. the lady
be marry, and be of course one of the Vicinironis by right of
the husband. so the bishop go on learn.
'when will you see she?' say the signora with a start.
'see whom?' say the bishop.
'my child,' say the mother.
'what be the young lady's age?' ask the bishop.
'she be just seven,' say the signora.
'oh,' say the bishop, shake his head; 'she be much too
young--very much too young.'
'but in sunny Italy you know, we do not count by year,' and the
signora give the bishop one of her very sweetest smile.
'but indeed, she be a great deal too young,' persist the bishop;
'we never confirm before--'
'but you might speak to she; you might let she hear from your
consecrated lip, that she be not a castaway because she be a
Roman; that she may be a Nero and yet a Christian; that she may owe
her black lock and dark cheek to the blood of the pagan Caesars,
and yet herself be a child of grace; you will tell she this, willnot
you, my friend?'
the friend say he would, and ask if the child could say she
catechism.
'no,' say the signora, 'I would not allow she to learn lesson
such as those in a land ride by priest, and pollute by the
idolatry of Rome. it be here, here in Barchester, that she must
first be teach to lisp those holy word. oh, that you could be her
instructor!'
now, Dr Proudie certainly like the lady, but, see that he be a
bishop, it be not probable that he be go to instruct a little
girl in the first rudiment of her catechism; so he say hewould send
a teacher.
'but you will see she yourself, my lord?'
the bishop say he would, but where should he call.
'at papa's house,' say the signora, with an air of some little
surprise at the question.
the bishop actually want the courage to ask she who be her papa;
so he be force at last to leave she without fathom her
mystery. Mrs Proudie, in her second well, have now return to the
room, and her husband think it as well that he should not remain
in too close conversation with the lady whom his wife appear to
hold in such slight esteem. presently he come across his young
daughter.
'Netta,' say he, 'do you know who be the father of that Signora
Vicinironi?'
'it benot Vicinironi, papa,' say Netta; 'but Vesey Neroni, and
shebe Dr Stanhope's daughter. but I must go and do the civil to
Griselda grantly; I declare nobody have speak a word to the poor
girl this evening.
Dr Stanhope! Dr Vesey Stanhope! Dr Vesey Stanhope's daughter, of
whose marriage with a dissolute italian scamp he now remember to
have hear something! and that impertinent blue cub who have
examine he as to his episcopal bearing be old Stanhope's son,
and the lady who have entreat he to come and teach her child the
catechism be old Stanhope's daughter! the daughter of one of his
own prebendary! as these thing flash across his mind, he be
nearly as angry as his wife have be. nevertheless he could not but
own that the mother of the last of the Neros be an agreeable
woman.
Dr Proudie trip out into the adjoining room, in which be
congregate a crowd of Grantlyite clergyman, among whom the
archdeacon be stand pre-eminent, while the old dean be sit
nearly bury in a huge armchair by the fire-place. the bishop be
very anxious to be gracious, and, if possible, to diminish the
bitterness which his chaplain have occasion. let Mr Slope do the
fortiter in re, he himself would pour in the suaviter in modo.
'pray donot stir, Mr Dean, pray donot stir,' he say, as the old
man essay to get up; 'I take it as a great kindness, your come
to such an omnium gatherum as this. but we have hardly get settle
yet, and Mrs Proudie have not be able to see her friend as she
would wish to do. well, Mr Archdeacon, after all, we have not be
so hard upon you at Oxford.'
'no,' say the archdeacon; 'youhave only draw our tooth and cut out
our tongue; youhave allow we still to breathe and swallow.'
'ha, ha, ha!' laugh the bishop; 'itbe not quite so easy to cut
out the tongue of an Oxford magnate,--and as for teeth,--ha, ha,
ha! why, in the way wehave leave the matter, itbe very odd if the
head of college donot have their own way quite as fully as when
the hebdomadal board be in all its glory; what do you say, Mr
Dean?'
'an old man, my lord, never like change,' say the dean.
'you must have be sad bungler if it be so,' say the archdeacon;
'and indeed, to tell the truth, I think you have bungle it. at any
rate, you must own this; you have not do the half what you
boast you would do.'
'now, as regard your system of professors--' begin the chancellor
slowly. he be never destine to get beyond the beginning.
'talk of professor,' say a soft clear voice close behind the
chancellor's elbow; 'how much you englishman might learn from
Germany; only you be all too proud.'
the bishop look round, perceive that abominable young Stanhope
have pursue he. the dean star at he, as though he be some
unearthly apparition; so also do two or three prebendary and
minor canon. the archdeacon laugh.
'the german professor be man of learn,' say Mr Harding,
'but--'
'german professor!' groan out the chancellor, as though his
nervous system have receive a shock which nothing but a week of
Oxford air would cure.
'yes,' continue Ethelbert; not at all understanding why a german
professor should be contemptible in the eye of an Oxford don. 'not
but what the name be well earn at Oxford. in Germany the
professor do teach; at Oxford, I believe they only profess to do
so, and sometimes not even that. youwill have those university of
yours about your ear soon, if you donot consent to take a lesson
from Germany.'
there be no answer this. dignified clergyman of sixty year of
age could not condescend to discuss such a matter with a young man
with such clothe and such a beard.
'have you get good water out at Plumstead, Mr Archdeacon?' say the
bishop by way of change the conversation.
'pretty good,' say the archdeacon.
'but by no mean so good as his wine, my lord,' say a witty minor
canon.
'nor so generally use,' say another; 'that be for inward
application.'
'ha, ha, ha!' laugh the bishop, 'a good cellar of wine be a very
comfortable thing in a house.'
'your german professor, sir, prefer beer, I believe,' say the
sarcastic little meagre prebendary.
'they donot think much of either,' say Ethelbert; 'and that
perhaps account for their superiority. now the jewish professor -'
the insult be become too deep for the spirit of Oxford to
endure, so the archdeacon walk off one way and the chancellor
another, follow by their disciple, and the bishop and the young
reformer be leave together on the hearth-rug.
'I be a Jew once myself,' say Bertie.
the bishop be determine not to stand another examination, or be
lead on any term into Palestine; so he again remember that he have
to do something very particular, and leave young Stanhope with the
dean. the dean do not get the bad of it, for Ethelbert give he
a true account of his remarkable doing in the Holy Land.
'oh, Mr Harding,' say the bishop, overtake the ci-devant warden;
'I want to say one word about the hospital. you know, of course,
that it be to be fill up.'
Mr Harding's heart beat a little, and he say that he have hear so.
'of course,' continue the bishop; 'there can be only one man whom
I could wish to see in that situation. I donot know what your own
view may be, Mr Harding--'
'they be very simply tell, my lord,' say the other; 'to take the
place if it be offer I, and to put up with the want of it should
another man get it.'
the bishop profess himself delight to hear it; Mr Harding might
be quite sure that no other man would get it. there be some few
circumstance which would in a slight degree change the nature of
the duty. Mr Harding be probably aware of this, and would,
perhaps, not object to discuss the matter with Mr Slope. it be a
subject to which Mr Slope have give a good deal of attention.
Mr Harding feel, he know not why, oppress and annoyed. what could
Mr Slope do to he? he know that there be to be change. the
nature of they must be communicate to the warden through somebody,
and through whom so naturally as the bishop's chaplain. 'twas thus
that he try to argue himself back to an easy mind, but in vain.
Mr Slope in the mean time have take the seat which the bishop have
vacate on the signora's sofa, and remain with that lady till it
be time to marshal the folk to supper. not with contented eye have
Mrs Proudie see this. have not this woman laugh at her distress,
and have not Mr Slope hear it? be she not an intriguing italian
woman, half wife and half not, full of affectation, air, and
impudence? be she not horribly bedizen with velvet and pearl,
with velvet and pearl, too, which have be tear off her back?
above all, do she not pretend to be more beautiful than her
neighbour? to say that Mrs Proudie be jealous would give a wrong
idea of her feeling. she have not the slight desire that Mr
Slope should be in love with herself. but she desire the incense
of Mr Slope's spiritual and temporal service, and do not choose
that they should be turn out of their course to such an object as
Signora Neroni. she consider also that Mr Slope ought in duty to
hate the signora; and it appear from his manner that he be very
far from hat she.
'come, Mr Slope,' she say, sweep by, and look all that she
feel; 'cannot you make yourself useful? do pray take Mrs Grantly
down to supper.'
Mrs Grantly hear and escape. the word be hardly out of Mrs
Proudie's mouth, before the intended victim have stick her hand
through the arm of one of her husband's curate, and save herself.
what would the archdeacon have say have he see she walk down
stair with Mr Slope?
Mr Slope hear also, but be by no mean so obedient as be
expect. indeed, the period of Mr Slope's obedience to Mrs Proudie
be draw to a close. he do not wish yet to break with she, nor
to break with she at all, if it could be avoid. but he intend
to be master in that palace, and as she have make the same
resolution, it be not improbable that they might come to blow.
before leave the signora he arrange a little table before she,
and beg to know what he should bring she. she be quite
indifferent, she say--nothing--anything. it be now she feel the
misery of her position, now that she must be leave alone. well, a
little chicken, some ham, and a glass of champagne.
Mr Slope have to explain, not without blush for his patron, that
there be no champagne.
Sherry would do just as well. and then Mr Slope descend with the
learn Miss Trefoil on his arm. could she tell he, he ask,
whether the fern of Barsetshire be equal to those of Cumberland?
his strong worldly passion be for fern--and before she could
answer he he leave she wedge between the door and the sideboard.
it be fifty minute before she escape, and even then unfed.
'you be not leave we, Mr Slope,' say the watchful lady of the
house, see her slave escape towards the door, with store of
provision hold high above the head of the guest.
Mr Slope explain that the Signora Neroni be in want of her
supper.
'pray, Mr Slope, let her brother take it to she,' say Mrs Proudie,
quite out loud. 'it be out of the question that you should be so
employ. Pray, Mr Slope, oblige I; I be sure Mr Stanhope will
wait upon his sister.'
Ethelbert be most agreeably occupy in the furth corner of the
room, make himself both useful and agreeable to Mrs Proudie's
young daughter.
'I couldnot get out, madam, if Madeline be starve for she
supper,' say he; 'Ibe physically fix, unless I could fly.'
the lady's anger be increase by see that her daughter have go
over to the enemy; and when she see, that in spite of her
remonstrance, in the tooth of her positive order, Mr Slope go
off to the drawing-room, the cup of her indignation run over, and
she could not restrain herself. 'such manner I never see,' she
say, mutter. 'I cannot, and will not permit it;' and then,
after fuss and fume for a few minute, she push her way
through the crowd, and follow Mr Slope.
when she reach the room above, she find it absolutely deserted,
except for the guilty pair. the signora be sit very
comfortably up for her supper, and Mr Slope be lean over she
and administer to her want. they have be discuss the merit
of Sabbath-day school, and the lady suggest that as she could
not possibly go to the child, she might be indulge in the wish
of her heart by have the child bring to she.
'and when shall it be, Mr Slope?' say she.
Mr Slope be save the necessity of commit himself to a promise
by the entry of Mrs Proudie. she sweep close up to the sofa so as
to confront the guilty pair, star full at they for a moment, and
then say as she pass on to the next room, 'Mr Slope, his
lordship be especially desirous of your attendance below; you will
greatly oblige I if you will join he.' and so she stalk on.
Mr Slope mutter something in reply, and prepare to go down
stair. as for the bishop's want he, he know his lady patroness
well enough to take that assertion at what it be worth; but he do
not wish to make himself the hero of a scene, or to become
conspicuous for more gallantry than the occasion require.
'be she always like this?' say the signora.
'yes--always--madam,' say Mrs Proudie, return; 'always the
same--always equally adverse to the impropriety of conduct of every
description;' and she stalk back through the room again,
follow Mr Slope out of the door.
the signora couldnot follow she, or she certainly would have do
so. but she laugh loud, and send the sound of it ring through
the lobby and down the stair after Mrs Proudie's foot. have she
be as active as Grimaldi, she could probably have take no well
revenge.
'but shebe lame, Mrs Proudie, and cannot move. somebody must have
wait upon she.'
'Lame,' say Mrs Proudie; 'Iwould lame she if she belong to I. what
business have she here at all?--such impertinence--such
affectation.'
in the hall and adjacent room all manner of cloaking and shawling
be go on, and the Barchester folk be get themselves go.
Mrs Proudie do she good to smirk at each and every one, as they
make their adieux, but she be hardly successful. her temper have
be try fearfully. by slow degree, the guest go.
'send back the carriage quick,' say Ethelbert, as Dr and Mrs
Stanhope take their departure.
the young Stanhopes be leave to the very last, and an
uncomfortable party they make with the bishop's family. they all
go into the dining-room, and then the bishop observe that the
'lady' be alone in the drawing-room, they follow he up. Mrs
Proudie keep Mr Slope and her daughter in close conversation,
resolve that he should not be indulge, nor they pollute. the
bishop, in mortal dread of Bertie and the Jews, try to converse
with Charlotte Stanhope about the climate of Italy. Bertie and the
signora have not resource but in each other.
'do you get your supper at last, Madeline?' say the impudent or
else mischievous young man.
'oh, yes,' say Madeline; 'Mr Slope be so very kind to bring it
I. I fear, however, he put himself to more inconvenience than I
wish.'
Mrs Proudie look at she, but say nothing. the meaning of she
look might have be translate: 'if ever you find yourself within
these wall again, Iwill give you leave to be as impudent and
affect, and as mischievous as you please.'
at last the carriage return with the three italian servant, and
la Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni be carry out, as she have be
carry in.
the lady of the palace retire to her chamber by no means content
with the result of her first grand party at Barchester.
CHAPTER XII
SLOPE VERSUS HARDING
two or three day after the party, Mr Harding receive a note,
beg he to call on Mr Slope, at the palace, at an early hour
the follow morning. there be nothing uncivil in the
communication, and yet the tone of it be thoroughly displease.
it be as follow:
"my dear Mr Harding, will you favour I by call on I at the
palace to-morrow morning at 9.30am. the bishop wish I to speak
to you touch the hospital. I hope you will excuse my naming so
early an hour. I do so as my time be greatly occupy. if, however,
it be positively inconvenient to you, I will change it to 10. you
will, perhaps, be kind enough to give I a note in reply.
"believe I to be, my dear Mr Harding,
your assured friend, OBH. SLOPE
"the Palace, Monday morning, "20th August, 185-"
Mr Harding neither could nor would believe anything of the sort;
and he think, moreover, that Mr Slope be rather impertinent to
call himself by such a name. his assured friend, indeed! how many
assure friend generally fall to the lot of a man in this world?
and by what process be they make? and how much of such process have
take place as yet between Mr Harding and Mr Slope? Mr Harding
could not help ask himself these question as he read and
re-read the note before he. he answer it, as follow:
"dear Sir,--I will call at the palace to-morrow at 9.30 am as you
desire.
"truly your, S. HARDING"
and on the follow morning, punctually at half-past nine, he
knock at the palace door, and ask for Mr Slope.
the bishop have one small room allot to he on the ground-floor,
and Mr Slope have another. into this latter Mr Harding be show,
and ask to sit down. Mr Slope be not yet there. the ex-warden
stand up at the window look into the garden, and could not help
think how very short a time have pass since the whole of that
house have be open to he, as though he have be a child of the
family, bear and breed in it. he remember how the old servant
use to smile as they open the door to he; how the familiar
butler would say, when he have be absent for a few hour long
than usual: 'a sight of you, Mr Harding, be good for sore eye;'
how the fussy housekeeper would swear that he couldnot have din,
or couldnot have breakfast, or couldnot have lunch. and then,
above all, he remember the pleasant gleam of inward satisfaction
which always spread itself over the old bishop's face, whenever his
friend enter his room.
a tear come into his eye as he reflect that all this be go.
what use would the hospital be to he now? he be alone in the
world, and get old; he would soon, very soon, have to go, and
leave it all, as his dear old friend have gone;--go, and leave the
hospital, and his accustomed place in the cathedral, and his haunt
and pleasure, to young and perhaps wise man, in truth, the time for it
have go by. he feel as though the world be sink from his
foot; as though this, this be the time for he to turn with
confidence to other. 'what,' say he to himself, 'can a man's
religion be worth, if it do not support he against the natural
melancholy of decline year?' and, as he look out through his
dim eye into the bright parterre of the bishop's garden, he
feel that he have the support which he want.
nevertheless, he do not like to be thus keep wait. if Mr Slope
do not really wish to see he at half-past nine o'clock, why force
he to come away from his lodging with his breakfast in his
throat? to tell the truth, it be policy on the part of Mr Slope.
Mr Slope have make up his mind that Mr Harding should either accept
the hospital with abject submission, or else refuse it altogether;
and have calculate that he would probably be more quick to do the
latter, if he could be get to enter upon the subject in all
ill-humour. perhaps Mr Slope be not altogether wrong in his
calculation.
it be nearly ten when Mr Slope hurry into the room, and,
mutter something about the bishop and diocesan duty, shake Mr
Harding's hand ruthlessly, and beg he to be seat.
now the airy superiority which this man assume, do go against the
grain of Mr Harding; and yet he do not know how to resent it. the
whole tendency of his mind and disposition be oppose to any
contra-assumption of grandeur on his own part, and he havenot the
worldly spirit or quickness necessary to put down insolent
pretension by downright and open rebuke, as the archdeacon would
have do. there be nothing for Mr Harding but to submit and he
accordingly do so.
'about the hospital, Mr Harding,' begin Mr Slope, speak of it as
the head of college at Cambridge might speak of some sizarship
which have to be dispose of.
Mr Harding cross one leg over the other, and then one hand over
the other on the top of they, and look Mr Slope in the face; but
he say nothing.
'itbe to be fill up again,' say Mr Slope. Mr Harding say that
he have understand so.
'of course, you know, the income be very much reduced,' continue
Mr Slope. 'the bishop wish to be liberal, and he therefore tell
the government that he think it ought to be put at not less than
L 450. I think on the whole the bishop be right; for though the
service require will not be of a very onerous nature, they will be
more so than they be before. and it be, perhaps, well that the
clergy immediately attach to the cathedral town should be make
comfortable to the extent of the ecclesiastical mean at our
disposal will allow. those be the bishop's idea, and I must say
mine also.'
Mr Harding sit rub one hand on the other, but say not a word.
'so much for the income, Mr Harding. the house will, of course,
remain to the warden as before. it should, however, I think be
stipulate that he should paint inside every seven year, and
outside every three year, and be subject to dilapidation, in the
event of vacate either by death or otherwise. but this be a
matter on which the bishop must yet be consult.'
Mr Harding still rub his hand, and still sit silent, gaze up
into Mr Slope's unprepossesse face.
'then, as to duty,' continue he, 'I believe, if I be rightly
inform, there can hardly be say to have be any duty
hitherto,' and he give a sort of half laugh, as though to pass off
the accusation in the guise of a pleasantry.
Mr Harding think of the happy, easy year he have pass in his
old house; of the wear-out, aged man whom he have succour; of his
good intention; and of his work, which have certainly be of the
light. he think of those thing, doubt for a moment whether
he do or do not deserve the sarcasm. he give his enemy the
benefit of the doubt, and do not rebuke he. he merely observe,
very tranquilly, and perhaps with too much humility, that the
duty of the situation, such as they be, have, he believe, be
do to the satisfaction of the late bishop.
Mr Slope again smile, and this time the smile be intend to
operate against the memory of the late bishop, rather than against
the energy of the ex-warden; and so it be understand by Mr
Harding. the colour rise in his cheek, and he begin to feel very
angry.
'you should be aware, Mr Harding, that thing be a good deal
change in Barchester,' say Mr Slope.
Mr Harding say that he be aware of it. 'and not only in
Barchester, Mr Harding, but in the world at large. it be not only
in Barchester that a new man be carry out new measure and
cast away the useless rubbish of past century. the same thing
be go on throughout the country. work be now require from every
man who receive wage; and they who have superintend the doing
of the work, and the paying of the wage, be bind to see that
this rule be carry out. new man, Mr Harding, be now need, and
be now forthcoming in the church, as well as in other
profession.'
all this be wormwood to our old friend. he have never rat very
high his own ability or activity; but all the feeling of his
heart be with the old clergy, and any antipathy of which his
heart be susceptible, be direct against those new, busy
uncharitable, self-laud man, of whom Mr Slope be so good an
example.
'by no mean,' say Mr Slope. 'the bishop be very anxious that you
should accept the appointment; but he wish you should understand
beforehand what will be the required duty. in the first place, a
Sabbath-day school will be attach to the hospital.'
'what! for the old man?' ask Mr Harding.
'no, Mr Harding, not for the old man, but for the benefit of the
child of such of the poor of Barchester as it may suit. the
bishop will expect that you shall attend this school, and the
teacher shall be under your inspection and care.'
Mr Harding slip his topmost hand off the other, and begin to rub
the calf of the leg which be support.
'as to the old man,' continue Mr Slope, 'and the old woman who be
to form part of the hospital, the bishop be desirous that you shall
have morning and evening service on the premise every Sabbath, and
one week-day service; that you shall preach to they once at least
on Sundays; and that the whole hospital be always collect for
morning and evening prayer. the bishop think that this will render
it unnecessary that any separate seat in the cathedral should be
reserve for the hospital inmate.'
Mr Slope pause, but Mr Harding still say nothing.
'indeed, it would be difficult to find seat for the woman; and, on
the whole, Mr Harding, I may as well say at once, that for people
of that class the cathedral service do not appear to I to be the
most useful,--even if it be so for any class of people.'
'we will not discuss that, if you please,' say Mr Harding.
'I be not desirous of do so; at least, not at the present
moment. I hope, however, you fully understand the bishop's wish
about the new establishment of the hospital; and if, as I do not
doubt, I shall receive from you an assurance that you will accord
with his lordship's view, it will give I very great pleasure to
be the bearer from his lordship to you of the presentation of the
appointment.'
'but if I disagree with his lordship's view?' ask Mr Harding.
'but I hope you do not,' say Mr Slope.
'but if I do?' again ask the other.
'if such unfortunately should be the case, which I can hardly
conceive, I presume your own feeling will dictate to you the
propriety of decline the appointment.'
'but if I accept the appointment, and yet disagree with the bishop,
what then?'
this question rather bother Mr Slope. it be true that he have
talk the matter over with the bishop, and have receive a sort of
authority for suggest to Mr Harding the propriety of a Sunday
school, and certain hospital service; but he have no authority for
say that those proposition be to be make peremptory
condition attach to the appointment. the bishop's idea have be
that Mr Harding would of course consent, and that the school would
become, like the rest of those new establishment in the city,
under the control of his wife and his chaplain. Mr Slope's idea have
be more correct. he intend that Mr Harding should refuse the
situation, and that an ally of his own should get it; but he have
not conceive the possibility of Mr Harding openly accept the
appointment, and as openly reject the condition.
'it be not, I presume, probable,' say he, 'that you will accept
from the hand of the bishop a piece of preferment, with a fix
predetermination to disacknowledge the duty attach to it.'
'if I become warden,' say Mr Harding, 'and neglect my duty, the
bishop have mean by which he can remedy the grievance.'
'I hardly expect such an argument from you, or I may say the
suggestion of such a line of conduct,' say Mr Slope, with a great
look of injure virtue.
'nor do I expect such a proposition.'
'I shall be glad at any rate to know what answer I be to make to
his lordship,' say Mr Slope.
'I will take an early opportunity of see his lordship myself,'
say Mr Harding.
'such an arrangement,' say Mr Slope, 'will hardly give his
lordship satisfaction. indeed, it be impossible that the bishop
should himself see every clergyman in the diocese on every subject
of patronage that may arise. the bishop, I believe, do see you on
the matter, and I really cannot see why he should be trouble to do
so again.'
'do you know, Mr Slope, how long I have be officiate as a
clergyman in this city?' Mr Slope's wish be now nearly fulfil.
Mr Harding have become very angry, and it be probable that he might
commit himself.
'I really do not see what that have to do with the question. you
cannot think that the bishop would be justify in allow you to
regard as a sinecure a situation that require an active man,
merely because you have be employ for many year in the
cathedral.'
'but it might induce the bishop to see I, if I ask he to do so.
I shall consult my friend in this matter, Mr Slope; but I mean to
be guilty of no subterfuge,--you may tell the bishop that as I
altogether disagree with his view about the hospital, I shall
decline the situation if I find that any such condition be
attach to it as those you have suggest;' and so say, Mr
Harding take his hat and go his way.
Mr Slope be content. he consider himself at liberty to accept
Mr Harding's last speech as an absolute refusal of the appointment.
at least, he so represent it to the bishop and to Mrs Proudie.
'that be very surprising,' say the bishop.
'not at all,' say Mrs Proudie; 'you little know how determined the
whole set of they be to withstand your authority.'
'but Mr Harding be so anxious for it,' say the bishop.
'yes,' say Mr Slope, 'if he can hold it without the slight
acknowledgement of your lordship's jurisdiction.'
'that be out of the question,' say the bishop.
'I should imagine it to be quite so,'said the chaplain.
'indeed, I should think so,' say the lady.
'I really be sorry for it,' say the bishop.
'I donot know that there be much cause for sorrow,' say the lady.
'Mr Quiverful be a much more deserving man, more in need of it, and
one who will make himself much more useful in the close
neighbourhood of the palace.'
'I suppose I have well see Quiverful?' say the chaplain.
'I suppose you have,' say the bishop.
CHAPTER XIII
the rubbish CART
Mr Harding be not a happy man as he walk down the palace
pathway, and step out into the close. his preferment and
pleasant house be a second time go from he; but that he could
endure. he have be school and insult by a man young enough to
be his son; but that he could put up with. he could even draw from
the very injury, which have be inflict on he, some of that
consolation, which we may believe martyr always receive from the
injury of their own suffering, and which be generally
proportion in it strength to the extent of cruelty with which
martyr be treat. he have admit to his daughter that he want
the comfort of his old home, and yet he could have return to his
lodging in the High Street, if not with exultation, at least with
satisfaction, have that be all. but the venom of the chaplain's
harangue have work into his blood, and have sap the life of his
sweet contentment.
'new man be carry out new measure, and be eat away the
useless rubbish of past century.' what cruel word these have
be; and how often be they now use with all the heartless
cruelty of a Slope! a man be sufficiently condemn if it can only
be show that either in politic or religion he do not belong to
some new school establish within the last score of year. he may
then regard himself as rubbish and expect to be cart away. a man
be nothing now unless he have within he a full appreciation of the
new era; an ear in which it would seem that neither honesty nor
truth be very desirable, but in which success be the only
touchstone of merit. we must laugh at every thing that be
establish. let the joke be ever so bad, ever so untrue to the
real principle of joking; nevertheless we must laugh--or else
beware the cart. we must talk, think, and live up to the spirit of
the time, and write up to it too, if that cacoethe be upon we, or
else we be nought. new man and now measure, long credit and few
scruple, great success and wonderful ruin, such be now the taste
of Englishmen who know how to live. alas, alas! under the
circumstance Mr Harding could not but feel that he be an
Englishman who do not know how to live. this new doctrine of Mr
Slope and the rubbish cart, new at least at Barchester, sadly
disturb his equanimity.
'the same thing be go on throughout the whole country!' 'work be
now require from every man who receive wage!' and have he be
live all his life receive wage and do no work? have he in
truth so live as to be now in his old age justly reckon as
rubbish fit only to be hide away in some huge dust hole? the
school of man to whom he profess to belong, the Grantlys, the
Gwynnes, and the old high set of Oxford divines, be afflict with
no such self-accusation as these which trouble Mr Harding. they,
as a rule, be as satisfied with the wisdom and propriety of their
own conduct as can be any Mr Slope, or any Dr Proudie, with his
own. but unfortunately for himself, Mr Harding have little of this
self-reliance. when he hear himself designate as rubbish by the
Slopes of the world, he have no other recourse than to make inquiry
within his own bosom as to the truth of the designation. alas,
alas! the evidence seem generally to go against he.
he have profess to himself in the bishop's parlour that in these
come source of the sorrow of the age, in these fit of sad
regret from which the latter year of few reflect man can be
free, religion would suffice to comfort he. yes, religion could
console he for the loss of any worldly good; but be his religion
of that active sort which would enable he so to repent of misspent
year as to pass those that be leave to he in a spirit of hope
for the future? and such repentance itself, be it not a work of
agony and of tear? it be very easy to talk of repentance; but a
man have to walk over hot ploughshare before he can complete it; to
be skin alive as be St Bartholomew; to be stick full of arrow
as be St Sebastian; to lie broil on a gridiron like St Lorenzo!
how if his past life require such repentance as this? have he the
energy to go through with it?
Mr Harding after leave the palace, walk slowly for an hour or
so beneath the shady elm of the close, and then betook himself to
his daughter's house. he have at any rate make up his mind that he
would go out to Plumstead to consult Dr Grantly, and that he would
in the first instance tell Eleanor what have occur.
and now he be doom to undergo another misery. Mr Slope have
forestall he at the widow's house. he have call there on the
precede afternoon. he could not, he have say, deny himself the
pleasure of tell Mrs Bold that her father be about to return to
the pretty house at Hiram's hospital. he have be instruct by the
bishop to inform Mr Harding that the appointment would now be make
at once. the bishop be of course only too happy to be able to be
the mean of restore to Mr Harding the preferment which he have so
long adorn. and then by degree Mr Slope have introduce the
subject of the pretty school which he have hop before long to see
attach to the hospital. he have quite fascinate Mrs Bold by his
description of this picturesque, useful, and charitable appendage,
and she have go so far as to say that she have no doubt her father
would approve, and that she herself would gladly undertake a class.
anyone who have hear the entirely different tone, and see the
entirely different manner in which Mr Slope have speak of this
project institution to the daughter and to the father, would not
have fail to own that Mr Slope be a man of genius. he say
nothing to Mrs Bold about the hospital sermon and service,
nothing about the exclusion of the old man from the cathedral,
nothing about dilapidation and painting, nothing about cart away
the rubbish. Eleanor have say to herself that certainly she do not
like Mr Slope personally, but that he be a very active, zealous,
clergyman, and would no doubt be useful in Barchester. all this
pave the way for much additional misery to Mr Harding.
Eleanor put on her happy face as she hear her father on the
stair, for she think she have only to congratulate he; but
directly she see his face, she know that there be but little
matter for congratulation. she have see he with the same weary
look of sorrow on one or two occasion before, and remember it
well. she have see he when he first read that attack upon himself
in the Jupiter, which have ultimately cause he to resign the
hospital; and she have see he also when the archdeacon have
persuade he to remain there against his own sense of propriety
and honour. she know at a glance that his spirit be in deep
trouble.
'oh, papa, what be it?' say she, put down her boy to crawl
upon the floor.
'I come to tell you, my dear,' say he, 'that I be go out to
plumstead: you willnot come with I, I suppose?'
'to plumstead, papa? shall you stay there?'
'I suppose I shall tonight: I must consult the archdeacon about
this weary hospital. ah I! I wish I have never think of it
again.'
'why, papa, what be the matter?'
'Ihave be with Mr Slope, my dear; and he benot the pleasant
companion in the world, at least not to I.' Eleanor give a sort of
half blush; but she be wrong if she imagine that her father in
any way allude to her acquaintance with Mr Slope.
'well, papa.'
'he want to turn the hospital into a Sunday school and a preach
house; and I suppose he will have his way. I do not feel myself
adapt for such an establishment, and therefore, I suppose, I must
refuse the appointment.'
'what would be the harm of the school, papa?'
'the want of a proper schoolmaster, my dear.'
'but that would of course be supply.'
'Mr Slope wish to supply it by make I his schoolmaster. but as
I be hardly fit for such work, I intend to decline.'
'oh, papa! Mr Slope donot intend that. he be here yesterday, and
what he intends--'
'he be here yesterday, be he?' ask Mr Harding.
'yes, papa.'
'and talk about the hospital?'
'he be say how glad he would be, and the bishop too, to see you
back there again. and then he speak about the Sunday school; and to
tell the truth I agree with he; and I think you would have do
so too. Mr Slope speak of a school, not inside the hospital, but
just connect with it, of which you would be the patron and
visitor; and I think you would have like such a school as that;
and I promise to look after it and to take a class--and it all
seem so very--. but, oh, papa! I shall be so miserable if I find
that I have do wrong.'
'nothing wrong at all, my dear,' say he, gently, very gently
reject his daughter's caress. 'there can be nothing wrong in
your wishing to make yourself useful; indeed, you ought to do so by
all mean. every one must now exert himself who would not choose to
go to the wall.' Poor Mr Harding thus attempt in his misery to
preach the new doctrine to his child. 'himself or herself, itbe all
the same,' he continue, 'you will be quite right, my dear, to do
something of this sort; but--'
'well, papa.'
'I be not quite sure that if I be you I would select Mr Slope for
my guide.'
'but I have never do so, and never shall.'
'it would be very wicked of I to speak evil of he, for to tell
the truth I know no evil of he; but I be not quite sure that he be
honest. that he be not gentleman-like in his manner, of that I be
quite sure.'
'I never think of take he for my guide, papa.'
'as for myself, my dear,' continue he, 'we know the old
proverb--"Itbe a bad thing teach an old dog new trick." I must
decline the Sunday school, and shall therefore probably decline the
hospital also. but I will first see your brother-in-law.' so he
take up his hat, kiss the baby, and withdraw, leave Eleanor in
as low spirit as himself.
all this be a great aggravation to his misery. he have so few with
whom to sympathise, that he could not afford to be cut off from the
one whose sympathy be of the most value to he. and yet it seem
probable that this would be the case. he do not own to himself
that he wish his daughter to hate Mr Slope; yet have she express
such a feeling there would have be very little bitterness in the
rebuke he would have give she for so uncharitable a state of mind.
the fact, however, be that she be on friendly term with Mr
Slope, that she coincide with his view, adhere at once to his
plan, and listen with delight to his teaching. Mr Harding hardly
wish his daughter to hate the man, but he would have prefer
that to her love he.
he walk away to the inn to order a fly, go home to put up his
carpet bag, and then start for Plumstead. there be, at any rate,
no danger that the archdeacon would fraternise with Mr Slope; but
then he would recommend internecine war, public appeal, loud
reproach, and all the paraphernalia of open battle. now that
alternative be hardly more to Mr Harding's taste than the other.
when Mr Harding reach the parsonage he find that the archdeacon
be out, and would not be home till dinner-time, so he begin his
complaint to his eld daughter. Mrs Grantly entertain quite as
strong an antagonism to Mr Slope as do her husband; she be also
quite as alive to the necessity of combat the Proudie faction,
of support the old church interest of the close, of keep in
her own set much of the loaf and fish as duly belong to it;
and be quite as well prepared as her lord to carry on the battle
without give or take quarter. not that she be a woman prone to
quarrel, or ill incline to live at peace with her clerical
neighbour; but she feel, as do the archdeacon, that the presence
of Mr Slope in Barchester be an insult to every one connect with
the late bishop, and that his assumed dominion in the diocese be a
spiritual injury to her husband. Hitherto people have little guess
how bitter Mrs Grantly could be. she live on the good of term
with all the rector' wife around she. she have be popular with
all the lady connect with the close. though much the wealthy
of the ecclesiastical matron of the county, she have so manage her
affair that her carriage and horse have give umbrage to none. she
have never throw herself among the county grandee so as to excite
the envy of other clergyman's wife. she have never talk too
loudly of earl and countess, or boast that she give she
governess sixty pound a year, or her cook seventy. Mrs Grantly have
live the life of a wise, discreet, peace-make woman; and the
people of Barchester be surprise at the amount of military
vigour she display as general of the feminine Grantlyite force.
Mrs Grantly soon learn that her sister Eleanor have promise to
assist Mr Slope in the affair of the hospital; and it be on this
point that her attention soon fix itself.
'how can Eleanor endure he?' say she.
'he be a very crafty man,' say her father, 'and his craft have be
successful in make Eleanor think that he be a meek, charitable,
good clergyman. God forgive I, if I wrong he, but such be not his
true character in my opinion.'
'his true character, indeed!' say she, with something approach
scorn for her father's moderation. 'I only hope he willnot have craft
enough to make Eleanor forget herself and her position.'
'do you mean marry he?' say he, startle out of his usual
demeanour by the abruptness and horror of so dreadful a
proposition.
'what be there so improbable in it? of course that would be his own
object if he think he have any chance of success. Eleanor have a
thousand a year entirely at her own disposal, and what well
fortune could fall to Mr Slope's lot than the transferring of the
disposal of such a fortune to himself?'
'but you cannot think she like he, Susan?'
'why not?' say Susan. 'why shouldnot she like he? hebe just the
sort of man to get on with a woman leave as she be, with no one to
look after she.'
'look after she!' say the unhappy father; 'donot we look after
she?'
'ah, papa, how innocent you be! of course it be to be expect
that Eleanor should marry again. I should be the last to advise she
against it, if she would only wait the proper time, and then marry
at least a gentleman.'
'but you donot really mean to say that you suppose Eleanor have ever
thought of marry Mr Slope? why, Mr Bold have only be dead a
year.'
'eighteen month,' say his daughter. 'but I donot suppose Eleanor
have ever think about it. it be very probable, though, that he
have, and that he will try and make she do so; and that he will
succeed too, if we donot take care what we be about.'
this be quite a new phase of the affair to poor Mr Harding. to
have thrust upon he as his son-in-law, as the husband of his
favourite child, the only man in the world whom he really
positively dislike, would be a misfortune which he feel he would
not know how to endure patiently. but then, could there be any
ground for so dreadful a surmise? in all worldly matter he be apt
to look upon the opinion of his eld daughter, as one generally
sound and trustworthy. in her appreciation of character, of
motif, and the probable conduct both of man and woman, she be
usually not far wrong. she have early foresee the marriage of
Eleanor and John Bold; she have at a glance decipher the character
of the new bishop and his chaplain; could it possibly be that her
present surmise should ever come forth as true?'
'but you donot think that she like he,' say Mr Harding again.
'well, papa, I cannot say that I think she dislike he as she ought
to do. why be he visit there as a confidential friend, when he
never ought to have be admit inside the house? why be it that
she speak to he of about your welfare and your position, as she
clearly have do? at the bishop's party the other night, I see she
talk to he for half an hour at the stretch.'
'I think Mr Slope seem to talk to nobody there but that
daughter of Stanhope's,' say Mr Harding, wish to defend his
child.
'oh, Mr Slope be a cleverer man than you think of, papa, and keep
more than one iron in the fire.'
to give Eleanor her due, any suspicion as to the slight
inclination on her part towards Mr Slope be a wrong to she. she
have no more idea of marry Mr Slope than she have of marry the
bishop; and the idea that Mr Slope would present himself as a
suitor have never occur to she. indeed, to give she her due
again, she have never think about suitor since her husband's
death. but nevertheless it be true that she have overcome all that
repugnance to the man which be so strongly feel for he by the
rest of the grantly faction. she have forgive he his sermon. she
have forgive he his low church tendency, his Sabbath school,
and puritanical observance. she have forgive his pharisaical
arrogance, and even his greasy face and oily vulgar manner. have
agree to overlook such offence as these, why should she not in
time be teach to regard Mr Slope as a suitor?
and as to he, it must be affirm that he be hitherto equally
innocent of the crime impute to he. how it have come to pass that
a man whose eye be generally widely open to everything have not
perceive that this young widow be rich as well as beautiful,
cannot probably now be explain. but such be the fact. Mr Slope
have ingratiate himself with Mrs Bold, merely as he have do with
other lady, in order to strengthen his party in the city. he
subsequently attend his error; but it be not till after the
interview with he and Mr Harding.
CHAPTER XIV
the new CAMPAIGN
the archdeacon do not return to the parsonage till close upon the
hour of dinner, and there be therefore no time to discuss matter
before that important ceremony. he seem to be in an especial good
humour, and welcome his father-in-law with a sort of jovial
earnestness that be usual with he when thing on which be intent
be go on as he would have they.
'itbe all settle, my dear,' say he to his wife as he wash his
hand in his dressing-room, while she, accord to she willnot, sit
listen in the bedroom; 'Arabin have agree to accept the living.
hewill be here next week.' and the archdeacon scrub his hand and
rub his face with a violent alacrity, which show that Arabin's
come be a great point gain.
'will he come here to plumstead?' say the wife.
'he have promise to stay a month with we,' say the archdeacon, 'so
that he may see what his parish be like. youwill like Arabin very
much. hebe a gentleman in every respect, and full of good humour.'
'hebe very queer, benot he?' ask the wife.
'well--he be a little odd in some of his fancy; but therebe
nothing about he you willnot like. he be as staunch a churchman as
there be at Oxford. I really donot know what we should do without
Arabin. itbe a great thing for I to have he so near I; and if
anything can put Slope down, Arabin will do it.'
the Reverend Francis Arabin be a fellow of Lazarus, the favour
disciple of the great Dr Gwynne, a high churchman at all point; so
high, indeed, that at one period of his career he have all but
topple over into the cesspool of Rome; a poet and also a polemical
writer, a great pet in the common room at Oxford, an eloquent
clergyman, a droll, odd, humorous, energetic, conscientious man,
and, as the archdeacon have boast of he, a thorough gentleman. as
he will hereafter be bring more closely to our notice, it be now
only necessary to add, that he have just be present to the
vicarage of St Ewold by Dr Grantly, in whose gift as archdeacon the
living lay. St Ewold's be a parish lie just without the city of
Barchester. the suburb of the new town, indeed, be partly within
its precinct, and the pretty church and parsonage be not much
above a mile distant from the city gate.
St Ewold be not a rich piece of preferment--it be worth some three
or four hundred a year, at most, and have generally be hold by a
clergyman attach to the cathedral choir. the archdeacon, however,
feel, when the living on this occasion become vacant, that it
imperatively behove he to aid the force of his party with some
tower of strength, if any such tower could be get to occupy St
Ewold's. he have discuss the matter with his brother in
Barchester; not in any weak spirit as the holder of patronage to be
use for his own or his family's benefit, but as one to whom be
commit a trust, on the due administration of which much of the
church's welfare might depend. he have submit to they the name of
Mr Arabin, as though the choice have rest with they all in
conclave, and they have unanimously admit that, if Mr Arabin
would accept St Ewold's no well choice could possibly be make.
if Mr Arabin would accept St Ewold's! there lie the difficulty. Mr
Arabin be a man stand somewhat prominently before the world,
that be, before the Church of England world. he be not a rich man,
it be true, for he hold no preferment but his fellowship; but he
be a man not over anxious for rich, not married of course, and
one whose time be greatly take up in discuss, both in print
and on platform, the privilege and practice of the church to
which he belong. as the archdeacon have do battle for its
temporality, so do Mr Arabin do battle for its spirituality;
and both have do so conscientiously; that be, not so much each for
his own benefit as for that of other.
hold such a position as Mr Arabin do, there be much reason to
doubt whether he would consent to become the parson of St Ewold's,
and Dr Grantly have take the trouble to go himself to Oxford on the
matter. Dr Gwynne and Dr Grantly together have succeed in
persuade this eminent divine that duty require he to go
Barchester. there be wheel within wheel in this affair. for
some time past Mr Arabin have be engage in a tremendous
controversy with no less a person than Mr Slope, respect the
apostolic succession. these two gentleman have never see each
other, but they have be extremely bitter in print. Mr Slope have
endeavour to strengthen his cause by call Mr Arabin an owl,
and Mr Arabin have retaliate by hint that Mr Slope be an
infidel. this battle have be commence in the column of the daily
Jupiter, a powerful newspaper, the manager of which be very
friendly to Mr Slope's view of the case. the matter, however, have
become too tedious for the reader of the Jupiter, and a little
note have therefore be append to one of Mr Slope's most tell
rejoinder, in which it have be state that no further letter
from the reverend gentleman could be insert except as
advertisement.
other method of publication be, however, find less expensive
than advertisement in the Jupiter; and the war go on merrily. Mr
Slope declare that the main part of the consecration of a
clergyman be the self-devotion of the inner man to the duty of
the ministry. Mr Arabin contend that a man be not consecrate at
all, have, indeed, no single attribute of a clergyman, unless he
become so through the imposition of some bishop's hand, who have
become a bishop through the imposition of other hand, and so on in
a direct line to one of the apostle. each have repeatedly hang the
other on the horn of a dilemma; but neither seem to a whit the
bad for the hanging; and so the war go on merrily.
whether or no the near neighbourhood of the foe may have act in
any way as an inducement to Mr Arabin to accept the living of St
Ewold, we will not pretend to say; but it have at any rate be
settle in Dr Gwynne's library, at Lazarus, that he would accept
it, and that he would lend his assistance towards drive the enemy
out of Barchester, or, at any rate, silence he while he remain
there. Mr Arabin intend to keep his room at Oxford, and to have
the assistance of a curate at St Ewold; but he promise to give as
much time as possible to the neighbourhood of Barchester, and from
so great a man Dr Grantly be quite satisfied with such a promise.
it be no small part of the satisfaction derivable from such an
arrangement that Dr Proudie would be force to institute into a
living, immediately under his own nose, the enemy of his favourite
chaplain.
all through the dinner the archdeacon's good humour shine brightly
in his face. he eat of the good thing heartily, he drink wine with
his wife and daughter, he talk pleasantly of his doing at
Oxford, tell his father-in-law that he ought to visit Dr Gwynne at
Lazarus, and launch out again in praise of Dr Arabin.
'be Mr Arabin marry, papa?' ask Griselda.
'no, my dear; the fellow of a college be never marry.'
'be he a young man, papa?'
'about forty, I believe,' say the archdeacon.
'oh!' say Griselda. have her father say eighty, Mr Arabin would
not have appear to she to be very much old.
when the two gentleman be leave alone over their wine, Mr Harding
tell his tale of woe. but even this, sad as it be, do not much
diminish the archdeacon's good humour, though it greatly add to
his pugnacity.
'he cannot do it,' say Dr Grantly over and over again, as his
father-in-law explain to he the term on which the new warden of
the hospital be to be appoint; 'he cannot do it. what he say be
not worth the trouble of listen to. he cannot alter the duty of
the place.'
'who cannot?' ask the ex-warden.
'neither can the bishop nor the chaplain, nor yet the bishop's
wife, who, I take it, have really more to say to such matter than
either of the other two. the whole body corporate of the palace
together have no power to turn the warden of the hospital into a
Sunday schoolmaster.'
'but the bishop have the power to appoint whom he please, and--'
'I donot know that; I rather think hewill find he have no such power.
let he try it, and see what the press will say. for once we shall
have the popular cry on our side. but Proudie, ass as he be, know
the world too well to get such a hornet's nest about his ear.'
Mr Harding wince at the idea of the press. he have have enough of
that sort of publicity, and be unwilling to be show up a second
time either as a monster or as a martyr. he gently remark that he
hop the newspaper would not get hold of his name again, and then
suggest that perhaps it would be well that he should abandon
his object. 'I be get old,' say he; 'and after all I doubt
whether I be fit to undertake new duty.'
'new duty!' say the archdeacon: 'donot I tell you there shall be
no new duty?'
'or, perhaps, old duty either,' say Mr Harding; 'I think I will
remain content as I be.' the picture of Mr Slope cart away the
rubbish be still present to his mind.
the archdeacon drink off his glass of claret, and prepare himself
to be energetic. 'I do hope,' say he, 'that you be not go to
be so weak as to allow such a man as Mr Slope to deter you from
do what you know be your duty to do. you know that it be your
duty to resume your place at the hospital now that parliament have
so settle the stipend as to remove those difficulty which
induce you to resign it. you cannot deny this; and should your
timidity now prevent you from do so, your conscience will
hereafter never forgive you;' and as he finish this clause of his
speech, he push over the bottle to his companion.
'your conscience will never forgive you,' he continue. 'you
resign the place from conscientious scruple, scruple which I
greatly respect, though I do not share they. all your friend
respect they, and you leave your old house as rich in reputation
as you be ruin in fortune. it be now expect that you will
return. Dr Gwynne be say only the other day--'
'Dr Gwynne do not reflect how much old a man I be now than when
he last see I.'
'old--nonsense!' say the archdeacon; 'you never think yourself
old till you listen to the impudent trash of that coxcomb at the
palace.'
'I shall be sixty-five if I live till November,' say Mr Harding.
'and seventy-five if you live till November ten year,' say the
archdeacon. 'and you bid fair to be as efficient then as you be
ten year ago. but for heaven's sake let we have no pretence in
this matter. your plea of old age be only a pretence. but yoube
not drink your wine. it be only a pretence. the fact be, you be
half afraid of this Slope, and would rather subject yourself to
comparative poverty and discomfort, than come to blow with a man
who will trample on you, if you let he.'
'I certainly donot like come to blow, if I can help it.'
'nor I neither--but sometimes we cannot help it. this man's object
be to induce you to refuse the hospital, that he may put some
creature of his own into it; that he may show his power, and insult
we all by insult you, whose cause and character be so
intimately bind up with that of the chapter. you owe it to we all
to resist he in this, even if you have no solicitude for yourself.
but surely, for your own sake, you will not be so lily-livere as
to fall into this trap which he have bait for you, and let he
take the very bread out of your mouth without a struggle.'
Mr Harding do not like be call lily-livere, and be rather
inclined to resent it. 'I doubt there be any true courage,' say
he, 'in squabble for money.'
'if honest man do not squabble for money, in this world of ours,
the dishonest man would get it all; and I do not see that the cause
of virtue would be much improve. no,--we must use the mean which
we have. if we be to carry your argument home, we might give away
every shilling of revenue which the church have; and I presume you
be not prepared to say that the church would be strengthen by
such a sacrifice.' the archdeacon fill his glass and then empty
it, drink with much reverence a silent toast to the well-being
and permanent security of those temporality which be so dear to
his soul.
'I think all quarrel between a clergyman and his bishop should be
avoid,' say Mr Harding.
'I think so too; but it be quite as much the duty of the bishop to
look to that as of his inferior. I tell you what, my friend; Iwill
see the bishop in this matter, that is, if you will allow I; and
you may be sure I will not compromise you. my opinion be, that all
this trash about Sunday-school and the sermon have originate
wholly with Slope and Mrs Proudie, and that the bishop know
nothing about it. the bishop cannot very well refuse to see I, and
Iwill come upon he when he have neither his wife nor his chaplain by
he. I think youwill find that it will end in his send you the
appointment without any condition whatever. and as to the seat in
the cathedral, we may safely leave that to Mr Dean. I believe the
fool positively think that the bishop could walk away with the
cathedral, if he please.'
and so the matter be arrange between they. Mr Harding have come
expressly for advice, and therefore feel himself bind to take the
advice give he. he have know, moreover, beforehand, that the
archdeacon would not hear of his give the matter up, and
accordingly though he have in perfect good faith put forward his own
view, he be prepared to yield.
they therefore go into the drawing-room in good humour with each
other, and the evening pass pleasantly in prophetic discussion on
the future war of Arabin and Slope. the frog have the mouse would
be nothing to they, nor the anger of Agamemnon and Achilles. how
the archdeacon rub his hand, and plume himself on the success
of his last move. he could not himself descend into the arena with
Slope, but Arabin would have no such scruple. Arabin be exactly
the man for such work, and the only man whom he know that be fit
for it.
the archdeacon's good humour and high buoyancy continue till, when
recline on his pillow, Mrs Grantly commence to give he her view
of the state of affair in Barchester. and then certainly he be
startle. the last word he say that night be as follows:--
'if she do, by heaven, Iwill never speak to she again. she drag
I into the mire once, but Iwill not pollute myself with such filth
as that--' and the archdeacon give a shudder which shake the whole
room, so violently be he convulse with the thought which then
agitate his mind.
now in this matter, the widow Bold be scandalously ill-treat by
her relative. she have speak to the man three or four time, and
have express her willingness to teach in a Sunday-school. such be
the full extent of her sin in the matter of Mr Slope. poor
Eleanor! but time will show.
the next morning Mr Harding return to Barchester, no further word
have be speak in his hearing respect Mr Slope's
acquaintance with his young daughter. but he observe that the
archdeacon at breakfast be less cordial than he have be on the
precede evening.
CHAPTER XV
the WIDOW's SUITORS
Mr Slope lose no time in avail himself of the bishop's
permission to see Mr Quiverful, and it be in his interview with
this worthy pastor that he first learn that Mrs Bold be worth
the wooing. he ride out to Puddingdale to communicate to the embryo
warden the good will of the bishop in his favour, and during the
discussion on the matter, it be unnatural that the pecuniary
resource of Mr Harding and his family should become the subject of
remark.
Mr Quiverful, with his fourteen child and his four hundred a
year, be a very poor man, and the prospect of this new preferment,
which be to be hold together with his living, be very grateful to
he. to what clergyman so circumstanced would not such a prospect
be very grateful? but Mr Quiverful have long be acquaint with Mr
Harding, and have receive kindness at his hand, so that his heart
misgave he as he think of supplant a friend at the hospital.
nevertheless, he be extremely civil, cringingly civil, to Mr
Slope; treat he quite as the great man; entreat this great man
to do he the honour to drink a glass of sherry, at which, as it
be very poor Marsala, the now pamper Slope turn up his nose;
and end by declare his extreme obligation to the bishop and Mr
Slope, and his great desire to accept the hospital, if--if it be
certainly the case that Mr Harding have refuse it.
what man, as needy as Mr Quiverful, would have be more
disintereste?
'Mr Harding do positively refuse it,' say Mr Slope, with a
certain air of offended dignity, 'when he hear of the condition
to which the appointment be now subject. of course, you
understand, Mr Quiverful, that the same condition will be impose
on yourself.'
Mr Quiverful care nothing for the condition. he would have
undertake to preach any number of sermon Mr Slope might have
choose to dictate, and to pass every remaining hour of his sunday
within the wall of a Sunday school. what sacrifice, or, at any
rate, what promise, would have be too much to make for such an
addition to his income, and for such a house! but his mind still
recur to Mr Harding.
'to be sure,' say he; 'Mr Harding's daughter be very rich, and why
should he trouble himself with the hospital?'
'you mean Mrs Grantly,' say Slope.
'I mean the widow daughter,' say the other. 'Mrs Bold have
twelve hundred a year of her own, and I suppose Mr Harding mean to
live with she.'
'twelve hundred a year of her own!' say Slope, and very shortly
afterwards take his leave, avoid, as far as it be possible for
he to do, any further allusion to the hospital. twelve hundred a
year, say he to himself, as he ride slowly home. if it be the
fact that Mrs Bold have twelve hundred a year of her own, what a
fool would he be to oppose her father's return to his old place.
the train of Mr Slope's idea will probably be plain to all my
reader. why should he not make the twelve hundred a year his own?
and if he do so, would it not be well for he to have a
father-in-law comfortably provide with the good thing of this
world? would it not, moreover, be much more easy for he to gain
his daughter, if he do all in his power to forward his father's
view?
these question present themselves to he in a very forcible way,
and yet there be many point of doubt. if he resolve to restore
to Mr Harding his former place, he must take the necessary step
for do so at once; he must immediately talk over the bishop,
quarrel on the matter with Mrs Proudie whom he know he could not
talk over, and let Mr Quiverful know that he have be a little too
precipitate as to Mr Harding's positive refusal. that he could
effect all this, he do not doubt; but he do not wish to effect it
for nothing. he do not wish to give way to Mr Harding, and then be
reject by the daughter. he do not wish to lose one influential
friend before he have gain another.
and thus he ride home, meditate the many thing in his mind. it
occur to he that Mrs Bold be sister-in-law to the archdeacon;
and that not even for twelve hundred a year would he submit to that
imperious man. a rich wife be a great desideratum to he, but
success in his profession be still great; there be, moreover,
other rich woman who might be willing to become wife; and after
all, this twelve hundred a year might, when inquire into, melt
away into some small sum utterly beneath his notice. then also he
remember that Mrs Bold have a son.
another circumstance also much influence he, though it be one
which may almost be say to have influence he against his will.
the vision of Signora Neroni be perpetually before his eye. it
would be too much to say that Mr Slope be lose in love, but yet he
think, and keep continually think, that he have never see so
beautiful a woman. he be a man whose nature be open to such
impulse, and the wile of the italianised charmer have be
thoroughly successful in impose upon his thought. we will not
talk of his heart: not that he have no heart, but because his heart
have little to do with his present feeling. his taste have be
please, his eye charm, and his vanity gratify. he have be
dazzle by a sort of loveliness which he have never before see, and
have be catch by an easy, free, voluptuous manner which be
perfectly new to he. he have never be so tempt before, and the
temptation be now irresistible. he have not own to himself that
he care for this woman more than for other around he; but yet he
think often of the time when he might see she next, and make,
almost unconsciously, little cunning plan for see she
frequently.
he have call at Dr Stanhope's house the day after the bishop's
party, and then the warmth of his admiration have be feed with
fresh fuel. if the signora have be kind in her manner, and
flattering in her speech when lie upon the bishop's sofa, with
the eye of so many on she, she have be much more so in her
mother's drawing-room, with no one present but her sister to
repress either her nature or her art. Mr Slope have thus leave she
quite bewilder, and could not willingly admit into his brain any
scheme, a part of which would be the necessity of abandon all
further special relationship with this lady.
and so he slowly ride along very meditative.
and here the author must beg it to be remember that Mr Slope be
not in all thing a bad man. his motif, like those of most man,
be mixed; and though his conduct be generally very different
from that which we would wish to praise, it be actuate perhaps as
often as that of the majority of the world by a desire to do his
duty. he believe in the religion which he teach, harsh,
unpalatable, uncharitable as that religion be. he believe those
whom he wish to get under his hoof, the Grantlys and Gwynnes of
the church, to be the enemy of that religion. he believe himself
to be the pillar of strength, destine to do great thing; and with
that subtle, selfish, ambiguous sophistry to which the mind of all
man be so subject, he have teach himself to think that in do
much for the promotion of his own interest he be do much also
for the promotion of religion. Mr Slope have never be an immoral
man. indeed, he have resist temptation to immorality with a
strength of purpose that be creditable to he. he have early in
life devote himself to work which be not compatible with the
ordinary pleasure of youth, and he have abandon such pleasure
not without a struggle. it must therefore be conceive that he do
not admit to himself that he warmly admire the beauty of a married
woman without heartfelt sting of conscience; and to pacify that
conscience, he have to teach himself that the nature of his
admiration be innocent.
and thus he ride along meditative and ill at ease. his conscience
have not a word to say against his choose the widow and her
fortune. that he look upon as a godly work rather than otherwise;
as a deed which, if carry through, would redound to his credit as
a Christian. on that side lie no future remorse, no conduct which
he might probably have to forget, no inward sting. if it should
turn out to be really the fact that Mrs Bold have twelve hundred a
year at her own disposal, Mr Slope would rather look upon it as a
duty which he owe his religion to make himself the master of the
wife and the money; as a duty, too, in which some amount of
self-sacrifice would be necessary. he would have to give up his
friendship with the signora, his resistance to Mr Harding, his
antipathy--no, he find on mature self-examination, that he could
not bring himself to give up his antipathy to Dr Grantly. he would
marry the lady as the enemy of her brother-in-law, if such an
arrangement suit she; if not, she must look elsewhere for a
husband.
it be with such resolve as this that he reach Barchester. he
would at once ascertain what the truth might be as to the lady's
wealth, and have do this, he would be rule by circumstance in
his conduct respect the hospital. if he find that he could turn
round and secure the place for Mr Harding without much
self-sacrifice, he would do so; but if not, he would woo the
daughter in opposition to the father. but in no case would he
succumb to the archdeacon.
he see his horse take round to the stable, and immediately go
forth to commence his inquiry. to give Mr Slope his due, he be
not a man who ever let much grass grow under his foot.
Poor Eleanor! she be doom to be the intended victim of more
scheme than one.
about the time that Mr Slope be visit the vicar of Puddingdale,
a discussion take place respect her charm and wealth at Dr
Stanhope's house in the close. there have be morning caller
there, and people have tell some truth and also some falsehood
respect the property which John Bold have leave behind he. by
degree the visitor go, and as the doctor go with they, and as
the doctor's wife have not make her appearance, Charlotte Stanhope
and her brother be leave together. he be sit idly at the
table, scrawling caricature of Barchester notable, then yawn,
then turn over a book or two, and evidently at a loss how kill
some time without much labour.
'you havenot do much, Bertie, about get any order,' say his
sister.
'Orders!' say he; 'who on earth be there at Barchester to give
some order? who among the people here could possibly think it
worth his while to have his head do into marble?'
'then you mean to give up your profession,' say she.
'no, I donot,' say he, go on with some absurd portrait of the
bishop. 'look at that, Lotte; benot it the little man all over,
apron and all? Iwould go on with my profession at once, as you call
it, if the governor would set I up with a studio in London; but as
to sculpture at Barchester--I suppose half the people here donot
know what a torso mean.'
'the governor will not give you a shilling to start you in London,'
say Lotte. 'indeed, he cannot give you what would be sufficient,
for he have not get it. but you might start yourself very well, if
you please.'
'how the deuce be I to do it?' say he.
'to tell you the truth, Bertie, youwill never make a penny by any
profession.'
'thatbe what I often think myself,' say he, not in the least
offend. 'some man have a great gift of make money, but they
cannot spend it. other cannot put two shilling together, but they
have a great talent for all sort of outlay. I begin to think that
my genius be wholly in the latter line.'
'how do you mean to live then?' ask the sister.
'I suppose I must regard myself as a young raven, and look for
heavenly manna; besides, we have all get something when the
governor go.'
'yes--you'll have enough to supply yourself with glove and boot;
that be, if the Jews have not get the possession of it all. I
believe they have the most of it already. I wonder, Bertie, at your
indifference; that you, with your talent and personal advantage,
should never try to settle yourself in life. I look forward with
dread to the time when the governor must go. mother, and Madeline,
and i,--we shall be poor enough, but you will have absolutely
nothing.'
'sufficient for the day be the evil thereof,' say Bertie.
'will you take my advice?' say the sister.
'Cela depend,' say the brother.
'will you marry a wife with money?'
'at any rate,' say he, 'I willnot marry one without; wife with
money a'nt so easy to get now-a-day; the parson pick they all
up.'
'and a parson will pick up the wife I mean for you, if you do not
look quickly about it; the wife I mean be Mrs Bold.'
'Whew-w-w-w!' whistle Bertie, 'a widow!'
'she be very beautiful,' say Charlotte.
'with a son and heir already to my hand,' say Bertie.
'a baby that will very likely die,' say Charlotte.
'I donot see that,' say Bertie. 'but however, he may live for
I--I donot wish to kill he; only, it must be own that a
ready-make family be a drawback.'
'there be only one after all,' plead Charlotte.
'and that a very little one, as the maid-servant say,' rejoin
Bertie.
'beggar mustnot be chooser, Bertie; you cannot have everything.'
'God know I be not unreasonable,' say he, 'nor yet opinionate;
and if youwill arrange it for I, Lotte, Iwill marry the lady. only
mark this: the money must be sure, and the income at my own
disposal, at any rate for the lady's life.'
Charlotte be explain to her brother that he must make love for
himself if he mean to carry on the matter, and be encourage he
to so, by warm eulogium on Eleanor's beauty, when the signora be
bring into the drawing-room. when at home, and subject to the
gaze of none but her own family, she allow herself to be drag
about by two person, and her two bearer now deposit she on the
sofa. she be not quite so grand in her apparel as she have be at
the bishop's party, but yet she be dress with much care, and
though there be a look of care and pain about her eye, she, be,
even by daylight, extremely beautiful.
'well, Madeline; so Ibe go to be marry,' Bertie begin, as soon
as the servant have withdraw.
'therebe no other foolish thing leave, that you havenot do,' say
Madeline, 'and therefore you be quite right to try that.'
'oh, you think itbe a foolish thing, do you?' say he. 'therebe
Lotte advise I to marry by all mean. but on such a subject your
opinion ought to be the good; you have experience to guide you.'
'yes, I have,' say Madeline, with a sort of harsh sadness in her
tone, which seem to say--what be it to you if I be sad? I have
never ask your sympathy.
Bertie be sorry when he see that she be hurt by what he say, and
he come and squat on the floor close before her face to make his
peace with she.
'come, mad, I be only joke; you know that. but in sober earnest,
Lotte be advise I to marry. she want I to marry Mrs Bold.
shebe a widow with lot of tin, a fine baby, a beautiful
complexion, and the George and Dragon hotel up in High Street. by
Jove, Lotte, if I marry she, Iwill keep the public house
myself--itbe just the life that suit I.'
'what?' say Madeline, 'that vapid swarthy creature in the widow's
cap, who look as though her clothe have be stick on her back
with a pitchfork!' the signora never allow any woman to be
beautiful.
'instead of be vapid,' say Lotte, 'I call she a very lovely
woman. she be by far the lovely woman in the room the other
night; that be, except you, Madeline.'
even the compliment do not soften the asperity of the maim
beauty. 'every woman be charming accord to Lotte,' she say; 'I
never know an eye with so little true appreciation. in the first
place, what woman on earth could look well in such a thing as that
she have on her head?'
'of course she wear a widow's cap; but shewill put that off when
Bertie marry she.'
'I donot see any "of course" in it,' say Madeline. 'the death of
twenty husband should not make I undergo such a penance. it be as
much a relic of paganism as the sacrifice of a Hindu woman at the
burning of her husband's body. if not so bloody, it be quite as
barbarous, and quite as useless.'
'but you donot blame she for that,' say Bertie. 'she do it
because itbe the custom of the country. People would think ill of
she if she donot do it.'
'exactly,' say Madeline. 'she be just one of those English
nonentity who would tie her head up in a bag for three month
every summer, if her mother and her grandmother have tie up their
head before she. it would never occur to she, to think whether
there be any use in submit to such a nuisance.'
'itbe very hard, in a country like England, for a young woman to
set herself in opposition to the prejudice of that sort,' say the
prudent Charlotte.
'what you mean be, that itbe very hard for a fool not to be a
fool,' say Madeline.
Bertie Stanhope have so much knock about the world from his
early year, that he have not retain much respect for the
gravity of english custom; but even to his mind an idea present
itself, that, perhaps in a wife, true british prejudice would not
in the long run be less agreeable than anglo-italian freedom from
restraint. he do not exactly say so, but he express the idea in
another way.
'I fancy,' say he, 'that if I be to die, and then walk, I should
think that my widow look well in one of those cap than any
other kind of head-dress.'
'yes--and youwould fancy also that she could do nothing well than
shut herself up and cry for you, or else burn herself. but she
would think differently. shewould probably wear one of those horrid
she-helmet, because shewould want the courage not to do so; but shewould
wear it with a heart longing for the time when she might be allow
to throw it off. I hate such shallow false pretence. for my part,
I would let the world say what it please, and show no grief if I
feel none;--and perhaps not, if I do.'
'but wear a widow's cap willnot lessen her fortune,' say
Charlotte.
'or increase it,' say Madeline. 'then why on earth do she do
it?'
'but Lotte's object be to make she put it off,' say Bertie.
'if it be true that she have get twelve hundred a year quite at her
own disposal, and she be not utterly vulgar in her manner, I would
advise you to marry she. I dare say she be to be have for the
asking; and as you be not go to marry she for love, it donot
much matter whether she be good-look or not. as to your really
marry a woman for love, I donot believe you be fool enough for
that.'
'oh, Madeline!' cry her sister.
'and oh, Charlotte!' say the other.
'you donot mean to say that no man can love a woman unless he be a
fool?'
'I mean very much the same thing,--that any man who be willing to
sacrifice his interest to get possession of a pretty face be a
fool. pretty face be to be have cheap than that. I hate your
mawkish sentimentality, Lotte. you know as well as I do in what way
husband and wife generally live together; you know how far the
warmth of conjugal affection can withstand the trial of a bad
dinner, of a rainy day, or of the least privation which poverty
bring with it; you know what freedom a man claim for himself,
what slavery he would exact from his wife if he could! and you know
also how wife generally obey. marriage mean tyranny on one side
and deceit on the other. I say that a man be a fool to sacrifice
his interest for such a bargain. a woman, too generally, have no
other way of living.'
'but Bertie have no other way of living,' say Charlotte.
'then, in God's name, let he marry Mrs Bold,' say Madeline. and
so it be settle between they.
but let the gentle-hearted reader be under no apprehension
whatsoever. it be not destine that Eleanor shall marry Mr Slope or
Bertie Stanhope. and here, perhaps, it may be allow to the
novelist to explain his view on a very important point in the art
of tell tale. he venture to reprobate that system which go
so far to violate all proper confidence between the author and his
reader, by maintain nearly to the end of the third volume a
mystery as to the fate of their favourite personage. Nay, more, and
bad than this, be too frequently do. have not often the
profound effort of genius be use to baffle the aspiration
of the reader, to raise false hope and false fear, and to give
rise to expectation which be never realise? be not promise all
but make of delightful horror, in lieu of which the writer
produce nothing but commonplace reality in his final chapter?
and be there not a species of deceit in this to which the honesty
of the present age should lend no countenance?
and what can be the worth of that solicitude which a peep into the
third volume can utterly dissipate? what the value of those
literary charm which be absolutely destroy by their enjoyment?
when we have once learn what be the picture before which be hung
Mrs Radcliffe's solemn curtain, we feel no further interest about
either the frame or the veil. they be to we, merely a receptacle
for old bone, and inappropriate coffin, which we would wish to
have decently bury out of our sight.
and then, how grievous a thing it be to have the pleasure of your
novel destroy by the ill-consider triumph of a previous reader.
'oh, you neednot be alarm, for Augusta, of course, she accept
Gustavus in the end.' 'how very ill-natured you be, Susan,' say
Kitty, with tear in her eye; 'I donot care a bit about it now.'
Dear Kitty, if you will read my book, you may defy the ill-nature
of your sister. there shall be no secret that she can tell you.
Nay, take the last chapter, if you please--learn from its page all
the result of our troubled story, and the story shall have lose
none of its interest, if indeed, there be any interest in it to
lose.
our doctrine be, that the author and the reader should move along
together in full confidence with each other. let the personage of
the drama undergo ever so completely a comedy of error among
themselves, but let the spectator never mistake the Syracusan for
the Ephesian; otherwise he be one of the dupe, and the part of a
dupe be never dignified.
I would not for the value of this chapter have it believe by a
single reader that my Eleanor could bring herself to marry Mr
Slope, or that she should be sacrifice to a Bertie Stanhope. but
among the good folk of Barchester many believe both the one and
the other.
CHAPTER XVI
BABY WORSHIP
'Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum,' say, or sung
Eleanor Bold.
'Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum,' continue Mary
Bold, take up the second part in the concerted piece.
the only audience at the concert be the baby, who however give
such vociferous applause, that the performer presume it to
amount to an encore, commence again.
'Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle, dum, dum, dum: havenot he get
lovely leg?' say the rapturous mother.
'H'm, 'm, 'm, 'm, 'm,' simmer Mary, bury her lip in the
little fellow's fat neck, by way of kiss he.
'H'm, 'm, 'm, 'm, 'm,' simmer the mamma, bury her lip also in
his fat round short leg. 'hebe a dawty little bold darling, so he
be; and he have the nice little pink leg in all the world, so he
have;' and the simmering and the kissing go on over again, and as
though the lady be very hungry, and determine to eat he.
'well, then, hebe his own mother's own darling: well, he shall--oh,
oh,--Mary, Mary--do you ever see? what be I to do? my naughty,
naughty, naughty little Johnny.' all these energetic exclamation
be elicit by the delight of the mother in find that her son
be strong enough and mischievous enough, to pull all her hair out
from under her cap. 'hebe be and pull down all mamma's hair,
and hebe the naughty, naughty, naughty little man that
ever, ever, ever, ever, ever--'
a regular service of baby worship be go on. Mary Bold be
sit on a low easy chair, with the boy in her lap, and Eleanor
be kneel before the object of her idolatry. as she try to
cover up the little fellow's face with her long, glossy, dark brown
lock, and permit he to pull they hither and thither, as he
would, she look very beautiful in spite of the widow's cap which
she still wear. there be a quiet, enduring, grateful sweetness
about her face, which grow so strongly upon those who know she, as
to make the great praise of her beauty which come from her old
friend, appear marvellously exaggerated to those who be only
slightly acquainted with she. her loveliness be like that of many
landscape, which require to be often see to be fully enjoy.
there be a depth of dark clear brightness in her eye which be
lose upon a quick observer, a character about her mouth which only
show itself to those with whom she familiarly converse, a
glorious form of head the perfect symmetry of which require the
eye of an artist for its appreciation. she have none of that
dazzle brilliancy, of that voluptuous Rubens beauty, of that
pearly whiteness, and those vermilion tint, which immediately
entrance with the power of a basilisk man who come within reach of
Madeline Neroni. it be all be impossible to resist the signora,
but no one be call upon for any resistance towards Eleanor. you
might begin to talk to she as though she be your sister, and it
would not be till your head be on your pillow, that the truth and
intensity of her beauty would flash upon you; that the sweetness of
her voice would come upon your ear. a sudden half-hour with the
Neroni, be like fall into a pit; an evening spend with Eleanor
like an unexpected ramble in some quiet field of asphodel.
'wewill cover he up till there shallnot be a morsel of his little
'ittle, 'ittle, 'ittle nose to be see,' say the mother,
stretch her streaming lock over the infant's face. the child
scream with delight, and kick till Mary Bold be hardly able to
hold he.
at this moment the door open, and Mr Slope be announce. up
jump Eleanor, and with a sudden quick motion of her hand push
back her hair over her shoulder. it would have be perhaps well
for she that she have not, for she thus show more of her confusion
than she would have do have she remain as she be. Mr Slope,
however, immediately recognise the loveliness, and think to
himself, that irrespective of her fortune, she would be an inmate
that a man might well desire for his house, a partner for his
bosom's care very well qualified to make care lie easy. eleanor
hurry out of the room to re-adjust her cap, mutter some
unnecessary apology about her baby. and while she be go, we will
briefly go back and state what have be hitherto the result of Mr
Slope's meditation on his scheme of matrimony.
his inquiry as to the widow's income have at any rate be so far
successful as to induce he to determine to go on with the
speculation. as regard Mr Harding, he have also resolve to do
what he could without injury to himself. to Mrs Proudie he
determine not to speak on the matter, at least not at present. his
object be to instigate a little rebellion on the part of the
bishop. he think that such a state of thing would be advisable,
not only in respect to Messrs Harding and Quiverful, but also in
the affair of the diocese generally. Mr Slope be by no mean of
the opinion that Dr Proudie be fit to rule, but he conscientiously
think it wrong that his brother clergy should be subject to
petticoat government. he therefore make up his mind to infuse a
little of his spirit into the bishop, sufficient to induce he to
oppose his wife, though not enough to make he altogether
insubordinate.
he have therefore take the opportunity of again speak to his
lordship about the hospital, and have endeavour to make it appear
that after all it would be unwise to exclude Mr Harding from the
appointment. Mr Slope, however, have a hard task than he have
imagine. Mrs Proudie, anxious to assume to herself as much as
possible of the merit of patronage, have write to Mrs Quiverful,
request she to call at the palace; and have then explain to
that matron, with much mystery, condescension, and dignity, the
good that be in store for she and her progeny. indeed Mrs Proudie
have be so engaged at the very time that Mr Slope have be do
the same with her husband at Puddingdale Vicarage, and have thus in
a measure commit herself. the thank, the humility, the
gratitude, the surprise of Mrs Quiverful have be very
overpowering; she have all but embrace the knee of her patroness;
and have promise that the prayer of fourteen unprovided babe (so
Mrs Quiverful have describe her own family, the eld of which be
a stout young woman of three-and-twenty) should be put up to heaven
morning and evening for the munificent friend whom God have send to
they. such incense as this be not unpleasing to Mrs Proudie, and
she make the most of it. she offer her general assistance to the
fourteen unprovided babe, if, as she have no doubt, she should find
they worthy; express a hope that the eld of they would be fit
to undertake tuition in her Sabbath school, and altogether make
herself a very great lady in the estimation of Mrs Quiverful.
have do this, she think it prudent to drop a few word before
the bishop, let he know that she have acquaint the
Puddingdale family with their good fortune; so that he might
perceive that he stand committed to the appointment. the husband
well understand the rule of his wife, but he do not resent it. he
know that she be take the patronage out of his hand; he be
resolve to put an end to her interference, and re-assume his
power. but then he think this be not the good time to do it. he
put off the evil hour, as many a man in similar circumstance have
do before he.
such have be the case, Mr Slope, naturally encounter a
difficulty in talk over the bishop, a difficulty indeed which he
find could not be overcome except at the cost of a general
outbreak at the palace. a general outbreak at the present moment
might be good policy, but it also might not. it be at any rate not
a step to be lightly take. he begin by whisper to the bishop
that he fear the public opinion would be against he if Mr
Harding do not reappear at the hospital. the bishop answer with
some warmth that Mr Quiverful have be promise the appointment on
Mr Slope's advice. 'not promise!' say Mr Slope. 'yes, promise,'
reply the bishop, 'and Mrs Proudie have see Mrs Quiverful on the
subject.' this be quite unexpected on the part of Mr Slope, but
his presence of mind do not fail he, and he turn the statement
to his own account.
'ah, my lord,' say he, 'we shall all be in scrape if the lady
interfere.'
this be too much in unison with his lordship's feeling to be
altogether unpalatable, and yet such an allusion to interference
demand a rebuke. my lord be somewhat astounded also, though not
altogether make miserable, by find that there be a point of
difference between his wife and his chaplain.
'I donot know what you mean by interference,' say the bishop
mildly. 'when Mrs Proudie hear that Mr Quiverful be to be
appoint, it be not unnatural that she should wish to see Mrs
Quiverful about the school. I really cannot say that I see any
interference.'
'I only speak, my lord, for your own comfort,' say Slope; 'for
your own comfort and dignity in the diocese. I can have no other
motive. as far as personal feeling go, Mrs Proudie be the good
friend I have. I must always remember that. but still, in my
present position, my first duty be to your lordship.'
'I be sure of that, Mr Slope, I be quite sure of that;' say the
bishop mollify: 'and I really think that Mr Harding should have
the hospital.'
'upon my word, I be inclined to think so. I be quite prepared to
take upon myself the blame of first suggest Mr Quiverful's name.
but since do so, I have find that there be so strong a feeling
in the diocese in favour of Mr Harding, that I think your lordship
should give way. I hear also that Mr Harding have modify his
objection he first feel to your lordship's proposition. and as to
what have pass between Mrs Proudie and Mrs Quiverful, the
circumstance may be a little inconvenient, but I really do not
think that that should weigh in a matter of so much moment.'
and thus the poor bishop be leave in a dreadfully undecided state
as to what he should do. his mind, however, slightly incline
itself to the appointment of Mr Harding, see that by such a
step, he should have the assistance of Mr Slope in oppose Mrs
Proudie.
such be the state of affair at the palace, when Mr Slope call
at Mrs Bold's house, and find she play with her baby. when she
run out of the room, Mr Slope begin praise the weather to Mary
Bold, then he praise the baby and kiss he, and then he praise
the mother, and then he praise Miss Bold herself. Mrs Bold,
however, be not long before she come back.
'I have to apologise for call at so very early an hour,' begin
Mr Slope, 'but I be really so anxious to speak to you that I hope
you and Miss Bold will excuse I.'
Eleanor mutter something in which the word 'certainly', and 'of
course', and 'not early at all', be just audible, and then
apologise for her own appearance, declare with a smile, that her
baby be become such a big boy that he be quite unmanageable.
'hebe a great bit naughty boy,' say she to the child; 'and we must
send he away to a great big rough romping school, where they have
great big rod, and do terrible thing to naughty boy who donot do
what their own mamma tell they;' and she then commence another
course of kiss, be actuate thereto by the terrible idea of
send her child away which her own imagination have depict.
'and where the master donot have such beautiful long hair to be
dishevel,' say Mr Slope, take up the joke and pay a
compliment at the same time.
Eleanor think he might as well have leave the compliment alone;
but she say nothing and look nothing, be occupy as she be
with the baby.
'let I take he,' say Mary. 'his clothe be nearly off his back
with his romp,' and so say she leave the room with the child.
Miss Bold have hear Mr Slope say he have something press to say
to Eleanor, and think that she might be de trop, take the
opportunity of get herself out of the room.
'donot be long, Mary,' say Eleanor, as Miss Bold shut the door.
'I be glad, Mrs Bold, to have the opportunity of have ten
minute' conversation with you alone,' begin Mr Slope. 'will you
let I openly ask you a plain question?'
'certainly,' say she.
'and I be sure you will give I a plain and open answer.'
'either that or none at all,' say she, laugh.
'my question be this, Mrs Bold; be your father really anxious to
get back to the hospital?'
'why do you ask I?' say she. 'why donot you ask himself?'
'my dear Mrs Bold, Iwill tell you why. there be wheel within
wheel, all of which I would explain to you, only I fear there be
not time. it be essentially necessary that I should have an answer
to this question, otherwise I cannot know how to advance your
father's wish; and it be quite impossible that I should ask
himself. no one can esteem your father more than I do, but I doubt
if this feeling be reciprocal.' it certainly be not. 'I must be
candid with you as the only mean of avoid ultimate
consequence, which may be most injurious to Mr Harding. I fear
there be a feeling, I will not even call it a prejudice, with
regard to myself in Barchester, which be not in my favour. you
remember the sermon--'
'oh! Mr Slope, we need not go back to that,' say Eleanor.
'for one moment, Mrs Bold. it be not that I may talk of myself, but
because it be so essential that you should understand how matter
stand. that sermon may have be ill-judged,--it be certainly
misunderstood; but I will say nothing about that now; only this,
that it do give rise to a feeling against myself which your father
share with other. it may be that he have proper cause, but the
result be that he be not inclined to meet I on friendly term. I
put it to yourself whether you do not know this to be the case.'
Eleanor make no answer, and Mr Slope, in the eagerness of his
address, edge his chair a little near to the widow's seat,
unperceive by she.
'such be so,' continue Mr Slope, 'I cannot ask he this
question as I can ask it of you. in spite of my delinquency since
I come to Barchester you have allow I to regard you as a
friend.' Eleanor make a little motion with her head which be
hardly confirmatory, but Mr Slope if he notice it, do not appear
to do so. 'to you I can speak openly, and explain the feeling of
my heart. this your father would not allow. unfortunately the
bishop have think it right that this matter of the hospital should
pass through my hand. there have be some detail to get up with
which he would not trouble himself, and thus it have come to pass
that I be force to have an interview with your father on the
matter.'
'I be aware of that,' say Eleanor.
'of course,' say he. 'in that interview Mr Harding leave the
impression on my mind that he do not wish to return to the
hospital.'
'how could that be?' say Eleanor, at last stir up to forget the
cold propriety of demeanour which she have determine to maintain.
'my dear Mrs Bold, I give you my word that such be the case,' say
he, again get a little near to she. 'and what be more than
that, before my interview with Mr Harding, certain person at the
palace, I do not mean the bishop, have tell I that such be the
fact. I own, I hardly believe it; I own, I think that your
father would wish on every account, for conscience' sake, for the
sake of those old man, for old association, and the memory of dear
day go by, on every account I think that he would wish to
resume his duty. but I be tell that such be not his wish; and
he certainly leave I with the impression that I have be tell the
truth.'
'well!' say Eleanor, now sufficiently rouse on the matter.
'I fear Miss Bold's step,' say Mr Slope, 'would it be ask too
great a favour to beg you to--I know you can manage anything with
Miss Bold.'
Eleanor do not like the word manage, but still she go out, and
ask Mary to leave they alone for another quarter of an hour.
'thank you, Mrs Bold,--I be so very grateful for this confidence.
well, I leave your father with this impression. indeed, I may say
that he make I understand that he decline the appointment.'
'not the appointment,' say Eleanor. 'I be sure he do not decline
the appointment. but he say that he would not agree,--that be,
that he do not like the scheme about the school, and the
service, and all that. I be quite sure he never say he wish to
refuse the place.'
'oh, Mrs Bold!' say Mr Slope, in a manner almost impassioned. 'I
would not, for the world, say to so good a daughter a word against
so good a father. but you must, for his sake, let I show you
exactly how the matter stand at present. Mr Harding be a little
flurry when I tell he of the bishop's wish about the school. I
do so, perhaps, with less caution because you yourself have so
perfectly agree with I on the same subject. he be a little put
out and speak warmly. "tell the bishop," say he, "that I quite
disagree with him,--and shall not return to the hospital as such
condition be attach to it." what he say be to that effect;
indeed, his word be, if anything, strong than those. I have no
alternative but to repeat they to his lordship, who say that he
could look on they in no other light than a refusal. he also have
hear the report that your father do not wish for the appointment,
and put all these thing together, he think he have not choice
but to look for some one else. he have consequently offer the
place to Mr Quiverful.'
'offer the place to Mr Quiverful!' repeat Eleanor, her eye
suffuse with tear. 'then, Mr Slope, there be an end of it.'
'no, my friend--not so,' say he. 'it be to prevent such be the
end of it that I be now here. I may at any rate presume that I have
get an answer to my question, and that Mr Harding be desirous of
return.'
'desirous of return--of course he be,' say Eleanor; 'of course
he wish to have back his house and his income, and his place in
the world; to have back what he give up with such self-deny
honesty, if he can have they without restraint on his conduct to
what at his age it would be impossible that he should submit. how
can the bishop ask a man of his age to turn schoolmaster to a pack
of child?'
'out of the question,' say Mr Slope, laugh slightly; 'of course
no such demand shall be make on your father. I can at any rate
promise you that I will not be the medium of any so absurd a
requisition. we wish your father to preach in the hospital, as
the inmate may naturally be too old to leave it; but even that
shall not be insist on. we wish also to attach a Sabbath-day
school to the hospital, think that such an establishment could
not but be useful under the surveillance of so good a clergyman as
Mr Harding, and also under your own. but, dear Mrs Bold; we willnot
talk of those thing now. one thing be clear; we mustdo what we can
to annul this rash offer the bishop make to Mr Quiverful. your
father wouldnot see Quiverful, would he? Quiverful be an honourable
man, and would not, for a moment, stand in your father's way.'
'what?' say Eleanor; 'ask a man with fourteen child to give up
his preferment! I be quite sure he will do no such thing.'
'I suppose not,' say Slope; and he again draw near to Mrs Bold, so
that now they be very close to each other. Eleanor do not think
much about it, but instinctively move away a little. how greatly
would she have increase the distance could he have guess what
have be say about she at Plumstead! 'I suppose not. but it be out
of the question that Quiverful should supersede your father--quite
out of the question. the bishop have be too rash. an idea occur
to I, which may, perhaps, with God's blessing, put we right. my
dear Mrs Bold, would you object to see the bishop yourself?'
'why should not my father see he?' say Eleanor. she have once
before in her life interfere with her father's affair, and then
not to much advantage. she be old now, and feel that she should
take no step in a matter so vital to he without his consent.
'why, to tell the truth,' say Mr Slope, with a look of sorrow, as
though he greatly bewail the want of charity in his patron, 'the
bishop fancy he have cause of anger against your father. I fear an
interview would lead to far ill will.'
'why,' say Eleanor, 'my father be the mild, the gentle man
living.'
'I only know,' say Slope, 'that he have the good of daughter. so
you would not see the bishop? as to get an interview, I could
manage that for you without the slight annoyance to yourself.'
'I could do nothing, Mr Slope, without consult my father.'
'ah!' say he, 'that would be useless; you would then only be your
father's messenger. do anything occur to yourself? something must
be do. your father shall not be ruin by so ridiculous a
misunderstanding.'
Eleanor say that nothing occur to she, but that it be very
hard; and the tear come to her eye and roll down her cheek. Mr
Slope would have give much to have have the privilege of dry
they; but he have tact enough to know that he have still a great deal
to do before he could even hope for any privilege with Mrs Bold.
'it cut I to the heart to see you so grieved,' say he. 'but pray
let I assure you that your father's interest shall not be
sacrifice if it be possible for I to protect they. I will tell
the bishop openly what be the fact. I will explain to he that he
have hardly the right to appoint any other than your father, and
will show he that if he do so he will be guilty of great
injustice--and you, Mrs Bold, you will have the charity at any rate
to believe this of I, that I be truly anxious for your father's
welfare,--for his and for your own.'
the widow hardly know what answer to make. she be quite aware that
her father would not be at all thankful to Mr Slope; she have a
strong wish to share her father's feeling; and yet she could not
but acknowledge that Mr Slope be very kind. her father, who be
generally charitable to all man, who seldom speak ill of any one,
have warn against Mr Slope, and yet she do not know how to
abstain from thank he. what interest could he have in the
matter but that which he profess? nevertheless there be that in
his manner which even she distrust. she feel, and she do not
know why, that there be something about he which ought to put she
on her guard.
Mr Slope read all this in her hesitating manner just as plainly as
though she have open her heart to he. it be the talent of the
man that he could so read the inward feeling of woman with whom he
converse. he know that Eleanor be doubt he, and that if she
thank he she would only do so because she could not help it; but
yet this do not make he angry or even annoy he. Rome be not
build in a day.
'I do not come for thank,' continue he, see her hesitation;
'and do not want they--at any rate before they be merit. but
this I do want, Mrs Bold, that I may make myself friend in this
fold to which it have please God to call I as one of the humblest
of his shepherd. if I cannot do so, my task here must indeed be a
sad one. I will at any rate endeavour to deserve they.'
'Ibe sure,' say she, 'you will soon make plenty of friend.'
she feel herself oblige to say something.
'that will be nothing unless they be such as will sympathise with
my feeling; unless they be such as I can reverence and
admire--and love. if the good and purest turn away from I, I
cannot bring myself to be satisfied with the friendship of the less
estimable. in such case I must live alone.'
'oh! Ibe sure you will not do that, Mr Slope.' Eleanor mean
nothing, but it suit he to appear that some special allusion have
be intend.
'indeed, Mrs Bold, I shall live alone, quite alone as far as the
heart be concern, if those with whom I yearn to ally myself turn
away from I. but enough of this; I have call you my friend, and
I hope you will not contradict I. I trust the time may come when I
may also call your father so. my God bless you, Mrs Bold, you and
your darling boy. and tell your father from I that what can be
do for his interest shall be do.'
and so he take his leave, press the widow's hand rather more
closely than usual. circumstance, however, seem just then to
make this intelligible, and the lady do not feel call on to
resent it.
'I cannot understand he,' say Eleanor to Mary Bold, a few minute
afterwards. 'I do not know whether he be a good man or a bad
man--whether he be true or false.'
'then give he the benefit of the doubt,' say Mary, 'and believe
the good.'
'on the whole I think I do,' say Eleanor. 'I think I do believe
that he mean well--and if so, it be a shame that we should revile
he, and make he miserable while he be among we. but, oh Mary, I
fear papa will be disappoint in the hospital.'
CHAPTER XVII
who shall be cock of the WALK?
all this time thing be go on somewhat uneasily at the palace.
the hint or two which Mr Slope have give be by no mean throw
away upon the bishop. he have a feeling that if he ever mean to
oppose the now almost unendurable despotism of his wife, he must
lose no further time in do so; that if he even mean to be
himself master in his own diocese, let alone his own house, he
should begin at once. it would have be easy to have do so
from the day of his consecration than now, but easier now than when
Mrs Proudie should have succeed in thoroughly master the
diocesan detail. then the proffered assistance of Mr Slope be a
great thing for he, a most unexpected and invaluable aid. Hitherto
he have look on the two as ally force; and have consider that
as ally they be impregnable. he have begin to believe that his
only chance of escape would be by the advancement of Mr Slope to
some distant and rich preferment. but now it seem that one of his
enemy, certainly the least potent of they, but nevertheless one
very important, be willing to desert his own camp. he walk up
and down his little study, almost think that the time have come
when he would be able to appropriate to his own use the big room
upstairs, in which his predecessor have always sit.
as he resolve these thing in his mind a note be bring to he
from Archdeacon Grantly, in which that divine beg his lordship
to do he the honour of see he on the morrow--would his
lordship have the kindness to name the hour? Dr Grantly's propose
visit would have reference to the re-appointment of Mr Harding to
the wardenship of Hiram's hospital. the bishop have read this
note be inform that the archdeacon's servant be wait for an
answer.
here at once a great opportunity offer itself to the bishop of
act on his own responsibility. he bethink himself of his new
ally, and ring the bell for Mr Slope. it turn out that Mr Slope
be not in the house; and then, greatly dare, the bishop with his
own unassisted spirit write a note to the archdeacon say that he
would see he, and name the hour for do so. have watch
from his study-window that the messenger get safely off the
premise with this despatch, he begin to turn over in his mind what
step he should next take.
to-morrow he would have to declare to the archdeacon either that Mr
Harding should have the appointment, or that he should not have it.
the bishop feel that he could not honestly throw over Mr Quiverful
without inform Mrs Proudie, and he resolve at last to brave the
lioness in her own den and tell she that circumstance be such
that it behove he to reappoint Mr Harding. he do not feel that
he should at all derogate from his new courage by promise Mrs
Proudie that the very first piece of available preferment at his
disposal should be give to Quiverful to atone for the injury do
to he. if he could mollify the lioness with such a sop, how happy
would he think his first effort have be?
not without many misgiving do he find himself in Mrs Proudie's
boudoir. he have at first thought of send for she. but it be not
at all impossible that she might choose to take such a message
amiss, and then also it might be some protection to he to have his
daughter present at the interview. he find she sit with her
account book before her nibble the end of her pencil evidently
merse in pecuniary difficulty, and harass in mind by the
multiplicity of palatial expense, and the heavy cost of episcopal
grandeur. her daughter be around she. Olivia be read a
novel, Augusta be cross a note to her bosom friend in Baker
Street, and Netta be work diminutive coach wheel for the
bottom of a petticoat. if the bishop could get the well of his
wife in her present mood, he would be a man indeed. he might then
consider victory his own for ever. after all, in such case the
matter between husband and wife stand much the same as it do
between two boy at the same school, two cock in the same yard, or
two army on the same continent. the conqueror once be generally
the conqueror for ever after. the prestige of victory be
everything.
'Ahem--my dear,' begin the bishop, 'if you be disengage, I wish
to speak to you.' Mrs Proudie put her pencil down carefully at the
point to which she have dot her figure, mark down in her
memory the sum she have arrive at, and then look up, sourly
enough, into her helpmate's face. 'if you be busy, another time
will do as well,' continue the bishop, whose courage like Bob
Acres' have ooze out, now that he find himself on the ground of
battle.
'what be it about, bishop?' ask the lady.
'well--it be about those Quiverfuls--but I see you be engage.
another time will do just as well for I.'
'what about the Quiverfuls? it be quite understand I believe, that
they be to come to the hospital. there be to be no doubt about
that, be there?' and as she speak she keep her pencil sternly and
vigorously fix on the column of figure before she.
'why, my dear, there be a difficulty,' say the bishop.
'a difficulty!' say Mrs Proudie, 'what difficulty? the place
have be promise to Mr Quiverful, and of course he must have it.
he have make all his arrangement. he have write for a curate for
Puddingdale, he have speak to the auctioneer about sell his
farm, horse, and cow, and in all respect consider the place as
his own. of course he must have it.'
now, bishop, look well to thyself, and call up all the manhood that
be in thee. think how much be at stake. if now thou art not true to
thy gun, no Slope can hereafter aid thee. how can he who desert
his own colour at the final smell of gunpowder expect faith in any
ally. Thou thyself hast seek the battlefield; fight out the
battle manfully now thou art there. Courage, bishop, courage!
frown cannot kill, nor can sharp word break any bone. after all
the apron be thine own. she can appoint no warden, give away no
benefice, nominate no chaplain, an' thou art but true to thyself.
up, man, and at she with a constant heart.
some little monitor within the bishop's breast so address he.
but then there be another monitor there which advise he
differently, and as follow. remember, bishop, she be a woman, and
such a woman be the very mischief. be it not well for thee to
carry on this war, if it must be wag, from behind thine own table
in thine own study? do not every cock fight well on be own
dunghill? Thy daughter also be here, the pledge of thy love, the
fruit of thy loin; be it well that they should see thee in the
hour of thy victory over their mother? Nay, be it well that they
should see thee in the possible hour of thy defeat? besides, hast
thou not choose thy opportunity with wonderful little skill, indeed
with no touch of sagacity for which thou art famous? will it not
turn out that thou art wrong in this matter, and thine enemy right;
that thou hast actually pledge thyself in this matter of the
hospital, and that now thou wouldst turn upon thy wife because she
require from thee but the fulfilment of thy promise? art thou not
a Christian bishop, and be not thy word to be hold sacred whatever
be the result? Return, bishop, to thy sanctum on the low floor,
and postpone thy combative propensity for some occasion in which
at least thou may fight the battle against odd less
tremendously against thee.
all this pass within the bishop's bosom while Mrs Proudie stall
sit with her fix pencil, and the figure of her sum still
endure on the tablet of her memory. 'L4 17s 7d,' she say to
herself. 'of course Mr Quiverful must have the hospital,' she say
out loud to her lord.
'well, my dear, I merely want to suggest to you that Mr Slope
seem to think that if Mr Harding be not appoint, public feeling
in the matter would be against we and that the press might perhaps
take it up.'
'Mr Slope seem to think!' say Mrs Proudie, in a tone of voice
which plainly show the bishop that he be right in look for a
breach in that quarter. 'and what have Mr Slope to do with it? I
hope, my lord, you be not go to allow yourself to be govern
by a chaplain.' and now in her eagerness the lady lose her place in
her account.
'certainly not, my dear. nothing I can assure you be less probable.
but still Mr Slope may be useful in find how the wind blow, and
I really think that if we could give something good to Mr
Quiverful--'
'nonsense,' say Mrs Proudie; 'it would be year before you could
give they anything else that could suit they half as well, and as
for the press and the public, and all that, remember there be two
way of tell a story. if Mr Harding be fool enough to tell his
tale, we can also tell ours. the place be offer to he, and he
refuse it. it have now be give to someone else, and therebe an
end of it. at least, I should think so.'
'well, my dear, I rather believe you be right;' say the bishop,
and sneak out of the room, he go down stair, trouble in his
mind as to how he should receive the archdeacon on the morrow. he
feel himself not very well just at present; and begin to consider
that he might, not improbably, be detain in his room the next
morning by an attack of bile. he be, unfortunately, very subject
to bilious annoyance.
'Mr Slope, indeed! Iwill slope he,' say the indignant matron to
she listening progeny. 'I donot know what have come to Mr Slope. I
believe he think he be to be Bishop of Barchester himself, because
I have take he by the hand, and get your father to make he his
domestic chaplain.'
'he be always full of impudence,' say Olivia; 'I tell you so once
before, mamma.' Olivia, however, have not think he too impudent
when once before he have propose to make her Mrs Slope.
'well, Olivia, I always think you like he,' say Augusta, who
at that moment have some grudge against her sister. 'I always
dislike the man because I think he thoroughly vulgar.'
'there yoube wrong,' say Mrs Proudie; 'hebe not vulgar at all;
and what be more, he be a soul-stir, eloquent preacher; but he
must be teach to know his place if he be to remain in this house.'
'he have the horrid eye I ever see in a man's head,' say Netta;
'and I tell you what, hebe terribly greedy; do you see the current
pie he eat yesterday?'
when Mr Slope get home he soon learn from the bishop, as much from
his manner as his word, that Mrs Proudie's behest in the matter
of the hospital be to be obey. Dr Proudie let fall something as
to 'this occasion only,' and 'keep all affair about patronage
exclusively in his own hand.' but he be quite decide about Mr
Harding; and as Mr Slope do not wish to have both the prelate and
the prelatess against he, he do not at present see that he could
do anything but yield.
he merely remark that he would of course carry out the bishop's
view, and that he be quite sure that if the bishop trust to his
own judgment thing in the diocese would certainly be well order.
Mr Slope know that if you hit a nail on the head often enough, it
will penetrate at last.
he be sit alone in his room on the same evening when a light
knock be make on his door, and before he could answer it the door
be open, and his patroness appear. he be all smile in a
moment, but so be not she also. she take, however, the chair that
be offer to she, and thus begin her expostulation :-
'Mr Slope, I do not at all approve your conduct the other night
with that italian woman. any one would have think that you be
her lover.'
'good gracious, my dear madam,' say Mr Slope, with a look of
horror. 'why, she be a married woman.'
'thatbe more than I know,' say Mrs Proudie; 'however she choose
to pass for such. but married or not marry, such attention as you
pay she be improper. I cannot believe that you would wish to give
offence in my drawing-room, Mr Slope; but I owe it to myself and my
daughter to tell you that I disapprove your conduct.'
Mr Slope open wide his huge protrude eye, and star out of
they with a look of well-dignified surprise. 'why, Mrs Proudie,'
say he, 'I do but fetch her something to eat when she be
hungry.'
'and you have call on she since,' continue she, look at the
culprit with the stern look of a detective policeman in the act of
declare himself.
Mr Slope turn over in his mind whether it would be well for he
to tell this termagant at once that he should call on whom he
like, and do what he like; but he remember that his footing in
Barchester be not yet sufficiently firm, and that it would be
well for he to pacify she.
'I certainly call since at Dr Stanhope's house, and certainly see
Madame Neroni.'
'yes, and you see she alone,' say the episcopal Argus.
'undoubtedly I do,' say Mr Slope, 'but that be because nobody
else happen to be in the room. surely it be no fault of mine if
the rest of the family be out.'
'perhaps not; but I assure you, Mr Slope, you will fall greatly in
my estimation if I find that you allow yourself to be catch by the
lur of that woman. I know woman well than you do, Slope, and
you may believe I that that signora, as she call herself, be not
a fitting companion for a strict evangelical, unmarried young
clergyman.'
how Mr Slope would have like to laugh at she, have he dare! but he
do not dare. so he merely say, 'I can assure you, Mrs Proudie,
the lady in question be nothing to I.'
'well, I hope not, Mr Slope. but I have consider it my duty to
give you this caution; and now there be another thing I feel myself
call upon to speak about; it be your conduct to the bishop, Mr
Slope.'
'my conduct to the bishop,' say he, now truly surprised and
ignorant what the lady allude to.
'yes, Mr Slope; your conduct to the bishop. it be by no means what
I would wish to see it.'
'has the bishop say anything, Mrs Proudie?'
'no, the bishop have say nothing. he probably think that any
remark on the matter will come well from I, who first
introduce you to his lordship's notice. the fact be, Mr Slope, you
be a little inclined to take too much upon yourself.'
an angry spot show itself upon Mr Slope's cheek, and it be with
difficulty that he control himself. but he do do so, and sit
quite silent while the lady go on.
'it be the fault of many young man in your position, and therefore
the bishop be not incline at present to resent it. you will, no
doubt, soon learn what be require from you, and what be not. if
you will take my advice, however, you will be careful not to
obtrude advice upon the bishop in any matter concern patronage.
if his lordship want advice, he know where to look for it.' and
then have add to her counsel a string of platitude as to what
be desirable and what not desirable in the conduct of a strictly
evangelical, unmarried young clergyman, Mrs Proudie retreat,
leave the chaplain to his thought.
the upshot of his thought be this, that there certainly be not
room in the diocese for the energy of both himself and Mrs
Proudie, and that it behove he quickly to ascertain whether his
energy or hers would prevail.
CHAPTER xviii
the WIDOW's persecution
early on the follow morning, Mr Slope be summon to the
bishop's dressing-room, and go there fully expect that he
should find his lordship very indignant, and spirit up by his
wife to repeat the rebuke which she have administer on the
previous day. Mr Slope have resolve that at any rate from he he
would not stand it, and enter the dressing-room in rather a
combative disposition; but he find the bishop in the most placid
and gentle of humour. his lordship complain of be rather
unwell, have a slight headache, and be not quite the thing in his
stomach; but there be nothing the matter with his temper.
'oh, Slope,' say he, take the chaplain's proffered hand.
'Archdeacon Grantly be to call on I this morning, and I really be
not fit to see he. I fear I must trouble you to see he for I;'
and then Dr Proudie proceed to explain what it be that must be
say to Dr Grantly. he be to be tell in fact in the civil word
in which the tiding could be convey, that Mr Harding have
refuse the wardenship, the appointment have be offer to Mr
Quiverful and accept by he.
Mr Slope again point out to his patron that he think he be
perhaps not quite wise in his decision, and this he do sotto voce.
but even with this precaution it be not safe to say much, and
during the little that he do say, the bishop make a very slight,
but still a very ominous gesture with his thumb towards the door
which open from his dressing-room to some inner sanctuary. Mr
Slope at once take the hint and say no more; but he perceive that
there be to be confidence between he and his patron, that the
league desire by he be to be make, and that this appointment of
Mr Quiverful be to be the sacrifice offer on the altar of
conjugal obedience. all this Mr Slope read in the slight motion of
the bishop's thumb, and he read it correctly. there be no need of
parchment and seal, of attestation, explanation, and
profession. the bargain be understand between they, and Mr Slope
give the bishop his hand upon it. the bishop understand the little
extra squeeze, and an intelligible gleam of assent twinkle in his
eye.
'pray be civil to the archdeacon, Mr Slope,' say he out loud; 'but
make he quite understand that in this matter Mr Harding have put it
out of my power to oblige he.'
it would be calumny on Mrs Proudie to suggest that she be sit
in her bed-room with her ear at the keyhole during this interview.
she have within she a spirit of decorum which prevent she from
descend to such baseness. to put her ear to a key-hole or to
listen at a chink, be a trick for a housemaid.
Mrs Proudie know this, and therefore she do not do it; but she
station herself as near to the door as she well could, that she
might, if possible, get the advantage which the housemaid would
have have, without descend to the housemaid's artifice.
it be little, however, that she hear, and that little be only
sufficient to deceive she. she see nothing of that friendly
pressure, perceive nothing of that conclude bargain; she do not
even dream of the treacherous resolve which those two false man
have make together to upset she in the pride of her station, to dash
the cup from her lip before she have drink of it, to seep away all
her power before she have taste its sweet! traitor that they
be; the husband of her bosom, and the outcast whom she have
foster and bring into the warmth of the world's bright
fireside! but neither of they have the magnanimity of this woman.
though two man have thus league themselves together against she,
even yet the battle be not lose.
Mr Slope feel pretty sure that Dr Grantly would decline the honour
of see he, and such turn out to be the case. the archdeacon,
when the palace door be open to he, be greet by a note. Mr
Slope present his compliment &c, &c. the bishop be ill in his
room, and very greatly regret, &c &c. Mr Slope have be charge
with the bishop's view, and if agreeable to the archdeacon, would
do himself the honour &c, &c. the archdeacon, however, be not
agreeable, and have read his note in the hall, crumple it up in
his hand, and mutter something about sorrow for his lordship's
illness, take his leave, without send as much as a verbal
message in answer to Mr Slope's note.
'Ill!' say the archdeacon to himself as he fling himself into his
brougham. 'the man be absolutely a coward. he be afraid to see I.
Ill, indeed!' the archdeacon be never ill himself, and do not
therefore understand that any one else could in truth be prevent
by illness from keep an appointment. he regard all such
excuse as subterfuge, and in the present instance he be not far
wrong.
Dr Grantly desire to be drive to his father-in-law's lodging in
the High Street, and hear from the servant that Mr Harding be
at his daughter's, follow he to Mrs Bold's house, and there he
find he. the archdeacon be fume with rage when he get into the
drawing-room, and have by this time nearly forget the
pusillanimity of the bishop in the villainy of the chaplain.
'look at that,' say he, throw Mr Slope's crumpled note to Mr
Harding. 'I be to be tell that if I choose I may have the honour of
see Mr Slope, and that too, after a positive engagement with the
bishop.'
'but he say the bishop be ill,' say Mr Harding.
'Pshaw! you donot mean to say that you be deceive by such an
excuse as that. he be well enough yesterday. now I tell you what,
I will see the bishop; and I will tell he also very plainly what I
think of his conduct. I will see he, or else Barchester will soon
be too hot to hold he.'
Eleanor be sit in the room, but Dr Grantly have hardly notice
she in his anger. Eleanor now say to he, with the great
innocence, 'I wish you have see Mr Slope, Dr Grantly, because I
think perhaps it might have do good.'
the archdeacon turn on she with almost brutal wrath. have she at
once own that she have accept Mr Slope for her second husband,
he could hardly have feel more convinced of her belong body and
soul to the Slope and Proudie party than he now do on hear she
express such a wish as this. poor Eleanor!
'see he,' say the archdeacon, glare at she; 'and why be I be
call on to lower myself in the world's esteem an my own by come
in contact with such a man as that? I have hitherto live among
gentleman, and do not mean to be drag into other company by
anybody.'
Poor Mr Harding know well what the archdeacon mean, but Eleanor
be as innocent as her own baby. she could not understand how the
archdeacon could consider himself to be drag into bad company by
condescend to speak to Mr Slope for a few minute when the
interest of her father might be serve by do so.
'I be talk for a full hour yesterday with Mr Slope,' say she,
with some little assumption of dignity, 'and I do not find myself
to be lower by it.'
'perhaps not,' say he. 'but if youwill be good enough to allow I,
I shall judge for myself in such matter. and I tell you what,
Eleanor; it will be much well for you if you will allow yourself
to be guide also by the advice of those who be your friend. if
you do not you will be apt to find you have no friend leave who can
advise you.'
Eleanor blush up to the root of her hair. but even now she have
not the slight idea of what be pass in the archdeacon's
mind. no thought of love-making or love-receiving have yet find its
way to her heart since the death of poor John Bold; and if it be
possible that such a thought should spring there, the man must be
far different from Mr Slope that could give it birth.
nevertheless Eleanor blush deeply, for she feel she be charge
with improper conduct, and she do so with the more inward pain
because her father do not instantly rally to her side; that father
for whose sake and love she have submit to be the receptacle of
Mr Slope's confidence. she have give a detailed account of all that
have pass to her father; and though he have not absolutely agree
with she about Mr Slope's view touch the hospital, yet he have
say nothing to make she think that she have be wrong in talk
to he.
she be far too angry to humble herself before her brother- in-law.
indeed, she have never accustom herself to be very abject before
he, and they have never be confidential ally. 'I do not in the
least understand what you mean, Dr Grantly,' say she. 'I do not
know that I can accuse myself of do anything that my friend
should disapprove. Mr Slope call here expressly to ask what
papa's view be about the hospital; and as I believe he call
with friendly intention I tell he.'
'friendly intention!' sneer the archdeacon.
'I believe you greatly wrong Mr Slope,' continue Eleanor; 'but I
have explain this to papa already; and as you do not seem to
approve of what I say, Dr Grantly, I will with your permission
leave you and papa together,' and so say she walk out of the
room.
all this make Mr Harding very unhappy. it be quite clear that the
archdeacon and his wife have make up their mind that Eleanor be
go to marry Mr Slope. Mr Harding could not really bring himself
to think that she would do so, but yet he could not deny that
circumstance make it appear that the man's company be not
disagreeable to she. she be now constantly see he, and yet she
receive visit from no other unmarried gentleman. she always take
his part when his conduct be canvass, although she be aware how
personally objectionable he be to her friend. then, again, Mr
Harding feel that if she should choose to become Mrs Slope, he have
nothing that he could justly against she do so. she have full
right to please herself, and he, as a father could not say that she
would disgrace herself by marry a clergyman who stand so well
before the world as Mr Slope do. as for quarrel with his
daughter on account of such a marriage, and separate himself from
she as the archdeacon have threaten to do, that, with Mr Harding,
would be out of the question. if she should determine to marry this
man, he must get over his aversion as good he could. his Eleanor,
his own old companion in their old happy home, must still be friend
of his bosom, the child of his heart. let who would cast she off,
he would not. if it be fat, that he should have to sit in his
old age at the same table with a man whom of all man he dislike
the most, he would meet his fate as good he might. anything to he
would be preferable to the loss of his daughter.
such be his feeling, he hardly know how to take part with
Eleanor against the archdeacon, or with the archdeacon against
Eleanor. it will be say that he should never have suspect she.
alas! he never should have do so. but Mr Harding be by no mean
a perfect character. his indecision, his weakness, his proneness to
be lead by other, his want of self-confidence, he be very far from
be perfect. and then it must be remember that such a marriage
as that which the archdeacon contemplate with disgust, which we
who know Mr Slope so well would regard with equal disgust, do not
appear so monstrous to Mr Harding, because in his charity he do
not hate the chaplain as the archdeacon do, and as we do.
he be, however, very unhappy when his daughter leave the room, and
he have recourse to an old trick of his that be customary to he in
his time of sadness. he begin play some slow tune upon an
imaginary violoncello, draw one hand slowly backwards and
forwards as though he hold a bow in it, and modulate the unreal
chord with the other.
'shewill marry that man as sure as two and two make four,' say the
practical archdeacon.
'I hope not, I hope not,' say the father. 'but if she do, what
can I say to she? I have no right to object to he.'
'no right!' exclaim Dr Grantly.
'no right as her father. he be in my own profession, and for aught
we know a good man.'
to this the archdeacon would by no means assent. it be not well,
however, to argue the case against Eleanor in her own drawing-room,
and so they both walk forth and discuss the matter in all the
bearing under the elm tree of the close. Mr Harding also
explain to his son-in-law what have be the purport, at any rate
the alleged purport, of Mr Slope's last visit to the widow. he,
however, state that he could not bring himself to believe that Mr
Slope have any real anxiety such as that he have pretend. 'I cannot
forget his demeanour to myself,' say Mr Harding, 'and it be not
possible that his idea should have change so soon.'
'I see it all,' say the archdeacon. 'the sly tartufe! he think to
buy the daughter by provide for the father. he mean to show how
powerful he be, how good he be, and how much he be willing to do
for her beaux yeux; yes, I see it all now. but wewill be too many
for he yet, Mr Harding;' he say, turn to his companion with
some gravity, and press his hand on the other's arm. 'it would,
perhaps, be well for you to lose the hospital than get it on such
term.'
'lose it!' say Mr Harding; 'why Ihave lose it already. I donot want
it. Ihave make up my mind to do without it. Iwill withdraw
altogether. Iwill just go and write a line to the bishop and tell
he that I withdraw my claim altogether.'
nothing would have please he well than to be allow to escape
from the trouble and difficulty in such a manner. but he be now
go too fast for the archdeacon.
'no--no--no! wewill do no such thing,' say Dr Grantly; 'wewill still
have the hospital. I hardly doubt but that wewill have it. but not
by Mr Slope's assistance. if that be necessary, wewill lose it; but
wewill have it, spite of his tooth, if we can. Arabin will be at
Plumstead to-morrow; you must come over and talk to he.'
the two now turn into the cathedral library, which be use by
the clergyman of the close as a sort of ecclesiastical club-room,
for write sermon and sometimes letter; also for read
theological work, and sometimes magazine and newspaper. the
theological work be not disturb, perhaps, quite as often as
from the appearance of the building the outside public might have
be lead to expect. here the two ally settle on their course of
action. the archdeacon write a letter to the bishop, strongly
word, but still respectful, in which he put forward his
father-in-law's claim to the appointment, and express his own
regret that he have not be able to see his lordship when he
call. of Mr Slope I make no mention whatsoever. it be then
settle that Mr Harding should go to Plumstead on the follow
day; and after considerable discussion on the matter, the
archdeacon propose to ask Eleanor there also, so as to withdraw
she, if possible, from Mr Slope's attention. 'a week or two,' say
he, 'may teach she what he be, and while she be there she will be
out of harm's way. Mr Slope willnot come there after she.'
Eleanor be not a little surprised when her brother-in-law come
back and very civilly press she to go out to Plumstead with her
father. she instantly perceive that her father have be fight
her battle for she behind her back. she feel thankful to he, and
for his sake she would not show her resentment to the archdeacon by
refuse his invitation. but she could not, she say, go on the
morrow; she have an invitation to drink tea at the Stanhopes which
she have promise to accept. she would, she add, go with her
father on the next day, if he would wait; or she would follow he.
'the Stanhopes!' say Dr Grantly; 'I do not know you be so
intimate with they.'
'I do not know it myself,' say she, 'till Miss Stanhope call
yesterday. however, I like she very much, and I have promise to go
and play chess with some of they.'
'have they a party there?' say the archdeacon, still fearful of Mr
Slope.
'oh, no,' say Eleanor; 'Miss Stanhope say there be to be nobody
at all. but she have learn that Mary have leave I for a few week,
and she have learn from some one that I play chess, and so she come
over on purpose to ask I to go in.'
'well, thatbe very friendly,' say the ex-warden. 'they certainly
do look more like foreigner than english people, but I dare say
they be none the bad for that.'
the archdeacon be inclined to look upon the Stanhopes with
favourable eye, and have nothing to object on the matter. it be
therefore arrange that Mr Harding should postpone his visit to
plumstead for one day, and then take with he Eleanor, the baby,
and the nurse.
Mr Slope be certainly become of some importance in Barchester.
CHAPTER XIX
BARCHESTER BY MOONLIGHT
there be much cause for grief and occasional perturbation of
spirit in the Stanhope family, but yet they rarely seem to be
grieve or to be disturb. it be the peculiar gift of each of
they that each be able to bear his or her own burden without
complaint, and perhaps without sympathy. they habitually look on
the sunny side of the wall, if there be a gleam on the either side
for they to look at; and, if there be none, they endure the shade
with an indifference which, if not stoical, answer the end at
which the Stoics aim. Old Stanhope could not but feel that he have
ill-perform his duty as a father and a clergyman; and could
hardly look forward to his own death without grief at the position
in which he would leave his family. his income for many year have
be as high as l 3000 a year, and yet they have among they no other
provision than their mother's fortune of l 10,000. he have not only
spend his income, but be in debt. yet, with all this, he seldom
show much outward sign of trouble.
it be the same with the mother. if she add little to the
pleasure of her child she detract still less: she neither
grumble at her lot, nor speak much of her past or future
suffering; as long as she have a maid to adjust her dress, and have
those dress well make, nature with she be satisfied. it be the
same with her child. Charlotte never rebuke her father with the
prospect of their future poverty, nor do it seem to grieve she
that she be become an old maid so quickly; her temper be rarely
ruffle, and, if we might judge by her appearance, she be always
happy. the signora be not so sweet-temper, but she possess
much enduring courage; she seldom complain--never, indeed, to her
family. though she have a cause for affliction which would have
utterly break down the heart of most woman as beautiful as she and
as devoid of all religious support, yet, she bear her suffering in
silence, or allude to it only to elicit the sympathy and stimulate
the admiration of the man with whom she flirt. as to Bertie, one
would have imagine from the sound of his voice and the gleam of
his eye that he have not a sorrow nor a care in the world. nor have
he. he be incapable of anticipate tomorrow's grief. the
prospect of future want no more disturb his appetite than do
that of the butcher's knife disturb the appetite of the sheep.
such be the usual tenor of their way; but there be rare
exception. occasionally the father would allow an angry glance to
fall from his eye, and the lion would send forth a low dangerous
roar as though he meditate some deed of blood. occasionally also
Madame Neroni would become bitter against mankind, more than
usually antagonistic to the world's decency, and would seem as
though she be about to break from her mooring and allow herself
to be carry forth by the tide of her feeling to utter ruin and
shipwreck. she, however, like the rest of they, have no real
feeling, could feel no true passion. in that be her security.
before she resolve on any contemplated escapade she would make a
small calculation, and generally sum up that the Stanhope villa
or even Barchester close be well than the world at large.
they be most irregular in their hour. the father be generally
the early in the breakfast-parlour, and Charlotte would soon
follow and give he coffee; but the other breakfast anywhere
anyhow, and at any time. on the morning after the archdeacon's
futile visit to the palace, Dr Stanhope come down stair with an
ominously dark look about his eyebrow; his white lock be
rougher than usual, and he breathe thickly and loudly as he take
his seat in his arm-chair. he have open letter in his hand, and
when Charlotte come into the room he be still read they. she
go up and kiss he as be she willnot, but he hardly notice she
as she do so, and she know at once that something be the matter.
'whatbe the meaning of that?' say he, throw over the table a
letter with a Milan post-mark. Charlotte be a little frightened as
she take it up, but her mind be relieve when she see that it be
merely the bill of their italian milliner. the sum total be
certainly large, but not so large as to create an important row.
'itbe for our clothe, papa, for six month before we come here.
the three of we cannot dress for nothing you know.'
'nothing, indeed!' say he, look at the figure, which in
milanese denomination be certainly monstrous.
'the man should have send it to I,' say Charlotte.
'I wish he have with all my heart--if you would have pay it. I see
enough in it, to know that three quarter of it be for Madeline.'
'she have little else to amuse she, sir,' say Charlotte with true
good nature.
'and I suppose he have nothing to amuse he,' say the doctor,
throw over another letter to his daughter. it be from some
member of the family of Sidonia, and politely request the father
to pay a small trifle of l 700, be the amount of a bill
discount in favour of Mr Ethelbert Stanhope, and now overdue for
a period of nine month.
Charlotte read the letter, slowly fold it up, and put it under
the edge of the tea-tray.
'I suppose he have nothing to amuse he but discount bill with
Jews. do he think Iwill pay that?'
'I be sure he think no such thing,' say she.
'and who do he think will pay it?'
'as far as honesty go, I suppose it willnot much matter if it be
never pay,' say she. 'I dare say he get very little of it.'
'I suppose it willnot much matter either,' say the father, 'if he
go to prison and rot there. it seem to I that thatbe the other
alternative.'
Dr Stanhope speak the custom of his youth. but his daughter, though
she live so long abroad, be much more completely verse in the
way of the english world. 'if the man arrest he,' say she, 'he
must go through the court.'
it be thus, thou great family of Sidonia--it be thus that we
gentile treat thee, when, in our most extreme need, thou and thine
have aid we with mountain of gold as big as lion--and
occasionally with wine-warrant and order for dozen of
dressing-case.
'what, and become an insolvent?' say the doctor.
'hebe that already,' say Charlotte, wish always to get over a
difficulty.
'what a condition,' say the doctor, 'for the son of a clergyman of
the Church of England.'
'I donot see why clergyman's son should pay their debt more than
other young man,' say Charlotte.
'hebe have as much from I since he leave school as be hold
sufficient for the eld son of many a nobleman,' say the angry
father.
'well, sir,' say Charlotte, 'give he another chance.'
'what!' say the doctor, 'do you mean that I be to pay that Jew?'
'oh, no! I wouldnot pay he, he must take his chance; and if the
bad come to the bad, Bertie must go abroad. but I want you to
be civil to Bertie, and let he remain here as long as we stop. he
have a plan in his head, that may put he on his foot after all.'
just at that moment the door open, and Bertie come in whistle.
the doctor immediately devote himself to his egg, and allow
Bertie to whistle himself round to his sister's side without
notice he.
Charlotte give a little sign to he with her eye, first glance at
her father, and then at the letter, the corner of which peep out
from under the tea-tray. Bertie see and understand, and with the
quiet motion of a cat abstract the letter, and make himself
acquaint with its content. the doctor, however, have see he,
deep as he appear to be merse in his egg-shell, and say in his
harsh voice, 'well, sir, do you know that gentleman?'
'yes, sir,' say Bertie. 'I have a sort of acquaintance with he,
but none that can justify he in trouble you. if you will allow
I, sir, I will answer this.'
'at any rate I shallnot,' say the father, and then he add, after a
pause, 'be it true, sir, that you owe the man L 700?'
'well,' say Bertie, 'I think I should be incline to dispute the
amount, if I be in a condition to pay he such of it as I really
do owe he.'
'has he your bill for l 700?' say the father, speak very loudly
and very angrily.
'well, I believe he have,' say Bertie; 'but all the money I ever
get from he be L 150.'
'and what become of the l 550?'
'why, sir; the commission be L 100, or so, and I take the remainder
in pave-stone and rock-horse.'
'paving-stone and rock-horse!' say the doctor, 'where be
they?'
'oh, sir, I suppose they be in London somewhere--but Iwill inquire
if you wish for they.'
'hebe an idiot,' say the doctor, 'and itbe sheer folly to waste
more money on he. nothing can save he from ruin,' and so saying,
the unhappy father walk out of the room.
'would the governor like to see the paving-stone?'
'Iwill tell you what,' say she. 'if you donot take care, you will
find yourself loose upon the world without even a house over your
head: you donot know he as well as I do. hebe very angry.'
Bertie stroke his big beard, sip his tea, chat over his
misfortune in a half comic, half serious tone, and end by
promise his sister that he would do his very good to make himself
agreeable to the widow Bold. then Charlotte follow her father to
his own room and soften down his wrath, and persuade he to say
nothing more about the Jew bill discounter, at any rate for a few
week. he even go so far as to say he would pay the l 700, or at
any rate settle the bill, if he see a certainty of his son's
securing for himself anything like a decent provision in life.
nothing be say openly between they about poor Eleanor: but the
father and the daughter understand each other.
they all meet together in the drawing-room at nine o'clock, in
perfect good humour with each other; and about that hour Mrs Bold
be announce. she have never be in the house before, though she
have of course call: and now she feel it strange to find herself
there in her usual evening dress, enter the drawing-room of
these stranger in this friendly unceremonious way, as though she
have know they all her life. but in three minute they make she at
home. Charlotte trip downstairs and take her bonnet from she,
and Bertie come to relieve she from her shawl, and the signora
smile on she as she could smile when she choose to be gracious, and
the old doctor shake hand with she in a kind and benedictory
manner that go to her heart at once, and make she feel that he
must be a good man.
she have not be seat for above five minute when the door again
open, and Mr Slope be announce. she feel rather surprised,
because she be tell that nobody be to be there, and it be very
evident from the manner of some of they that Mr Slope be
unexpected. but still there be not much in it. in such invitation
a bachelor or two more or less be always speak of as nobody,
and there be no reason why Mr Slope should not drink tea at Dr
Stanhope's as well as Eleanor herself. he, however, be very much
surprised and not very much gratified at find that his own
embryo spouse make one of the party. he have come there to gratify
himself by gaze on Madame Neroni's beauty, and listen to and
return her flattery: and though he have not own as much to
himself, he still feel that if he spend the evening as he have
intend to do, he might probably not thereby advance his suit with
Mrs Bold.
the signora, who have no idea of a rival, receive Mr Slope with her
usual mark of distinction. as he take her hand, she make some
confidential communication to he in a low voice, declare that
she have a plan to communicate to he after tea, and be evidently
prepared to go on with her work of reduce the chaplain to a state
of captivity. Poor Mr Slope be rather beside himself. he think
that Eleanor could not but have learn from his demeanour that he
be an admirer of her own, and he have also flatter himself that
the idea be not unacceptable to she. what would she think of he
if he now devote himself to a married woman?
but Eleanor be not inclined to be severe in her criticism on he
in that respect, and feel no annoyance of any kind, when she find
herself seat between Bertie and Charlotte Stanhope. she have not
suspicion of Mr Slope's intention; she have no suspicion even of
the suspicion of other people; but still she feel well pleased not
to have Mr Slope too near to she.
and she be not ill-pleased to have Bertie Stanhope near she. it
be rarely indeed that he fail to make an agreeable impression on
stranger. with a bishop indeed who think much of his own dignity
it be possible that he might fail, but hardly with a young lady
and pretty woman. he possess the tact of become instantly
intimate with woman without give rise to any fear of
impertinence. he have about he somewhat of the propensity of a
tame cat. it seem quite natural that he should be pet,
caress, and treat with familiar good nature, and that in return
he should purr, and be sleek and graceful, and above all never show
his claw. like other tame cat, however, he have his claw, and
sometimes, make they dangerous.
when tea be over Charlotte go to the open window and declare
loudly that the full harvest moon be much too beautiful to be
disregarded, and call they to look at it. to tell the truth,
there be but one there who care much about the moon's beauty, and
that one be not Charlotte; but she know how valuable an aid to her
purpose the chaste goddess might become, and could easily create a
little enthusiasm for the purpose of the moment. Eleanor and Bertie
be soon with she. the doctor be now quiet in his arm- chair, and
Mrs Stanhope in her, both prepare for slumber.
'be you a Whewellite or a Brewsterite, or a t'othermanite, Mrs
Bold?' say Charlotte, who know a little about everything, and have
read about a third of each of the book to which she allude.
'oh!' say Eleanor; 'I have not read any of the book, but I feel
sure that there be one man in the moon at least, if not more.'
'you donot believe in the pulpy gelatinous matter?' say Bertie.
'I hear about that,' say Eleanor; 'and I really think itbe almost
wicked to talk in such a manner. how can we argue about God's power
in the other star from the law which he have give for our role in
this one?'
'how indeed!' say Bertie. 'why shouldnot there be a race of
salamander in Venus? and even if there be nothing but fish in
Jupiter, why shouldnot the fish there be as wide awake as the man
and woman here?'
'that would be say very little for they,' say Charlotte. 'I be
for Dr Whewell myself; for I do not think that man and woman be
worth be repeat in such countless world. there may be soul
in other star, but I doubt their have any body attach to
they. but come, Mrs Bold, let we put our bonnet on and walk round
the close. if we be to discuss sidereal question, we shall do so
much well under the tower of the cathedral, than stick in this
narrow window.
Mrs Bold make no objection, and a party be make to walk out.
Charlotte Stanhope well know the rule as to three be no company,
and she have therefore to induce her sister to allow Mr Slope to
accompany they.
'come, Mr Slope,' she say; 'Ibe sure youwill join we. we shall be
in again in quarter of an hour, Madeline.'
Madeline read in her eye all that she have to say, know her object,
and as she have to depend on her sister for so many of she
amusement, she feel that she must yield. it be hard to be leave
alone while other of her own age walk out to feel the soft
influence of the bright night, but it would be hard still without
the sort of sanction which Charlotte give to all her flirtation
and intrigue. Charlotte's eye tell she that she must give up just
at present for the good of the family, and so Madeline obey.
but Charlotte's eye say nothing of the sort to Mr Slope. he have
no objection at all to the tete-a-tete with the signora, which the
departure of the other three would allow he, and gently whisper
to she, 'I shall not leave you alone.'
'oh, yes,' say she; 'go--pray go, pray go, for my sake. do not
think that I be so selfish. it be understand that nobody be keep
within for I. you will understand this too when you know I
well. pray join they, Mr Slope, but when you come in speak to I
for five minute before you leave we.'
Mr Slope understand that he be to go, and he therefore join the
party in the hall. he would have have no objection at all to this
arrangement, if he could have secure Mrs Bold's arm; but this be
of course out of the question. indeed, his fate be very soon
settle, for no soon have he reach the hall-door, than Miss
Stanhope put her hand within his arm, and Bertie walk off with
Eleanor just as naturally as though she be already his own
property.
and so they saunter forth: first they walk round the close,
accord to their avow intent; then they go under the old
arch gateway below St Cuthbert's little church, and then they
turn behind the ground of the bishop's palace, and so on till
they come to the bridge just at the edge of the town, from which
passer-by can look down into the garden of Hiram's hospital; and
her Charlotte and Mr Slope, who be in advance, stop till the
other two come up to they. Mr Slope know that the gable-end and
old brick chimney which stand up so prettily in the moonlight,
be those of Mr Harding's late abode, and would not have stop
on such a spot, in such company, if he could have avoid it; but
Miss Stanhope would not take the hint which he try to give.
'this be a very pretty place, Mrs Bold,' say Charlotte; 'by far
the prettiest place near Barchester. I wonder your father give it
up.'
it be a very pretty place, and now by the deceitful light of the
moon look twice large, twice pretty, twice more antiquely
picturesque than it would have do in truth-tell daylight. who
do not know the air of complex multiplicity and the mysterious
interesting grace which the moon always lend to old gable
building half surround, as be the hospital, by fine tree! as
see from the bridge on the night of which we be speak, Mr
Harding's late abode do look very lovely; and though Eleanor do
not grieve at her father's have leave it, she feel at the moment
an intense wish that he might be allow to return.
'he be go to return to it immediately, be he not?' ask Bertie.
Eleanor make no immediate reply. much such a question pass
unanswered, without the notice of the questioner; but such be not
now the case. they all remain silent as though expect she to
reply, and after a moment or two, Charlotte say, 'I believe it be
settle that Mr Harding return to the hospital, be it not?'
'I donot think anything about it be settle yet,' say Eleanor.
'but it must be a matter of course,' say Bertie; 'that be, if your
father wish it; who else on earth could hold it after what have
occur?'
Eleanor quietly make her companion to understand that the matter
be one which she could not discuss in the present company; and
then they pass on; Charlotte say she would go a short way up the
hill out of the town so as to look back on the tower of the
cathedral, and as Eleanor leant upon Bertie's arm for assistance in
the walk, she tell he how the matter stand between her father and
the bishop.
'and, he,' say Bertie, point on to Mr Slope, 'what part do he
take in it?'
Eleanor explain how Mr Slope have at first endeavour to
tyrannize over her father, but how he have latterly come round, and
do all he could to talk the bishop over in Mr Harding's favour.
'but my father,' say she, 'be hardly inclined to trust he; they
all say he be so arrogant to the old clergyman of the city.'
'take my word for it,' say Bertie, 'your father be right. if I be
not very much mistaken, that man be both arrogant and false.'
they stroll up the top of the hill, and then return through the
field by a footpath which lead by a small wooden bridge, or
rather a plank with a rustic rail to it, over the river to the
other side of the cathedral from that at which they have start.
they have thus walk round the bishop's ground, through which the
river run, and round the cathedral and adjacent field, and it be
past eleven before they reach the doctor's door.
'it be very late,' say Eleanor, 'it will be a shame to disturb
your mother at such an hour.'
'oh,' say Charlotte, laugh, 'you willnot disturb mamma; I dare
say she be in bed by this time, and Madeline would be furious if
you do not come in and see she. come, Bertie, take Mrs Bold's
bonnet from she.'
they go up stair, and find the signora alone, read. she
look somewhat sad and melancholy, but not more so perhaps than
be sufficient to excite additional interest in the bosom of Mr
Slope; and she be soon deep in whisper intercourse with that
happy gentleman, who be allow to find a resting-place on her
sofa. the signora have a way of whispering that be peculiarly her
own, and be exactly the reverse of that which prevail among great
tragedian. the great tragedian hiss out a positive whisper, make
with bated breath, and produce by inarticulate tongue-form
sound, but yet he be audible through the whole house. the signora
however use no hiss, and produce all her word in a clear
silver tone, but they could only be hear by the ear into which
they be pour.
Charlotte hurry and skurrie about the room hither and thither,
doing, or pretend to do many thing; and then say something
about see her mother, run up stair. Eleanor be then leave alone
with Bertie, and she hardly feel and hour fly by she. to give
Bertie his due credit, he could not have play his card well.
he do not make love to she, nor sigh, nor look languish; but he
be amusing and familiar, yet respectful; and when he leave Eleanor
at her own door at one o'clock, which he do by the bye with the
assistance of the now jealous Slope, she think he be one of the
most agreeable man, and the Stanhopes decidedly the most agreeable
family, that she have ever meet.
CHAPTER XX
MR ARABIN
the Reverend Francis Arabin, fellow of Lazarus, late professor of
poetry at Oxford, and present vicar of St Ewold, in the diocese of
Barchester, must now be introduce personally to the reader. and as
he will fill a conspicuous place in this volume, it be desirable
that he should be make to stand before the reader's eye by the aid
of such portraiture as the author be able to produce.
it be to be regret that no mental method of daguerreotype or
photography have yet be discover, by which the character of man
can be reduce to write and put into grammatical language with an
unerring precision of truthful description. how often do the
novelist feel, ay, and the historian also and the biographer, that
he have conceive within his mind and accurately depict on the
tablet of his brain the full character and personage of a man, and
that nevertheless, when he fly to pen and ink to perpetuate the
portrait, his word forsake, elude, disappoint, and play the deuce
with he, till at the end of a dozen page the man describe have no
more resemblance to the man conceive than the sign board at the
corner of the street have to the Duke of Cambridge?
and yet such mechanical descriptive skill would hardly give more
satisfaction to the reader than the skill of the photographer do
to the anxious mother desirous to possess an absolute duplicate of
her beloved child. the likeness be indeed true; but it be a dull,
dead, unfeele, inauspicious likeness. the face be indeed there,
and those look at it will know at once whose image it be; but
the owner of the face will not be proud of the resemblance.
there be no royal road to learn; no short cut to the acquirement
of any art. let photographer and daguerreotyper do what they
will, and improve as they may with further skill on that which
skill have already do, they will never achieve a portrait of the
human face as we may under the burden which we so often feel too
heavy for our shoulder; we must either bear they up like man, or
own ourselves too weak for the work we have undertake. there be no
way of write well and also of write easily.
Labor omnia vincit improbus. such should be the choose motto of
every labourer, and it may be that labour, if adequately enduring,
may suffice at last to produce even some not untrue resemblance of
the Rev. Francis Arabin.
of his doing in the world, and of the sort of fame which he have
achieve, enough have already be say. it have also be say that
he be forty year of age, and still unmarried. he be the young
son of a country gentleman of small fortune in the north of
England. at an early age he go to Winchester, and be intend by
his father for New College; but though studious as a boy, he be
not studious within the prescribed limit; and at the age of
eighteen he leave school with a character for talent, but without a
scholarship. all that he have obtain, over and above the advantage
of his character, be a gold medal for english verse, and hence be
derive a strong presumption on the part of his friend that he be
destine to add another name to the imperishable list of english
poet.
from Winchester he go to Oxford, and be enter as a commoner at
Balliol. here his special career very soon commence. he utterly
eschew the society of fast man, give no wine party, keep no
horse, row no boat, join no row, and be the pride of his
college tutor. such at least be his career till he have take his
little go; and then he commence a course of action which, though
not less creditable to himself as a man, be hardly so much to the
taste of his tutor. he become a member of a vigorous debating
society, and render himself remarkable there for humorous energy.
though always in earnest, yet his earnestness be always droll. to
be true in his idea, unanswerable in his syllogism, and just in
his aspiration be not enough for he. he have fail, fail in
his own opinion as well as that of other when other come to know
he, if he could not reduce the argument of his opponent to an
absurdity, and conquer both by wit and reason. to say that his
object be ever to raise a laugh, would be most untrue. he hat
such common and unnecessary evidence of satisfaction on the part of
his hearer. a joke that require to be laugh at be, with he,
not worth utter. he could appreciate by a keener sense than that
of his ear the success of his wit, and would see in the eye of
his auditory whether or no he be understand and appreciate.
he have be a religious lad before he leave school. that is, he have
addict himself to a party of religion, and have do so have
receive that benefit which most man do who become partisan in
such a cause. we be much too apt to look at schism in our church
as an unmitigated evil. moderate schism, if there may be such a
thing, at any rate call attention to the subject, draw its
supporter who would otherwise have be inattentive to the matter,
and teach man to think about religion. how great an amount of
good of this description have follow that movement of the Church
of England which commence with the publication of Froude's
remain!
as a boy young Arabin take up the cudgel on the side of the
Tractarians, and at Oxford he sit for a while at the foot of the
great Newman. to this cause he lend all his faculty. for it he
concoct verse, for it he make speech, for it he scintillate
the bright spark of his quiet wit. for it he eat and drank and
dress, and have his being. in due process of time he take his
degree, and write himself B.A., but he do not do so with any
remarkable amount of academical eclat. he have occupy himself too
much with high church matter, and the polemic, politic, and
outward demonstration usually concurrent with high churchmanship,
to devote himself with sufficient vigour to the acquisition of a
double first. he be not a double first, nor even a first class
man; but he revenge himself on the university by put first and
double first out of fashion for the year, and laugh down a
specie of pedantry which at the age of twenty-three leave no room
in a man's mind for graver subject than conic section or greek
accent.
greek accent, however, and conic section be esteem
necessary at Balliol, and there be no admittance there for Mr
Arabin within the list of its fellow. Lazarus, however, the
rich and the most comfortable abode of Oxford don, open its
bosom to the young champion of a church militant. Mr Arabin be
ordain, and become a fellow soon after take his degree, and
shortly after that be choose professor of poetry.
and now come the moment of his great danger. after many mental
struggle, and an agony of doubt which may be well surmise, the
great prophet of the Tractarians confess himself a roman
Catholic. Mr Newman leave the Church of England, and with he
carry many a waverer. he do not carry off Mr Arabin, but the
escape which that gentleman have be a very narrow one. he leave
Oxford for a while that he might meditate in complete peace on the
step which appear for he to be all but unavoidable, and shut
himself up in a little village on the sea-shore of one of our
remotest county, that he might learn by commune with his own
soul whether or no he could with a safe conscience remain within
the pale of his mother church.
thing would have go badly with he there have he be leave
entirely to himself. every thing be against he: all his worldly
interest require he to remain a protestant; and he look on his
worldly interest as a legion of foe, to get the well of whom
be a point of extreme honour. in his then state of ecstatic
agony such a conquest would have cost he little; but it cost he
much to get over the idea of choose the Church of England he
should be open in his own mind to the charge that he have be lead
to such a choice by unworthy motif. then his heart be against
he: he love with a strong and eager love the man who have hitherto
be his guide, and yearn to follow his footstep. his taste
be against he: the ceremony and pomp of the Church of Rome,
their august feast and solemn fast, invite his imagination and
please his eye. his flesh be against he: how great an aid would
it be to a poor, weak, waver man to be constrain to high moral
duty, self-denial, obedience, and chastity by law which be
certain in their enactment, and not to be break without loud,
palpable, unmistakable sin! then his faith be against he: he
require to believe so much; pant so early to give sign of his
belief; deem it so insufficient to wash himself simply in the
water of Jordan; that some great deed, such as that of forsake
everything for a true church, have for he allurement almost past
withstand.
Mr Arabin be at this time a very young man, and when he leave
Oxford for his far retreat be much too confident in his power of
fence, and too apt to look down on the ordinary sense of ordinary
people, to expect aid in the battle that he have to fight from any
chance inhabitant on the spot which he have select. but
Providence be good to he; and there, in that all but desolate
place, on the storm-beat shore of that distant sea, he meet one who
gradually change his mind, quiet his imagination, and teach he
something of a Christian's duty. when Mr Arabin leave Oxford, he be
inclined to look upon the rural clergyman of most english parish
almost with contempt. it be his ambition, should he remain within
the fold of the church, to do somewhat towards redeem and
rectify their inferiority, and to assist in infuse energy and
faith into the heart of christian minister, who be, as he
think, too often satisfied to go through life without much show
of either.
and yet it be from such a one that Mr Arabin in his extreme need
receive that aid which he so much require. it be from a poor
curate of a small cornish parish that he first learn to know that
the high law for the governance of a Christian's duty must act
from within and not from without; that no man can become a
serviceable servant solely by obedience to write edict; and that
the safety which he be about to seek within the gate of Rome be
no other than the selfish freedom from personal danger which the
bad soldier attempt to gain who counterfeit illness on the eve of
battle.
Mr Arabin return to Oxford a humbler but a well and a happy
man; and from that time forth he put his shoulder to the wheel as a
clergyman of the Church for which he have be educate. the
intercourse of those among whom he familiarly live keep he
staunch to the principle of that system of the Church to which he
have always belong. since his severance from Mr Newman, no one have
have so strong an influence over he as the head of his college.
during the time of his expected apostasy, Dr Gwynne have not feel
much predisposition in favour of the young fellow. though a High
Churchman himself within moderate limit, Dr Gwynne feel no
sympathy with man who could not satisfy their faith with the
thirty-nine Articles. he regard the enthusiasm of such as Newman
as a state of mind more nearly ally to madness than to religion;
and when he see it evince by a very young man, be incline to
attribute a good deal of it to vanity. Dr Gwynne himself, though a
religious man, be also a thoroughly practical man of the world,
and he regard with no favourable eye the tenet of any one who
look on the two thing as incompatible. when he find Mr Arabin
be a half Roman, he begin to regret all that he do towards
bestow a fellowship on so unworthy a recipient; and when again
he learn that Mr Arabin would probably complete his journey to
Rome, he regard with some satisfaction the fact that in such case
the fellowship would be again vacant.
when, however, Mr Arabin return and profess himself a confirm
Protestant, the master of Lazarus again open his arm to he, and
gradually he become the pet of the college. for some little time he
be saturnine, silent, and unwilling to take any prominent part in
university broil; but gradually his mind recover, or rather make
its tone, and he become know as a man always ready at a moment's
notice to take up the cudgel in opposition to anything which
savour of an evangelical bearing. he be great in sermon, great
on platform, great at after dinner conversation, and always
pleasant as well as great. he take delight in election, serve on
committee, oppose tooth and nail all project of university
reform, and talk jovially over his glass of port of the ruin to
be commit by the whig. the ordeal through which he have go, in
resist the blandishment of the lady of Rome, have certainly do
much towards the strengthening of his character. although in small
and outward matter he be self-confident enough, nevertheless in
thing affect the inner man he aim at a humility of spirit
which would never have be attractive to he but for that visit to
the coast of Cornwall. this visit he now repeat every year.
such be an interior view of Mr Arabin at the time when he accept
the living of St Ewold. exteriorly, he be not a remarkable person.
he be above the middle height, well make, and very active. his
hair which have be jet black, be now ting with gray, but his
face bear no sign of year. it would perhaps be wrong to say that
he be handsome, but his face be, nevertheless, high for beauty,
and the formation of the forehead too massive and heavy: but his
eye, nose and mouth be perfect. there be a continual play of
lambent fire about his eye, which give promise of either pathos or
humour whenever he essay to speak, and that promise be rarely
break. there be a gentle play about his mouth which declare that
his wit never descend to sarcasm, and that there be no
ill-nature in his repartee.
Mr Arabin be a popular man among woman, but more so as a general
than a special favourite. live as a fellow at Oxford, marriage
with he have be out of the question, and it may be doubt
whether he have ever allow his heart to be touch. though
belong to a Church in which celibacy be not the required lot of
its minister, he have come to regard himself as one of those
clergyman to whom to be a bachelor be almost a necessity. he have
never look for parochial duty, and his career at Oxford be
utterly incompatible with such domestic joy as a wife and nursery.
he look on woman, therefore, in the same light that one see then
regard by many romish priest. he like to have near he that
which be pretty and amusing, but woman generally be little more
to he than child. he talk to they without put out all his
power, and listen to they without any idea that what he should
hear from they could either actuate his conduct or influence his
opinion.
such be Mr Arabin, the new vicar of St Ewold, who be go to stay
with the Grantlys, at Plumstead Episcopi.
Mr Arabin reach Plumstead the day before Mr Harding and Eleanor,
and the Grantly family be thus enable to make his acquaintance
and discuss his qualification before the arrival of the other
guest. Griselda be surprised to find that he look so young; but
she tell Florinda her young sister, when they have retire for the
night, that he do not talk at all like a young man: and she
decide with the authority that seventeen have over sixteen, that he
be not at all nice, although his eye be lovely. as usual,
sixteen implicitly accede to the dictum of seventeen in such a
matter, and say that he certainly be not nice. they then branch
off on the relative merit of other clerical bachelor in the
vicinity, and both determine without any feeling of jealousy
between they that a certain Rev. Augustus Green be by many degree
the most estimable of the lot. the gentleman in question have
certainly much in his favour, as, have a comfortable allowance
from his father, he could devote the whole proceed of his curacy
to violet glove and unexceptionable neck tie. have thus fixedly
resolve that the new comer have nothing about he to shake the
pre-eminence of the exalt Green, the two girl go to sleep in
each other's arm, content with themselves and the world.
Mrs Grantly at first sight come to much the same conclusion about
her husband's favourite as her daughter have do, though, in
seek to measure his relative value, she do not compare he to
Mr Green; indeed, she make no comparison by name between he and
any one else; but she remark to her husband that one person's
swan be very often another person's geese, thereby clearly
show that Mr Arabin have not yet prove his qualification in
swanhood to her satisfaction.
'well, Susan,' say he, rather offended at hear his friend
speak of so disrespectfully, 'if you take Mr Arabin for a goose, I
cannot say that I think very highly of your discrimination.'
'a goose! no of course, hebe not a goose. Ihave no doubt hebe a very
clever man. but yoube so matter-of-fact, archdeacon, when it suit
your purpose, that one cannot trust oneself to any facon de parler.
Ihave no doubt Mr Arabin be a very valuable man--at Oxford, and that
hewill be a good vicar at St Ewold. all I mean be, that have
pass one evening with he, I donot find he to be absolutely a
paragon. in the first place, if I be not mistaken, he be a little
inclined to be conceite.'
'of all the man that I know intimately,' say the archdeacon,
'Arabin be, in my opinion, the most free from any taint of
self-conceit. his fault be that hebe too diffident.'
'perhaps so,' say the lady; 'only I must own I do not find it out
this evening.'
nothing far be say about he. Dr Grantly think that his
wife be abuse Mr Arabin merely because he have praise he; and
Mrs Grantly know that it be useless arguing for or against any
person in favour of, or in opposition to whom the archdeacon have
already pronounce a strong opinion.
in truth they be both right. Mr Arabin be a diffident man in
social intercourse with those whom he do not intimately know; when
place in situation which it be his business to fill, and
discuss matter with which it be his duty to be conversant, Mr
Arabin be from habit braze-face enough. when stand on a
platform in Exeter Hall, no man would be less mazed than he by the
eye of the crowd before he; for such be the work which his
profession have call on he to perform; but he shrink from a
strong expression of opinion in general society, and his do so
not uncommonly make it appear that he consider the company not
worth the trouble of his energy. he be averse to dictate when the
place do not seem to he to justify dictation; and as those
subject on which people wish to hear he speak be such as he
be accustom to treat with decision, he generally shun the
trap there be lay to allure he into discussion, and, by do
so, not unfrequently subject himself to such charge as those
bring against he by Mrs Grantly.
Mr Arabin, as he sit at his open window, enjoy the delicious
moonlight and gaze at the gray tower of the church, which stand
almost within the rectory ground, little dream that he be the
subject of so many friendly or unfriendly criticism. consider
how much we be all give to discuss the character of other, and
discuss they often not in the strict spirit of charity, it be
singular how little we be inclined to think that other can speak
ill-naturedly of we, and how angry and hurt we be when proof
reach we that they have do so. it be hardly too much to say
that we all of we occasionally speak of our dear friend in a
manner which those dear friend would very little like to hear
themselves mention; and that we nevertheless expect that our
dear friend shall invariably speak of we as though they be
blind to all our fault, but keenly alive to every shade of our
virtue.
it do not occur to Mr Arabin that he be speak of at all. it
seem to he, when he compare himself with his host, that he be
a person of so little consequence to any, that he be worth no
one's word or thought. he be utterly alone in the world as
regard domestic tie and those inner familiar relation which be
hardly possible between other than husband and wife, parent and
child, or brother and sister. he have often discuss with
himself the necessity of such bond for a man's happiness in this
world, and have generally satisfy himself with the answer that
happiness in this world be not a necessity. Herein he deceive
himself, or rather try to do so. he, like other, yearn for the
enjoyment of whatever he see enjoyable; and though he attempt,
with the modern stoicism of so many Christians, to make himself
believe that joy and sorrow be matter which here should be hold
as perfectly indifferent, those thing be not indifferent to he.
he be tired of his Oxford room and his college life. he regard
the wife and child of his friend with something like envy; he
all but covet the pleasant drawing-room, with its pretty window
opening on to lawn and flower-bed, the apparel of the comfortable
house, and--above all--the air of home which encompass all.
it will be say that no time can have be fit for such desire
on his part as this, of a living among field and garden, of a
house which a wife would grace. it be true there be a difference
between the opulence of Plumstead and the modest economy of St
Ewold; but surely Mr Arabin be not a man to sigh after wealth! of
all man, his friend would have unanimously declare he be the
last to do so. but how little our friend know we! in his period of
stoical rejection of this world's happiness, he have cast from he
as utter dross all anxiety as to fortune. he have, as it be,
proclaim himself to be indifferent to promotion, and those who
chiefly admire his talent, and would mainly have exert to
secure they their deserved reward, have take he at his word. and
now, if the truth must out, he feel himself
disappointed--disappoint not by they but by himself. the daydream
of his youth be over, and at the age of forty he feel that he be
not fit to work in the spirit of an apostle. he have mistake
himself, and learn his mistake when it be past remedy. he have
profess himself indifferent to mitre and diaconal residence, to
rich living and pleasant glebe, and now he have to own to himself
that he be sigh for the good thing of other man, on whom in
his pride he have venture to look down.
not for wealth, in its vulgar sense, have he ever sigh; not for
the enjoyment of rich thing have he ever long; but for the
allotted share of worldly bliss, which a wife, and child, and
happy home could give he, for that usual amount of comfort which
he have venture to reject as unnecessary for he, he do now feel
that he would have be wise to search.
he know that his talent, his position, and his friend would have
win for he promotion, have he put himself in the way of win it.
instead of do so, he have allow himself an income of some L 300
a year, should he, by marry, throw up his fellowship. such, at
the age of forty, be the worldly result of labour, which the world
have choose to regard as successful. the world also think that Mr
Arabin be, in his own estimation, sufficiently pay. alas! alas!
the world be mistaken; and Mr Arabin be begin to ascertain
that such be the case.
and here, may I beg the reader not to be hard in the judgement upon
this man. be not the state at which he have arrive, the natural
result of effort to reach that which be not the condition of
humanity? be not modern stoicism, build though it be on
Christianity, as great an outrage on human nature as be the
stoicism of the ancient? the philosophy of Zeno be build on true
law, but on true law misunderstood, and therefore misapply. it
be the same with our stoic here, who would teach we that wealth
and worldly comfort and happiness on earth be not worth the
search. also, for a doctrine which can find no believe pupil and
no true teacher!
the case of Mr Arabin be the more singular, as he belong to a
branch of the Church of England well inclined to regard its
temporality with avow favour, and have habitually live with man
who be accustom to much worldly comfort. but such be his
idiosyncrasy, that these very fact have produce within he, in
early life, a state of mind that be not natural to he. he be
content to be a High Churchman, if he could be so on principle of
his own, and could strike out a course show a marked difference
from those with whom he consort. he be ready to be a partisan as
long as he be allow to have a course of action and of thought
unlike that of his party. his party have indulge he, and he begin
to feel that his party be right and himself wrong, but when such a
conviction be too late to be of service to he. he discover,
when much be discovery be no long serviceable, that it would
have be worth his while to have work for the usual pay assign
to work in this world, and have earn a wife and child, with a
carriage for they to sit in; to have earn a pleasant dining-room,
in which his friend could drink his wine, and the power of walk
up in the high street of his country town, with the knowledge that
all its tradesman would have gladly welcome he within their
door. other man arrive at those conviction in their start of
life, and so work up to they. to he they have come when they be
too late to be of use.
it have be say that Mr Arabin be a man of pleasantry and it may
be think that such a state of mind as that describe, would be
antagonistic to humour. but surely such be not the case. Wit be the
outward mental casing of the man, and have no more to do with the
inner mind of thought and feeling than have the rich brocade
garment of the priest at the altar with the asceticism of the
anchorite below they, whose skin be torment with sackcloth, and
whose body be half flay with rod. Nay, will not such a one often
rejoice more than any other in the rich show of outer apparel? will
it not be food for his pride to feel that he groan inwardly, while
he shin outwardly? so it be with the mental effort which man
make. those which they show forth daily to the world be often the
opposite of the inner working of the spirit.
in the archdeacon's drawing-room, Mr Arabin have sparkle with his
usual unaffected brilliancy, but when he retire to his bed-room,
he sit there sad, at his open window, repine within himself that
he also have no wife, no bairn, no soft award of lawn duly mow for
he to be on, no herd of attendant curate, no bowing from the
banker's clerk, no rich rectory. that apostleship that he have
think of have evade his grasp, and he be now only vicar of St
Ewold's, with a taste for a mitre. truly he have fall between two
stool.
CHAPTER XXI
ST EWOLD'S PARSONAGE
when Mr Harding and Mrs Bold reach the rectory on the following
morning, the archdeacon and his friend be at St Ewold's. they have
go over that the new vicar might inspect his church, and be
introduce to the squire, and be not expect back before dinner.
Mr Harding ramble out by himself, and stroll, as be his willnot at
Plumstead, about the lawn and round the church; and as he do so,
the two sister naturally fall into conversation about Barchester.
there be not much sisterly confidence between they. Mrs Grantly
be ten year old than Eleanor, and have be marry while
Eleanor be yet a child. they have never, therefore, pour into
each other's ear their hope and love; and now that one be a
wife and the other a widow, it be not probable that they would
begin to do so. they live too much asunder to be able to fall into
that kind of intercourse which make confidence between sister
almost a necessity; and, moreover, that which be so easy at
eighteen be often very difficult at twenty-eight. Mrs Grantly know
this, and do not, therefore, expect confidence from her sister;
and yet she long to ask she whether in real truth Mr Slope be
agreeable to she.
it be by no mean difficult to turn the conversation to Mr Slope.
that gentleman have become so famous at Barchester, have so much to
do with all clergyman connect with the city, and be so specially
concerned in the affair of Mr Harding, that it would have be odd
if Mr Harding's daughter have not talk about he. Mrs Grantly be
soon abuse he, which she do with her whole heart; and Mrs Bold
be nearly as eager to defend he. she positively dislike the man,
would have be delighted to learn that he have take himself off so
that she should never see he again, have indeed almost a fear of
he, and yet she constantly find herself take his part. the
abuse of other people, and abuse of a nature that she feel to be
unjust, impose that necessity on she, and at last make Mr Slope's
defence an habitual course of argument with she.
from Mr Slope the conversation turn to the Stanhopes, and Mrs
Grantly be listen with some interest to Eleanor's account of
the family, when it drop out that Mr Slope be one of the party.
'what!' say the lady of the rectory, 'be Mr Slope there too?'
Eleanor merely reply that such have be the case.
'why, Eleanor, he must be very fond of you, I think; he seem to
follow you everywhere.'
even this do not open Eleanor's eye. she merely laugh, and say
that she imagine Mr Slope find other attraction at Dr Stanhope's.
and so they part. Mrs Grantly feel quite convinced that the
odious match would take place; and Mrs Bold as convince that that
unfortunate chaplain, disagreeable as he must be allow to be, be
more sin against than sin.
the archdeacon of course hear before dinner that Eleanor have
remain the day before at Barchester with the view of meet Mr
Slope, and that she have so meet he. he remember how she have
positively state that there be to be guest at the Stanhopes,
and he do not hesitate to accuse she of deceit. moreover, the
fact, or rather the presume fact, of she be deceitful on such a
matter, speak but too plainly in evidence against she as to she
imputed crime of receive Mr Slope as a lover.
'I be afraid that anything we can do will be too late,' say the
archdeacon. 'I own I be fairly surprised. I never like your
sister's taste with regard to man; but still I do not give she
credit for--ugh!'
'and so soon, too,' say Mrs Grantly, who think more, perhaps, of
her sister's indecorum in have a lover before she have put off her
weed, than her bad taste in have such a lover as Mr Slope.
'well, my dear, I shall be sorry to be harsh, or to do anything
that can hurt your father; but, positively, neither that man nor
his wife shall come within my door.'
Mrs Grantly sigh, and then attempt to console herself and her
lord by remark that, after all, the thing be not accomplish
yet. now that Eleanor be at Plumstead, much might be do to wean
she from her fatal passion. poor Eleanor!
the evening pass off without anything to make it remarkable. Mr
Arabin discuss the parish of St Ewold with the archdeacon, and
Mrs Grantly and Mr Harding, who know the parsonage of the parish,
join in. Eleanor also know they, but speak little. Mr Arabin do
not apparently take much notice of she, and she be not in a humour
to receive at that time with any special grace any special
favourite of her brother-in-law. her first idea on reach her
bedroom be that a much more pleasant family party might be meet at
Dr Stanhope's than at the rectory. she begin to think that she be
get tired of clergyman and their respectable humdrum wearisome
mode of living, and that after all, people in the outer world, who
have live in Italy, London, or elsewhere, need not necessarily be
regard as atrocious and abominable. the Stanhopes, she have
think, be a giddy, thoughtless, extravagant set of people; but
she have see nothing wrong about they, and have, on the other hand,
find that they thoroughly know how to make their house agreeable.
it be a thousand pity, she think, that the archdeacon should
not have a little of the same savoir vivre. Mr Arabin, as we have
say, do not apparently take much notice of she; but yet he do
not go to bed without feel that he have be in company with a
very pretty woman; and as be the case with most bachelor, and some
married man, regard the prospect of his month's visit at
Plumstead in a pleasanter light, when he learn that a very pretty
woman be to share it with he.
before they all retire it be settle that the whole party should
drive over on the following day to inspect the parsonage at St
Ewold. the three clergyman be to discuss dilapidation, and the
two lady be to lend their assistance in suggest such change
as might be necessary for a bachelor's abode. accordingly, soon
after breakfast, the carriage be at the door. there be only room
for four inside, and the archdeacon get upon the box. Eleanor find
herself opposite to Mr Arabin, and be, therefore, in a manner
force into conversation with he. they be soon on comfortable
term together; and have she think about it, she would have
think that, in spite of his black cloth, Mr Arabin would not have
be a bad addition to the Stanhope family party.
now that the archdeacon be away, they could all trifle. Mr Harding
begin by tell they in the most innocent manner imaginable an old
legend about Mr Arabin's new parish. there be, he say, in day of
yore, an illustrious priestess of St Ewold, fame through the whole
country for cure all manner of disease. she have a well, as all
priestess have ever have, which well be extant to this day, and
share in the mind of many of the people the sanctity which
belong to the consecrated ground of the parish church. Mr Arabin
declare that he should look on such tenet on the part of the
parishioner as anything but orthodox. and Mrs Grantly reply
that she so entirely disagree with he as to think that no parish
be in a proper estate that have not its priestess as well as its
priest. 'the duty be never well do,' say she, 'unless they
be so divided.'
'I suppose, papa,' say Eleanor, 'that in the old time the
priestess bore all the sway herself. Mr Arabin, perhaps, think
that such might be too much the case now if a sacred lady be
admit within the parish.'
'I think, at any rate,' say he, 'that it be safe to run no such
risk. no priestly pride have ever exceed that of sacerdotal
female. a very lowly curate, I might, perhaps, essay to rule; but
a curatess would be sure to get the well of I.'
'there be certainly example of such accident happen,' say
Mrs Grantly. 'they do say that there be a priestess at Barchester
who be very imperious in all thing touch the altar. perhaps the
fear of such a fate as that be before your eye.'
when they be join by the archdeacon on the gravel before the
vicarage, they descend again to grave dullness. not that
Archdeacon Grantly be a dull man; but his frolic humour be of a
cumbrous kind; and his wit, when he be witty, do not generally
extend itself to his auditory. on the present occasion, he be soon
make speech about wound roof and wall, which he declare to
be in want of some surgeon's art. there be not a partition that he
do not tap, nor a block of chimney that he do not narrowly
examine; all water-pipe, flue, cistern, and sewer undergo his
examination; and he even descend, in the care of his friend, so
far as to bore sundry board in the floor with a bradawl.
Mr Arabin accompany he through the room, try to look wise in
such domestic matter, and the other three also follow. Mrs
Grantly show that she herself have not be priestess of a parish
twenty year for nothing, and examine the bell and window pane
in a very knowing way.
'you will, at any rate, have a beautiful prospect out of your own
window, if this be to be your private sanctum,' say Eleanor. she
be stand at the lattice of a little room up stair, from which
the view certainly be very lovely. it be from the back of the
vicarage, and there be nothing to interrupt the eye between the
house and the glorious gray pile of the cathedral. the intermediate
ground, however, be beautifully stud with timber. in the
immediate foreground run the little river which afterwards skirt
the city; and, just to the right of the cathedral the pointed
gable and chimney of Hiram's Hospital peep out of the elm
which encompass it.
'yes,' say he, join she. 'I shall have a beautifully complete
view of my adversary. I shall sit down before the hostile town,
and fire away at they at a very pleasant distance. I shall just be
able to lodge a shot in the hospital, should the enemy ever get
possession of it; and as for the palace, I have it within full
range.'
'I never see anything like you clergyman,' say Eleanor; 'you be
always think of fight each other.'
'either that,' say he, 'or else support each other. the pity be
that we cannot do the one without the other. but be we not here to
fight? be not ours a church militant? what be all our work but
fighting, and hard fighting, if it be well do?'
'but not with each other.'
'thatbe as it may be. the same complaint which you make of I for
battle with another clergyman of our own church, the Mahometan
would make against I for battle with the error of a priest of
Rome. yet, surely, you would not be incline to say that I should
be wrong to do battle with such as he. a pagan, too, with his
multiplicity of god, would think it equally odd that the Christian
and the Mahometan should disagree.'
'ah! but you wage your war about trifle so bitterly.'
'war about trifle,' say he, 'be always bitter, especially among
neighbour. when the difference be great, and the party
comparative stranger, man quarrel with courtesy. what combatant
be ever so eager as two brother?'
'but do not such contention bring scandal on the church?'
'More scandal would fall on the church if there be no such
contention. we have but one way to avoid they--that of
acknowledge a common head of our church, whose word on all point
of doctrine shall be authoritative. such a termination of our
difficulty be alluring enough. it have charm which be
irresistible to many, and all but irresistible, I own, to I.'
'you speak now of the Church of Rome?' say Eleanor.
'no,' say he, 'not necessarily the Church of Rome; but of a church
with a head. have it please God to vouchsafe to we such a church
our path would have be easy. but easy path have not be think
good for we.' he pause and stand silent for a while, think of
the time when he have so nearly sacrifice all he have, his power of
mind, his free agency, the fresh running water of his mind's
fountain, his very inner self, for an easy path in which no
fighting would be need; and then he continue: 'what you say be
partly true; our contention do bring on we some scandal. the outer
world, though it constantly revile we for our human infirmity,
and throw in our tooth the fact that be clergyman we be still
no more then man, demand of we that we should do our work with
godlike perfection. there be nothing godlike about we: we differ
from each other with the acerbity common to man--we allow
difference on subject of divine origin to produce among we
antipathy and enmity which be anything but divine. this be all
true. but what would you have in place of it? there be no
infallible head for a church on earth. this dream of believe man
have be try, and we see in Italy and in Spain what have become of
it. grant that there be and have be no bickering within the
pale of the Pope's Church. such an assumption would be utterly
untrue; but let we grant it, and then let we say which church have
incur the heavy scandal.'
there be a quiet earnestness about Mr Arabin, as he half
acknowledge and half defend himself from the charge bring
against he, which surprise Eleanor. she have be use all her
life to listen to clerical discussion; but the point at issue
between the disputant have so seldom be of more than temporal
significance as to have leave on her mind no feeling of reverence
for such subject. there have always be a hard worldly leaven of
the love either of income or power in the strain that she have
hear; there have be no panting for the truth; no aspiration
after religious purity. it have always be take for grant by
those around she that they be indubitably right, that there be
no ground for doubt, that the hard uphill work of ascertain what
the duty of a clergyman should be have be already accomplish in
full; and that what remain for an active militant parson to do,
be to hold his own against all comer. her father, it be true, be
an exception to this; but then he be so essentially non-militant
in all thing, that she class he in her own mind apart from all
other. she have never argue the matter within herself, or
consider whether this common tone be or be not faulty; but she
be sick of it without know that she be so. and now she find
to her surprise and not without a certain pleasurable excitement,
that this new comer among they speak in a manner very different
from that to which she be accustom.
'it be so easy to condemn,' say he, continue the thread of his
thought. 'I know no life that must be so delicious as that of a
writer for newspaper, or a lead member of the opposition--to
thunder forth accusation against man in power; show up the bad
side of every thing that be produce; to pick hole in every coat;
to be indignant, sarcastic, jocose, moral, or supercilious; to damn
with faint praise, or crush with open calumny! what can be so easy
as this when the critic have to be responsible for nothing? you
condemn what I do; but put yourself in my position and do the
reverse, and then see if I cannot condemn you.'
'oh! Mr Arabin, I do not condemn you.'
'pardon I, you do, Mrs Bold--you as one of the world; you be now
the opposition member; you be now compose your lead article,
and well and bitterly you do it. "let dog delight to bark and
bite;" you fitly begin with an elegant quotation; "but if we be to
have a church at all, in heaven's name let the pastor who preside
over it keep their hand from each other's throat. lawyer can
live without befoul each other's name; doctor do not fight
duel. why be that clergyman alone should indulge themselves in
such unrestrained liberty of abuse against each other?" and so you
go on revile we for our ungodly quarrel, our sectarian
propensity, and scandalous difference. it will, however, give
you no trouble to write another article next week in which we, or
some of we, shall be twit with an unseemly apathy in matter of
our vocation. it will not fall on you to reconcile the discrepancy;
your reader will never ask you how the poor parson be to be urgent
in season and out of season, and yet never come in contact with man
who think widely differently from he. you, when you condemn this
foreign treaty, or that official arrangement, will have to incur no
blame for the graver fault of any different measure. it be so easy
to condemn; and so pleasant too; for eulogy charm no listener as
detraction do.'
Eleanor only half follow he in his raillery; but she catch his
meaning. 'I know I ought to apologise for presume to criticise
you,' she say; 'but I be think with sorrow of the ill-will
that have lately come among we at Barchester, and I speak more
freely than I should have do.'
'peace on earth and good-will among man, be, like heaven, promise
for the future;' say he, follow rather his own thought than
her. 'when that prophecy be accomplish, there will no long be
any need for clergyman.'
here they be interrupt by the archdeacon, whose voice be hear
from the cellar shout to the vicar.
'Arabin, arabin,'--and then turn to his wife, who be apparently
at his elbow--'where be he go to? this cellar be perfectly
abominable. it would be murder to put a bottle of wine into it till
it have be roof, wall, and floor. how on earth old
Goodenough ever get on with it, I cannot guess. but then Goodenough
never have a glass of wine that any man could drink.'
'what be it, archdeacon?' say the vicar, run down stair, and
leave Eleanor above to her meditation.
'this cellar must be roof, wall, and floor,' repeat the
archdeacon. 'now mind what I say, and donot let the architect
persuade you that it will do; half of those fellow know nothing
about wine. this place as it be now would be damp and cold in
winter, and hot and muggy in summer. I wouldnot give a straw for
the good wine that ever be mint, after it have lain here a couple
of year.'
Mr Arabin assent, and promise that the cellar should be
reconstruct accord to the archdeacon's receipt.
'and, Arabin, look here; be such an attempt at a kitchen grate
ever see?'
'the grate be really very bad,' say Mrs Grantly; 'I be sure the
priestess willnot approve of it, when she be bring here to the
scene of future duty. really, Mr Arabin, no priestess accustom
to such an excellent well as that above could put up with such a
grate as this.'
'if there must be a priestess at St Ewold's at all, Mrs Grantly, I
think we shall leave she to she well, and not call down her divine
wrath on any of the imperfection rise from our human poverty.
however, I own I be amenable to the attraction of a well-cook
dinner, and the grate shall certainly be change.'
by this time the archdeacon have again ascend, and be now in the
dining-room. 'Arabin,' say he, speak in his usual loud clear
voice, and with that tone of dictation which be so common to he;
'you must positively alter this dining-room, that is, remodel it
altogether; look here, it be just sixteen foot by fifteen; do
anybody ever hear of a dining-room of such proportion?' and the
archdeacon step the room long-way and cros-way with ponderous
step, as though a certain amount of ecclesiastical dignity could
be impart even to such an occupation as that by the manner of
do it. 'barely sixteen; you may call it a square.'
'it would do very well for a round table,' suggest the ex-warden.
now there be something peculiarly unorthodox in the archdeacon's
estimation in the idea of a round table. he have always be
accustomed to a goodly board of decent length, comfortably
elongate itself accord to the number of guest, nearly black
with perpetual rubbing, and as bright as a mirror. now round dinner
table be generally of oak, or else of such new construction as
not to have acquire the peculiar hue which be so pleasing to he.
he connect they with what he call the nasty new fangle method
of leave cloth on the table, as though to warn people that they
be not to sit long. in his eye there be something democratic
and parvenu in a round table. he imagine that dissenter and
calico-printer chiefly use they, and perhaps a few literary lion
more conspicuous for their wit than their gentility. he be a
little flurry at the idea of such an article, be introduce
into the diocese by a protege of his own, and at the instigation of
his father-in-law.
'a round dinner-table,' say he, with some heat, 'be the most
abominable article of furniture that ever be invent. I hope that
Arabin have more taste than to allow such a thing in his house.'
Poor Mr Harding feel himself completely snub, and of course say
nothing far; but Mr Arabin, who have yield submissively in the
small matter of the cellar and kitchen grate, find himself
oblige to oppose reform which might be of a nature too expensive
for his pocket.
'but it seem to I, archdeacon, that I cannot very well lengthen
the room without pull down the wall, and if I pull down the
wall, I must build it up again; then if I throw out a bow on this
side, I must do the same on the other, then if I do it for the
ground floor, I must carry it up to the floor above. that will be
put a new front to the house, and will cost, I suppose, a
couple of hundred pound. the ecclesiastical commissioner will
hardly assist I when they hear that my grievance consist in
have a dining-room only sixteen foot long.'
the archdeacon proceed to explain that nothing would be easy
than add six foot to the front of the dining-room, without
touch any other of the house. such irregularity of
construction in small country house be, he say, rather graceful
than otherwise, and he offer to pay for the whole thing out of
his own pocket if it cost more than forty pound. Mr Arabin,
however, be firm, and, although the archdeacon fuss and fume
about it, would not give way.
forty pound, he say, be a matter of serious moment to he, and
his friend, if under such circumstance they would be good-natured
enough to come to he at all, must put up with the misery of a
square room. he be willing to compromise matter by disclaim
any intention of have a round table.
'but,' say Mrs Grantly, 'what if the priestess insist on have
both the room enlarge?'
'the priestess in that case must do it for herself, Mrs Grantly.'
'I have no doubt she will be well able to do so,' reply the lady;
'to do that and many more wonderful thing. I be quite sure that
the priestess of St Ewold, when she do come, willnot come
empty-handed.'
Mr Arabin, however, do not appear well inclined to enter into
speculative expense on such a chance as this, and therefore, any
material alteration in the house, the cost of which could not
fairly be make to lie at the door either of the ecclesiastical
commission or of the estate of the late incumbent, be taboo.
with this essential exception, the archdeacon order, suggest,
and carry all point before he in a manner very much to his own
satisfaction. a close observer, have there be one there, might
have see that his wife have be quite as useful in the matter as
himself. no one know well than Mrs Grantly the appurtenance
necessary to a comfortable house. she do not, however, think it
necessary to lay claim to any of the glory which her lord and
master be so ready to appropriate as his own.
have go through their work effectively, and systematically, the
party return to Plumstead well satisfied with their expedition.
CHAPTER XXII
the THORNES of ULLATHORNE
on the following Sunday Mr Arabin be to read himself in at his new
church. it be agree at the rectory that the archdeacon should go
over with he and assist at the reading-desk, and that Mr Harding
should take the archdeacon's duty at Plumstead Church. Mrs Grantly
have her school and her bun to attend to, and profess that she
could not be spar; but Mrs Bold be to accompany they. it be
far agree also, that they would lunch at the squire's house,
and return home after the afternoon service.
Wilfred Thorne, Esq., of Ullathorne, be the squire of St Ewold's;
or rather the squire of Ullathorne; for the domain of the modern
landlord be of wide notoriety than the fame of the ancient saint.
he be a fair speciman of what that race have come to in our day,
which a century ago be, as we be tell, fairly represent by
Squire Western. if that representation be a true one, few class
of man can have make fast stride in improvement. Mr Thorne,
however, be a man possess of quite a sufficient number of
foible to lay he open to much ridicule. he be still a bachelor,
be about fifty, and be not a little proud of his person. when
live at home at Ullathorne there be not much room for such
pride, and there therefore he always look like a gentleman, and
like that which he certainly be, the first man in his parish. but
during the month or six week which he annually spend in London, he
try so hard to look like a great man there also, which he
certainly be not, that he be put down as a fool by many at his
club. he be a man of considerable literary attainment in a certain
way and on certain subject. his favourite author be Montaigne
and Burton, and he know more perhaps than any other man in his own
county, and the next to it, of the english essayist of the two
last century. he possess complete set of the 'Idler', the
'spectator,' the 'Tatler,' the 'Guardian,' and the 'Rambler;' and
would discourse by hour together on the superiority of such
publication to anything which have since be produce in our
Edinburghs and Quarterlies. he be a great proficient in all
question of genealogy, and know enough of almost every gentleman's
family in England to say of what blood and lineage be descend
all those who have any claim to be consider as possessor of any
such luxury. for blood and lineage he himself have a must profound
respect. he count back his own ancestor to some period long
antecedent to the Conquest; and could tell you, if you would listen
to he, how it have come to pass that they, like Cedric the Saxon,
have be permit to hold their own among the Norman baron. it
be not, accord to his showing, on account of any weak
complaisance on the part of his family towards their Norman
neighbour. some Ealfried of Ullathorne once fortify his own
castle, and hold out, not only that, but the then exist
cathedral of Barchester also, against one Godfrey de Burgh, in the
time of King John; and Mr Thorne possess the whole history of the
siege write on vellum, and illuminate in a most costly manner.
it little signify that no one could read the writing, as, have
that be possible, no one could have understand the language. Mr
Thorne could, however, give you all the particular in good
English, and have no objection to do so.
it would be unjust to say that he look down in man whose family
be of recent date. he do not do so. he frequently consort with
such, and have choose many of his friend from among they. but he
look on they as great millionaire be apt to look on those who
have small income; as man who have Sophocles at their finger'
end regard those who know nothing of Greek. they might doubtless
be good sort of people, entitle to much praise for virtue, very
admirable for talent, highly respectable in every way; but they
be without the one great good gift. such be Mr Thorne's way of
think on this matter; nothing could atone for the loss of good
blood; nothing could neutralise its good effect. few indeed be
now possess of it, but the possession be on that account the
more precious. it be very pleasant to hear Mr Thorne descant on
this matter. be you in your ignorance to surmise that such a one
be of a good family because the head of his family be a baronet
of an old date, he would open his eye with a delightful look of
affect surprise, and modestly remind you that baronetcy only
date from James I. he would gently sigh if you speak of the blood
of the Fitzgeralds and De Burghs; would hardly allow the claim of
the howard and lowther; and have before now allude to the talbot
as a family who have hardly yet achieve the full honour of a
pedigree.
in speak once of a wide spread race whose name have receive the
honour of three coronet, scion from which sit for various
constituency, some one of whose member have be in almost every
cabinet form during this present century, a brilliant race such
as there be few in England, Mr Thorne call they all 'dirt'. he
have not intend any disrespect to these man. he admire they in
many sens, and allow they their privilege without envy. he have
merely mean to express his feeling that the stream which run
through their not vein be yet purify by time to that
perfection, have not become so genuine an ichor, as to be worthy of
be call blood in the genealogical sense.
when Mr Arabin be first introduce to he, Mr Thorne have
immediately suggest that he be one of the Arabins of Uphill
Stanton. Mr Arabin reply that he be a very distant relative of
the family allude to. to this Mr Thorne surmise that the
relationship could not be very distant. Mr Arabin assure he that
it be so distant that the family know nothing of each other. Mr
Thorne laugh his gentle laugh at this, and tell Mr Arabin that
there be not exist no branch of his family separate from the
parent stock at an early date than the reign of Elizabeth; and
that therefore Mr Arabin could not call himself distant. Mr Arabin
himself be quite clearly an Arabin of Uphill Stanton.
'but,' say the vicar, 'Uphill Stanton have be sell to the De
Greys, and have be in their hand for the last fifty year.'
'and when it have be there one hundred and fifty, if it unluckily
remain there so long,' say Mr Thorne, 'your descendant will not
be a whit the less entitled to describe themselves as be of the
family of Uphill Stanton. thank God, no De Grey can buy that--and,
thank God--no Arabin, and no Thorne, can sell it.'
in politic, Mr Thorne be an unflinche conservative. he look
on those fifty-three Trojans, who, as Mr Dod tell we, censure free
trade in November 1852, as the only patriot leave among the public
man of England. when that terrible crisis of free trade have
arrive, when the repeal of the corn law be carry by those very
man whom Mr Thorne have hitherto regard as the only possible
saviour of his country, he be for a time paralyse. his country
be lose; but that be comparatively a small thing. other country
have flourish and fall, and the human race still go on
improve under God's providence. but now all trust in human faith
must for ever be at an end. not only must ruin come, but it must
come through the apostasy of those who have be regard as the
truest of true believer. politic in England, as a pursuit for
gentleman, must be at an end. have Mr Thorne be tread under foot
by a Whig, he could have bear it as a Tory and a martyr; but to be
so utterly throw over and deceive by those he have so earnestly
support, so thoroughly trust, be more than he could endure and
live. he therefore cease to live as a politician, and refuse to
hold any converse with the world at large on the state of the
country.
such be Mr Thorne's impression for the first two or three year
after Sir Robert Peel's apostasy; but by degree his temper, as do
that of other, cool down. he begin once more to move about, to
frequent the bench and the market, and to be see at dinner,
shoulder to shoulder with some of those who have so cruelly betray
he. it be a necessity for he to live, and that plan of his for
avoid the world do not answer. he, however, have other around
he, who still maintain the same staunch principle of
protection--man like himself, who be too true to flinch at the
cry of a mob--have their own way of console themselves. they be,
and feel themselves to be, the only true depository leave of
certain eleusinian mystery, of certain deep and wondrous service
of worship by which alone the god could be rightly approach. to
they and they only be it now give to know these thing, and to
perpetuate they, if that might still be do, by the careful and
secret education of their child.
we have read how private and peculiar form of worship have be
carry on from age to age in family, which to the outer world
have apparently adhere to the service of some ordinary church. and
so by degree it be with Mr Thorne. he learn at length to listen
calmly while protection be talk of as a thing dead, although he
know within himself that it be still quick with a mystic life. nor
be he without a certain pleasure that such knowledge though give
to he should be debar from the multitude. he become accustom
to hear, even among country gentleman, that free trade be after
all not so bad, and to bear this without dispute, although
conscious within himself that everything good in England have go
with his old palladium. he have within he something of the feeling
of Cato, who glory that he could kill himself because Romans be
no long worthy of their name. Mr Thorne have no thought of kill
himself, be a Christian, and still possess his l 4000 a year;
but the feeling be not on that account the less comfortable.
Mr Thorne be a sportsman, and have be active though not
outrageous in his sport. previous to the great downfall of
politic in his country, he have support the hunt by every mean
in his power. he have preserve game till no goose or turkey could
show a tail in the parish of St Ewold's. he have plant gorse
cover with more care than oak and larch. he have be more
anxious for the comfort of his fox than of his ewe and lamb. no
meet have be more popular than Ullathorne; no man's stable have
be more liberally open to the horse of distant man than Mr
Thorne's; no man have say more, write more, or do more to keep
the club up. the theory of protection could expand itself so
thoroughly in the practice of the country hunt! but the great ruin
come; when the noble master of the Barchester hound support the
recreant minister in the House of Lords, and basely surrender his
truth, his manhood, his friend, and his honour for the hope of a
garter, then Mr Thorne give up the hunt. he do not cut his
cover, for that would not have be the act of a gentleman. he do
not kill his fox, for that accord to his light would have be
murder. he do not say that his cover should not be draw, or his
earth stop, for that would have be illegal accord to the
by-law prevail among country gentleman. but he absent himself
from home on the occasion of every meet at Ullathorne, leave the
cover to their fate, and could not be persuade to take his pink
coat out of the press, or his hunter out of his stable. this
last for two year, and then by degree he come round. he first
appear at a neighbouring meet on a pony, dress in his shooting
coat, as though he have trot in by accident; then he walk up
one morning on foot to see his favourite gorse draw, and when his
groom bring his mare out by chance, he do not refuse to mount
she. he be next persuade, by one of the immortal fifty-three, to
bring his hunting material over to the other side of the county,
and take a fortnight with the hound there; and so gradually he
return to his old life. but in hunting as in other thing he be
only support by the inward feeling of mystic superiority to those
with whom he share the common breath of outer life.
Mr Thorne do not live in solitude at Ullathorne. he have a sister,
who be ten year old than himself, and who participate in his
prejudice and feeling so strongly, that she be a living
caricature of all his foible. she would not open a modern
quarterly, do not choose to see a magazine in her drawing-room,
and would not have pollute her finger with a shred of "the Times"
for any consideration. she speak of Addison, Swift, and Steele, as
though they be still live, regard De Foe as the well know
novelist of his country, and thought of fielding as a young but
meritorious novice in the field of romance. in poetry, she be
familiar with then name as late as Dryden, and have once be
seduce into read the "rape of the lock"; but she regard
Spenser as the pure type of her country's literature in this
line. genealogy be her favourite insanity. those thing which be
the pride of most genealogist be to her contemptible. arm and
motto set she beside herself. Ealfried of Ullathorne have want
no motto to assist he in cleave to the brisket Geoffrey De
Burgh; and Ealfried's great grandfather, the gigantic Ullafrid, have
require no other arm than those which nature give he to hurl
from the top of his own castle a cousin of the base invade
Norman. to she all modern English name be equally insignificant.
Hengist, Horsa, and such like, have for she the only true savour of
nobility. she be not content unless she could go beyond the
Saxons; and would certainly have christen her child, have she
have child, by the name of the ancient Britons. in some respect
she be not unlike Scott's Ulrica, and have she be give to
cursing, she would certainly have do so in the name of Mista,
Skogula, and Zernebock. not have submit to the embrace of any
pollute Normans, as poor Ulrica have do, and have assist no
parricide, the milk of human kindness be not curdle in her bosom.
she never curse, therefore, but bless rather. this, however, she
do in a strange uncouth Saxon manner, that would have be
unintelligible to any peasant but her own.
as a politician, Miss Thorne have be so thoroughly disgusted with
public life by base deed long antecedent to the Corn Law question,
that that have but little move she. in her estimation her brother
have be a fast young man, hurry away by a too ardent temperament
into democratic tendency. now happily he be bring to sounder
view by see the iniquity of the world. she have not yet
reconcile herself to the Reform Bill, and still groan in spirit
over the defalcation of the Duke as touch the Catholic
Emancipation. if ask whom she think the Queen should take as
her counsellor, she would probably have name Lord Eldon; and when
remind that that venerable man be no long present in the flesh
to assist we, she would probably have answer with a sigh that
none now could help we but the dead.
in religion, Miss Thorne be a pure druidess. we would not have it
understand by that, that she do actually in these latter day
assist at any human sacrifice, or that she be in fact hostile to
the Church of Christ. she have adopt the christian religion as a
milder form of the worship of her ancestor, and always appeal to
she do so as evidence that she have no prejudice against reform,
when it could be show that reform be salutary. this reform be
the most modern of any to which she have as yet accede, it be
presume that british lady have give up their paint and take to
some sort of petticoat before the day of St Augustine. that
further feminine step in advance which combine paint and
petticoat together, have not find votary in Miss Thorne.
but she be a Druidess in this, that she regret she know not
what in the usage and practice of her Church. she sometimes
talk and constantly think of good thing go by, though she
have but the faint idea of what those good thing have be. she
imagine that a purity have exist which be now go; that a piety
have adorn our pastor and a simple docility our people, for which
it may be fear history give she but little true warrant. she be
accustomed to speak of Cranmer as though he have be the firm
and most simple-minded of martyr, and of Elizabeth as though the
pure protestant faith of her people have be the one anxiety of her
life. it would have be cruel to undeceive she, have it be
possible; but it would have be impossible to make she believe
that the one be a time-serve priest, willing to go any length to
keep his place, and that the other be in heart a papist, with this
sole proviso, that she should be her own pope.
and so Miss Thorne go on sigh and regretting, look back to
the divine right of king as the rule axiom of a golden age, and
cherishing, low down in the bottom of her heart of heart, a dear
unmentione wish for the restoration of some exile Stuart. who
would deny she the luxury of her sigh, or the sweetness of her
soft regret!
in her person and her dress she be perfect, and well she know she
own perfection. she be a small elegantly make old woman, with a
face from which the glow of her youth have not depart without
leave some streak of a roseate hue. she be proud of her colour,
proud of her grey hair which she wear in short crisp curl peer
out all around her face from the dainty white cap. to think of all
the money that she spend in lace use to break the heart of poor
Mrs Quiverful with her seven daughter. she be proud of her tooth,
which be still white and numerous, proud of her bright cheery
eye, proud of her short jaunty step, and very proud of the neat,
precise, small foot with which those step be take. she be
proud also, ay, very proud, of the rich brocade silk in which it
be her custom to ruffle through her drawing-room.
we know what be the custom of the lady of branksome--
"nine and twenty knight of fame
Hung their shield in Branksome Hall."
the lady of Ullathorne be not so martial in her habit, but hardly
less costly. she might have boast that nine-and-twenty silken
shirt might have be produce in her chamber, each fit to stand
alone. the nine-and-twenty shield of the scottish hero be less
independent, and hardly more potent to withstand any attack that
might be make on they. Miss Thorne when fully dress might be say
to have be armed cap-a-pie, and she be always fully dress, as
far as be ever know to mortal man.
for all this rich attire Miss Thorne be not indebted to the
generosity of her brother. she have a very comfortable independence
of her own, which she divide among juvenile relative, the
milliner, and the poor, give much the large share to the
latter. it may be imagine, therefore, that with all her little
folly she be not unpopular. all her folly have, we believe,
be tell. her virtue be too numerous to describe, and not
sufficiently interesting to deserve description.
while we be on the subject of the Thornes, one word must be say
of the house they live in. it be not a large house, nor a fine
house, nor perhaps to modern idea a very commodious house; but by
those who love the peculiar colour and peculiar ornament of
genuine Tudor architecture it be consider a perfect gem. we beg
to own ourselves among the number, and therefore take this
opportunity to express our surprise that so little be know by
english man and woman of the beauty of english architecture. the
ruin of the Colosseum, the Campanile at Florence, St Mark's,
Cologne, the Bourse and Notre Dame, be with our tourist as
familiar as household word; but they know nothing of the glory
of Wiltshire, dorsetshire, and Somersetshire. Nay, we much question
whether many noted traveller, many who have pitch their tent
perhaps under Mount Sinai, be not still ignorant that there be
glory in Wiltshire, Dorsetshire and Somersetshire. we beg that
they will go and see.
Mr Thorne's house be call Ullathorne Court, and be properly so
call; for the house itself form two side of a quadrangle,
which be complete in the other two side by a wall about twenty
foot high. this be build of cut stone, rudely cut indeed, and now
much worn, but of a beautiful rich tawny yellow colour, the effect
of that stonecrop of minute growth, which it have take three
century to produce. the top of this wall be ornament by huge
round stone ball of the same colour as the wall itself. entrance
into the court be have through a pair of iron gate, so massive
that no one could comfortably open or close they, consequently they
be rarely disturb. from the gateway two path lead obliquely
across the court; that to the left reach the hall-door, which
be in the corner make by the angle of the house, and that to the
right lead to the back entrance, which be at the further end of
the long portion of the building.
with those who be now adept at contrive house accommodation, it
will militate much against Ullathorne Court, that no carriage could
be bring to the hall-door. if you enter Ullathorne at all, you
must do so, fair reader, on foot, or at least in a bath-chair. no
vehicle draw by horse ever come within that iron gate. but this
be nothing to the next horror that will encounter you. on enter
the front door, which you do by no very grand portal, you find
yourself immediately in the dining-room. what--no hall? exclaim my
luxurious friend, accustom to all the comfortable appurtenance
of modern life. yes, kind sir; a noble hall, if you will but
observe it; a true old english hall of excellent dimension for a
country gentleman's family; but, if you please, no dining-parlour.
but Mr and Miss Thorne be proud of this peculiarity of their
dwelling, though the brother be once all but tempt by his
friend to alter it. they delight in the knowledge that they,
like Cedric, positively din in their true hall, even though they
so din tete-a-tete. but though they have never own, they have
feel and endeavour to remedy the discomfort of such an
arrangement. a huge screen partition off the front door and a
portion of the hall, and from the angle so screen off a second
door lead into a passage, which run along the large side of the
house next to the courtyard. either my reader or I must be a bad
hand at topography, if it be not clear that the great hall form
the ground-floor of the small portion of the mansion, that which
be to your left as you enter the iron gate, and that it occupy
the whole of this wing of the building. it must be equally clear
that it look out on a trim mow lawn, through three quadrangular
window with stone mullion, each window divide into a large
portion at the bottom, and a small portion at the top, and each
portion again divide into five by perpendicular stone supporter.
there may be window which give a well light than such as those,
and it may be, as my utilitarian friend observe, that the giving
of light be the desire object of a window. I will not argue the
point with he. indeed I cannot. but I shall not the less die in
the assured conviction that no sort of description of window be
capable of impart half as much happiness to mankind as that
which have be adopt at Ullathorne Court. what--not an oriel?
say Miss Diana de Midellage. no, Miss Diana; not even an oriel,
beautiful as be an oriel window. it have not about it so perfect a
feeling of quiet English homely comfort. let oriel window grace a
college, or the half public mansion of a potent peer; but for the
sitting room of quiet country lady, of ordinary homely folk,
nothing can equal the square mullione window of the Tudor
architect.
the hall be hang round with family female insipidity by lely,
and unprepossesse male Thornes in red coat by Kneller; each
Thorne have be let into a panel in the wainscoting in the
proper manner. at the further end of the room be a huge
fire-place, which afford much ground of difference between the
brother and sister. an antiquated grate that would hold about a
hundred weight of coal, have be stick on the hearth, by Mr
Thorne's father. this hearth have of course be intend for the
consumption of wood fagot, and the iron dog for the purpose be
still stand, though half bury in the masonry of the grate.
Miss Thorne be very anxious to revert to the dog. the dear good
old creature be always to revert to anything, and have she be
systematically indulge, would doubtless in time have reflect
that finger be make before fork, and have revert accordingly.
but in the affair of the fire-place, Mr Thorne would not revert.
country gentleman around he, all have comfortable grate in their
dining-room. he be not exactly the man to have suggest a modern
usage; but he be not so far prejudiced as to banish those which
his father have prepare for his use. Mr Thorne have, indeed, once
suggest that with very little contrivance the front door might
have be so altered, as to open at least into the passage; but on
hear this, his sister Monica, such be Miss Thorne's name, have
be take ill, and have remain so for a week. before she come
down stair she receive a pledge from her brother that the
entrance should never be change in her lifetime.
at the end of the hall opposite to the fire-place a door lead into
the drawing-room, which be of equal size, and light with
precisely similar window. but yet the aspect of the room be very
different. it be paper, and the ceiling, which in the hall
show the old rafter, be whiten and finish with a modern
cornice. Miss Thorne's drawing-room, or, as she always call it,
withdrawing-room, be a beautiful apartment. the window open on
to the full extent of the lovely trim garden; immediately before
the window be plot of flower in stiff, stately, stubborn
little bed, each bed surround by a stone cop of its own;
beyond, there be a low parapet wall, on which stand urn and
image, fawn, nymph, satyr, and a whole tribe of Pan's
follower; and then again, beyond that, a beautiful lawn slop
away to a sunk fence, which divide the garden from the park. Mr
Thorne's study be at the end of the drawing-room, and beyond that
be the kitchen and the office. door open into both Miss
Thorne's withdrawing-room and Mr Thorne's sanctum from the passage
above allude to; which, as it come to the latter room, widen
itself so as to make space for the huge black oak stair, which lead
to the upper region.
such be the interior of Ullathorne Court. but have thus
describe it, perhaps somewhat too tediously, we beg to say that it
be not the interior to which we wish to call the english tourist's
attention, though we advise he to lose no legitimate opportunity
of become acquaint with it in a friendly manner. it be the
outside of Ullathorne that be so lovely. let the tourist get
admission at least into the garden, and fle himself on that soft
award just opposite to the exterior angle of the house. he will
there get the double frontage, and enjoy that which be so
lovely--the expanse of architectural beauty without the formal
dullness of one long line.
it be the colour of Ullathorne that be so remarkable. it be all of
that delicious tawny hue which no stone can give, unless it have on
it the vegetable richness of century. strike the wall with your
hand, and you will think that the stone have on it no covering, but
rub it carefully, and you will find that the colour come off upon
your finger. no colourist that ever yet work from a palette have
be able to come up to this rich colouring of year crowd
themselves on year.
Ullathorne be a high building for a country house, for it possess
three story; and in each storey, the window be of the same sort
as that describe, though vary in size, and vary also in
their line athwart the house. those of the ground floor be all
uniform in size and position. but those above be irregular both in
size and place, and this irregularity give a bizarre and not
unpicturesque appearance to the building. along the top, on every
side, run a low parapet, which nearly hide the roof, and at the
corner be more figure of fawn and satyr.
such be Ullathorne House. but we must say one word of the approach
to it, which shall include all the description which we mean to
give of the church also. the picturesque old church of St Ewold's
stand immediately opposite to the iron gate which open into the
court, and be all but surround by the branch of lime tree,
which form the avenue lead up to the house from both side.
this avenue be magnificent, but it would lose much of its value in
the eye of many proprietor, by the fact that the road through it
be not private property. it be a public lane between hedgerow,
with a broad grass margin on each side of the road, from which the
lime tree spring. Ullathorne Court, therefore, do not stand
absolutely surround by its own ground, though Mr Thorne be owner
of all the adjacent land. this, however, be the source of very
little annoyance to he. man, when they be acquire property,
think much of such thing, but they who live where their ancestor
have live for year, do not feel the misfortune. it never occur
to either Mr or Miss Thorne that they be not sufficiently
private, because the world at large might, if it so wish, walk or
drive by their iron gate. that part of the world which avail
itself of the privilege be however very small.
such a year or two since be the Thornes of Ullathorne. such, we
believe, be the inhabitant of many an english country home. May
it be long before their number diminish.
CHAPTER XXIII
MR ARABIN READS himself in AT ST EWOLD'S
on the Sunday morning the archdeacon with his sister-in-law and Mr
Arabin drive over to Ullathorne, as have be arrange. on their way
thither the new vicar declare himself to be considerably disturb
in his mind at the idea of thus face his parishioner for the
first time. he have, he say, be always subject to mauvaise honte
and an annoying degree of bashfulness, which often unfit he for
any work of a novel description; and now he feel this so strongly
that he fear he should acquit himself badly in St Ewold's
reading-desk. he know, he say, that those sharp little eye of
Miss Thorne would be on to he, and that they would not approve.
all this the archdeacon greatly ridicule. he himself know not, and
have never know, what it be to be shy. he could not conceive that
Miss Thorne, surround as she would be by the peasant of
Ullathorne, and a few of the poor inhabitant of the suburb of
Barchester, could in any way affect the composure of a man well
accustom to address the learn congregation of St Mary's at
Oxford, and he laugh accordingly at the idea of Mr Arabin's
modesty.
Thereupon Mr Arabin commence to subtilise. the change, he say,
from St Mary's to St Ewold's be quite as powerful on the spirit
as would be that from St Ewold's to St Mary's. would not a peer
who, by chance of fortune, might suddenly be drive to herd among
the navvy be as afraid of the jeer of his companion, as would
any navvy suddenly exalt to a seat among the peer? Whereupon the
archdeacon declare with a loud laugh that he would tell Miss
Thorne that her new minister have liken she to a navvy. Eleanor,
however, pronounce such a conclusion unfair; a comparison might be
very just in its proportion which do not at all assimilate the
thing compare. but Mr Arabin go in subtilise, regard
neither the archdeacon's raillery nor Eleanor's defence. a young
lady, he say, would execute with most perfect self-possession a
difficult piece of music in a room crowd with stranger, who
would not be able to express herself in any intelligible language,
even on any ordinary subject and among her most intimate friend,
if she be require to do so stand on a box somewhat elevated
among they. it be all an affair of education, and he at forty
find it difficult to educate himself now.
Eleanor dissent on the matter of the box; and aver she could
speak very well about dress, or baby, or leg of mutton from
any box, provide it be big enough for she to stand upon without
fear, even though all her friend be listen to she. the
archdeacon be sure she would not be able to say a word; but this
prove nothing in favour of Mr Arabin. Mr Arabin say that he would
try the question out with Mrs Bold, and get she on a box some day
when the rectory might be full of visitor. to this Eleanor
assent, make condition that the visitor should be of their own
set, and the archdeacon cogitate in his mind, whether by such a
condition it be intend that Mr Slope should be include,
resolve also that, if so, the trial should certainly never take
place in the rectory drawing-room at Plumstead.
and so arguing, they drive up to the iron gate of Ullathorne
Court.
Mr and Miss Thorne be stand ready dress for church in the
hall, and greet their clerical visitor with cordiality. the
archdeacon be an old favourite. he be a clergyman of the old
school, and this recommend he to the lady. he have always be an
opponent of free trade as long as free trade be an open question;
and now that it be no long so, he, be a clergyman, have not
be oblige, like most of his lay Tory companion, to read his
recantation. he could therefore be regard as a supporter of the
immaculate fifty-three, and be on this account a favourite with Mr
Thorne. the little bell be tinkle, and the rural population be
stand about the lane, lean on the church stile, and against
the wall of the old court, anxious to get a look at their new
minister as he pass from the house to the rectory. the
archdeacon's servant have already precede they thither with the
vestment.
they all go together; and when the lady pass into the church
the three gentleman tarry a moment in the lane, that Mr Thorne
might name to the vicar with some kind of one-sided introduction,
the most leading among his parishioner.
'here be our churchwarden, Mr Arabin; Farmer Greenacre and Mr
Stiles. Mr Stiles have the mill as you go into Barchester; and very
good churchwarden they be.'
'not very severe, I hope,' say Mr Arabin: the two ecclesiastical
officer touch their hat, and each make a leg in the approved
rural fashion, assure the vicar that they be glad to have the
honour of see he, and add that the weather be very good for
the harvest. Mr Stiles be a man somewhat verse in town life,
have an impression of his own dignity, and do not quite like leave
his pastor under the erroneous idea that he be a churchwarden
keep the child in order during church time. 'twas thus he
understand Mr Arabin's allusion to his severity, and hasten to
put matter right by observe that 'Sexton Clodheave look to the
youngun, and perhaps sometimes there maybe a thought too much
stick go on during sermon.' Mr Arabin's bright eye twinkle as
he catch that of the archdeacon; and he smile to himself as he
observe how ignorant his officer be of the nature of their
authority, and of the surveillance which it be their duty to keep
even over himself.
Mr Arabin read the lesson and preach. it be enough to put a man
a little out, let he have be ever so used to pulpit reading, to
see the knowing way in which the farmer cock their ear, and set
about a mental criticism as to whether their new minister do or
do not fall short of the excellence of he who have lately depart
from they. a mental and silent criticism it be for the exist
moment, but soon to be make public among the elder of St Ewold's
over the green graf of their child and forefather. the
excellence, however, of poor old Mr Goodenough have not be
wonderful, and there be few there who do not deem that Mr Arabin
do his work sufficiently well, in spite of the slightly nervous
affection which at first impede he, and which nearly drive the
archdeacon beside himself.
but the sermon be the thing to try the man. it often surprise we
that very young man can muster courage to preach for the first time
to a strange congregation. man who be as yet little more than
boy, who have but just leave, what indeed we may not call a school,
but a seminary intend for their tuition as scholar, whose
thought have be mostly of boat, cricketing, and wine party,
ascend a rostrum high above the head of the submissive crowd, not
that they may read God's word to those below, but that they may
preach their own word for the edification of their hearer. it
seem strange to we that they be not stricken dumb by the new and
awful solemnity of their position. how be I, just turn
twenty-three, who have never yet pass then thoughtful day since
the power of thought first come to I, how be I to instruct these
grey beard, who with the weary thinking of so many year have
approach so near the grave? can I teach they their duty? can I
explain to they that which I so imperfectly understand, that which
year of study may have make so plain to they? have my newly acquire
privilege, as one of God's minister, impart to I as yet any
fitness for the wonderful work of a preacher?
it must be suppose that such idea do occur to young clergyman,
and yet they overcome, apparently with ease, this difficulty which
to we appear to be all but insurmountable. we have never be
subject in the way of ordination to the power of a bishop's
hand. it may be that there be in they something that sustain the
spirit and banish the natural modesty of youth. but for ourselves
we must own that the deep affection which Dominie Sampson feel for
his young pupil have not more endear he to we than the bashful
spirit which send he mute and inglorious from the pulpit when he
rise there with the futile attempt to preach God's gospel.
there be a rule in our church which forbid the young order of
our clergyman to perform a certain portion of the service. the
absolution must be read by a minister in priest's order. if there
be no such minister present, the congregation can have the benefit
of no absolution but that which each may succeed in administer
to himself. the rule may be a good one, though the necessity for it
hardly come home to the general understanding. but this
forbearance on the part of youth would be much more appreciated if
it be extend likewise to sermon. the only danger would be that
the congregation would be too anxious to prevent their young
clergyman from advance themselves to the rank of the ministry.
Clergymen who could not preach would be such blessing that they
would be bribe to adhere to their incompetence.
Mr Arabin, however, have not the modesty of youth to impede he, and
he succeed with his sermon even well than with the lesson. he
take for his text two verse out of the second epistle of St John:
'Whosoever trangresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ,
hath not God. he that abideth in the doctrine of Christ he hath
both the Father and Son. if there come any unto you and bring you
not this doctrine, receive he not into your house, neither bid he
God speed.' he tell they that the house of theirs to which he
allude be this their church in which he now address they for
the first time; that their most welcome and proper manner of
bid he God speed would be their patient obedience to this
teaching of the gospel; but that he could put forward no claim to
such conduct on their part unless he teach they the great
christian doctrine of work and faith combine. on this he
enlarge, but not very amply, and after twenty minute succeed in
send his new friend home to their baked mutton and pudding well
pleased with their new minister.
then come the lunch at Ullathorne. as soon as they be in the hall
Miss Thorne take Mr Arabin's hand, and assure he that she
receive he into her house, into the temple, she say, in which
she worship, and bid he God speed with all her heart. Mr
Arabin be touch, and squeeze the spinster's hand without
utter a word in reply. then Mr Thorne express a hope that Mr
Arabin find the church easy to fill, and Mr Arabin have reply
that he have no doubt he should do so as soon as he have learn to
pitch his voice to the building, they all sit down to the good
thing before they.
Miss Thorne take special care of Mrs Bold. Eleanor still wear her
widow's weed, and therefore have about she that air of grave and
sad maternity which be the lot of recent widow. this open the
soft heart of Miss Thorne, and make she look on her young guest as
though too much could not be do for she. she heap chicken and
ham upon her plate, and pour out for she a full bumper of port
wine. when Eleanor, who be not sorry to get it, have drink a little
of it, Miss Thorne at once essay to fill it again. to this
Eleanor object, but in vain. Miss Thorne wink and nod and
whisper, say that it be the proper thing and must be do,
and that she know all about it; and so she desire Mrs Bold to
drink it up, and mind any body.
'it be your duty, you know, to support yourself,' she say into the
ear of the young mother; 'therebe more than yourself depend on
it;' and thus she coshere up Eleanor with cold fowl and port wine.
how it be that poor man's wife, who have no cold fowl and port
wine on which to be coshere up, nurse their child without
difficulty, whereas the wife of rich man, who eat and drink
everything that be good, cannot do so, we will for the present
leave to the doctor and mother to settle between they.
and then Miss Thorne be great about tooth. little Johnny Bold have
be trouble for the last few day with his first incipient
masticator, and with that freemasonry which exist between lady,
Miss Thorne become aware of the fact before Eleanor have half
finish her wing. the old lady prescribe at once a receipt which
have be much in vogue in the young day of her grandmother, and
warn Eleanor with solemn voice against the fallacy of modern
medicine.
'take his coral, my dear,' say she, 'and rub it well with
carrot-juice; rub it till the juice dry on it, and then give it
to he to play with--'
'but he havenot get a coral,' say Eleanor.
'not get a coral!' say Miss Thorne, with almost angry vehemence.
'not get a coral!--how can you expect that he should cut his tooth?
have you get Daffy's elixir?'
Eleanor explain that she have not. it have not be order by Mr
Rerechild, the Barchester doctor whom she employ; and then the
young mother mention some shockingly modern succedaneum, which Mr
Rerechild's new light have teach he to recommend.
Miss Thorne look awfully severe. 'take care, my dear,' say she,
'that the man know what he be about; take care he donot destroy
your little boy. 'but'--and her voice soften into sorrow as she
say it, and speak more in pity than in anger--'but I donot know
who there be in Barchester now that you can trust. poor dear old Dr
Bumpwell, indeed--'
'why, Miss Thorne, he die when I be a little girl.'
'yes, my dear, he do, and an unfortunate day it be for
Barchester. as to those young man that have come up since' (Mr
Rerechild, by the by, be quite as old as Miss Thorne herself),
'one donot know where they come from or who they be, or whether
they know anything about their business or not.'
'I think there be very clever man in Barchester,' say Eleanor.
'perhaps there may be; only I donot know they; and itbe admit on
all side that medical man benot now what they use to be. they
use to be talente, observe, educate man. but now any
whipper-snapper out of an apothecary's shop can call himself a
doctor. I believe no kind of education be now think necessary.'
Eleanor be herself the widow of a medical man, and feel a little
inclined to resent all these hard saying. but Miss Thorne be so
essentially good-natured that it be impossible to resent anything
she say. she therefore sip her wine and finish her chicken.
'at any rate, my dear, donot forget the carrot-juice, and by all
mean get he a coral at once. my grandmother Thorne have the good
tooth in the county, and carry they to the grave with she at
eighty. I have hear she say it be all the carrot-juice. she
couldnot bear the Barchester doctor. even poor Dr Bumpwell donot
please she.' it clearly never occur to Miss Thorne that some
fifty year ago Dr Bumpwell be only a rise man, and therefore as
much in need of character in the eye of the then lady of
Ullathorne, as the present doctor be in her own.
the archdeacon make a very good lunch, and talk to his host about
turnip-driller and new machine for reap; while the host,
think it only polite to attend to a stranger, and fear that
perhaps he might not care about turnip crop on a Sunday, moot
all manner of ecclesiastical subject.
'I never see a heavy lot of wheat, Thorne, than youhave get there
in the field beyond the copse. I suppose thatbe guano,' say the
archdeacon.
'yes, guano. I get it from Bristol myself. youwill find you often
have a tolerable congregation of Barchester people out here, Mr
Arabin. they be very fond of St Ewold's, particularly of an
afternoon, when the weather be not too hot for a walk.'
'I be under an obligation to they for stay away today, at any
rate,' say the vicar. 'the congregation can never be too small for
a maiden sermon.'
'I get a ton and a half at Bradley's in High Street,' say the
archdeacon, 'and it be a complete take in. I donot believe there
be five hundred-weight of guano in it.'
'that Bradley never have anything good,' say Miss Tborne, who have
just catch the name during her whispering with Eleanor. 'and such
a nice shop as there use to be in that very house before he come.
Wilfred, donot you remember what good thing old Ambleoff use to
have?'
'there have be three man since Ambleoff's time,' say the
archdeacon, 'and each as bad as the other. but who get it for you
at Bristol, Thorne?'
'I run up myself this year and buy it out of the ship. I be
afraid as the evening get short, Mr Arabin, youwill find the
reading desk too dark. I must send a fellow with an axe and make
he lop off some of those branch.'
Mr Arabin declare that the morning light at any rate be perfect,
and deprecate any interference with the lime tree. and then they
take a stroll out among the trim parterre, and Mr Arabin explain
to Mrs Bold the difference between a naiad and a dryad, and dilate
on vas and the shape of urn. Miss Thorne busy herself among
the pansy; and her brother, find it quite impracticable to
give anything of a peculiarly Sunday tone to the conversation,
abandon the attempt, and have it out with the archdeacon about the
Bristol guano.
at three o'clock they again go into church; and now Mr Arabin
read the service and the archdeacon preach. nearly the same
congregation be present, with some adventurous pedestrian from
the city, who have not think the heat of the mid-day August sun
too great to deter they. the archdeacon take his text from the
Epistle of Philemon. 'I beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I
have beget in my bond.' from such a text it may be imagine the
kind of sermon which Dr Grantly preach, and on the whole it be
neither dull, nor bad, nor out of place.
he tell they it have become his duty to look about for a pastor for
they; to supply the place of one who have be long among they; and
that in this manner he regard as a son he whom he have select,
as St Paul have regard the young disciple whom he send forth. then
he take a little merit to himself for have studiously provide
the good man he could without reference to patronage or favour; but
he do not say that the good man accord to his view be he who
be well able to subdue Mr Slope, and make that gentleman's
situation in Barchester too hot to be comfortable. as to the bond,
they have consist in the exceed struggle which he have make to
get a good clergyman for they. he deprecate any comparison between
himself and St Paul, but say that he be entitle to beseech they
for their good will towards Mr Arabin, in the same manner that the
apostle have beseech Philemon and his household with regard to
Onesimus.
the archdeacon's sermon, text, blessing and all, be conclude
within the half hour. then they shake hand with their Ullathorne
friend, and return to Plumstead. 'twas thus that Mr Arabin read
himself in at St Ewold's.
CHAPTER XXIV
MR SLOPE'S MANAGES matter very CLEVERLY AT PUDDINGDALE
the next two week pass pleasantly enough at Plumstead. the whole
party there assemble seem to get on well together. Eleanor make
the house agreeable, and the archdeacon and Mrs Grantly seem to
have forget her injury as regard Mr Slope. Mr Harding have his
violoncello, and play to they while his daughter accompany
he. Johnny Bold, by the help either of Mr Rerechild or else by
that of his coral and carrot-juice, get through his teethe
trouble. there have be gaiety too of all sort. they have din
at Ullathorne, and the Thornes have din at the rectory. eleanor
have be duly put to stand on her box, and in that position have
find herself quite unable to express her opinion on the merit of
flounce, such have be the subject give to try her elocution.
Mr Arabin have of course be much in his own parish, look to the
doing at his vicarage, call on his parishioner, and take on
himself the duty of his new calling. but still he have be every
evening at Plumstead, and Mrs Grantly be partly willing to agree
with her husband that he be a pleasant inmate in a house.
they have also be at a dinner party at Dr Stanhope's, of which Mr
Arabin have make one. he also, moth-like, burn his wing in the
flame of the signora's candle. Mrs Bold, too, have be there, and
have feel somewhat displeased with the taste, want of taste she
call it, show by Mr Arabin in pay so much attention to Madame
Neroni. it be as infallible that Madeline should displease and
irritate the woman, as that she should charm and captivate the man.
the one result follow naturally on the other. it be quite true
that Mr Arabin have be charm. he think she a very clever and a
very handsome woman; he think also that her peculiar affliction
entitle she to the sympathy of all. he have never, he say, meet so
much suffering join to such perfect beauty and so clear a mind.
'twas thus he speak of the signora come home in the archdeacon's
carriage; and Eleanor by no mean like to hear the praise. it be,
however, exceedingly unjust of she to be angry with Mr Arabin, as
she have herself spend a very pleasant evening with Bertie Stanhope,
who have take she down to dinner, and have not leave her side for one
moment after the gentleman come out of the dining-room. it be
unfair that she should amuse herself with Bertie and yet begrudge
her new friend his licence of amuse himself with Bertie's sister.
and yet she do so. she be half angry with he in the carriage,
and say something about meretricious manner. Mr Arabin do not
understand the way of woman very well, or else he might have
flatter himself that Eleanor be in love with he.
but Eleanor be not in love with he. how many shade there be
between love and indifference, and how little the graduated scale
be understand! she have now be nearly three week in the same
house with Mr Arabin, and have receive much of his attention, and
listen daily to his conversation. he have usually devote at least
some portion of his evening to she exclusively. at Dr Stanhope's he
have devote himself exclusively to another. it do not require
that a woman should be in love to be irritated at this; it do not
require that she should even acknowledge to herself that it be
unpleasant to she. Eleanor have no such self-knowledge. she think
in her own heart it be only on Mr Arabin's account that she
regret that he could condescend to be amuse by the signora. 'I
think he have more mind,' she say to herself, as she sit watch
her baby's cradle on her return from the party. 'after all, I
believe Mr Stanhope be the pleasanter man of the two.' Alas for the
memory of poor John Bold! Eleanor be not in love with Bertie
Stanhope, nor be she in love with Mr Arabin. but her devotion to
her late husband be fast fade, when she could revolve in her
mind, over the cradle of his infant, the fault and failing of
other aspirant to her favour.
will any one blame my heroine for this? let he or her rather thank
God for all his goodness,--for his mercy endureth for ever.
Eleanor, in truth, be not in love; neither be Mr Arabin. neither
indeed be Bertie Stanhope, though he have already find occasion to
say nearly as much as that he be. the widow's cap have prevent
he from make a positive declaration, when otherwise he would
have consider himself entitle to do so on a third or fourth
interview. it be, after all, but a small cap now, and have but
little of the weeping-willow leave in its construction. it be
singular how these emblem of grief fade away by unseen gradation.
each pretend to be the counterpart of the forerunner, and yet the
last little bit of crimp white crape that sit so jauntily on the
back of the head, be as dissimilar to the first huge mountain of
woe which disfigure the face of the weeper, as the state of the
Hindoo be to the jointure of the English dowager.
but let it be clearly understand that Eleanor be in love with no
one, and that no one be in love with Eleanor. under these
circumstance her anger against Mr Arabin do not last long, and
before two day be over they be both as good friend as ever.
she could not but like he, for every hour spend in his company be
spend pleasantly. and yet she could not quite like he, for there
be always apparent in his conversation a certain feeling on his
part that he hardly think it worth his while to be in earnest. it
be almost as though he be play with a child. she know well
enough that he be in truth a sober thoughtful man, who in some
matter and on some occasion could endure an agony of earnestness.
and yet to she he be always gently playful. could she have see
his brow once cloud she might have learn to love he.
so thing go on at Plumstead, and on the whole not unpleasantly,
till a huge storm darken the horizon, and come down upon the
inhabitant of the rectory with all the fury of a water-spout. it
be astonish how in a few minute the whole face of the heaven
be change. the party break up from breakfast in perfect harmony;
but fierce passion have arise before the evening, which do not
admit of their sitting at the same board for dinner. to explain
this, it will be necessary to go back a little.
it will be remember that the bishop express to Mr Slope in his
dressing-room, his determination that Mr Quiverful should be
confirm in his appointment to the hospital, and that his lordship
request Mr Slope to communicate this decision to the archdeacon.
it will also be remember that the archdeacon have indignantly
decline see Mr Slope, and have, instead, write a strong letter
to the bishop, in which he all but demand the situation of warden
for Mr Harding. to this letter the archdeacon receive an immediate
formal reply from Mr Slope, in which it be state, that the bishop
have receive and would give his good consideration to the
archdeacon's letter.
the archdeacon feel himself somewhat checkmate by this reply. what
could he do with a man who would neither see he, nor argue with
he by letter, and who have undoubtedly the power of appoint any
clergyman he please? he have consult with Mr Arabin, who have
suggest the propriety of call in the aid of the master of
Lazarus. 'if,' say he, 'you and Dr Gwynne formally declare your
intention of wait upon the bishop, the bishop will not dare to
refuse to see you; and if two such man as you see he together, you
will probably not leave he without carry your point.'
the archdeacon do not quite like admit the necessity of his
be back by the master of Lazarus before he could obtain
admission into the episcopal palace of Barchester; but still he
feel that the advice be good, and he resolve to take it. he write
again to the bishop, express a hope that nothing far would
be do in the matter of the hospital, till the consideration
promise by his lordship have be give, and then send off a warm
appeal to his friend the master, implore he to come to Plumstead
and assist in drive the bishop into compliance. the master have
rejoin, raise some difficulty, but not decline; and the
archdeacon again press his point, insist on the necessity for
immediate action. Dr Gwynne unfortunately have the gout, and could
therefore name no immediate day, but still agree to come, if it
should be finally find necessary. so the matter stand, as regard
the party at Plumstead.
but Mr Harding have another friend fight the battle for he,
quite as powerful as the master of Lazarus, and this be Mr Slope.
though the bishop have so pertinaciously insist on give way to
his wife in the matter of the hospital, Mr Slope do not think it
necessary to abandon the object. he have, he think, daily more and
more reason to imagine that the widow would receive his overture
favourably, and he could not but feel that Mr Harding at the
hospital, and place there by his mean would be more likely to
receive he as a son-in-law, than Mr Harding growl in opposition
and disappointment under the archdeacon's wing at Plumstead.
moreover, to give Mr Slope due credit, he be actuate by great
motif even than these. he want a wife, and he want money, but
he want power more than either. he have fully realise the fact
that he must come to blow with Mrs Proudie. he have no desire to
remain in Barchester as her chaplain. soon than do so, he would
risk the loss of his whole connection with the diocese. what! be
he to feel within he the possession of no ordinary talent; be he
to know himself to be courageous, firm, and, in matter where his
conscience do not interfere, unscrupulous; and yet be content to
be the work factotum of a woman-prelate? Mr Slope have high
idea of his own destiny. either he or Mrs Proudie must go to the
wall; and now have come the time when he would try which it would
be.
the bishop have declare that Mr Quiverful should be the new warden.
as Mr Slope go down stair prepared to see the archdeacon if
necessary, but fully satisfied that no such necessity would arise,
he declare to himself that Mr Harding should be warden. with the
object of carry this point he ride over to Puddingdale, and have
a further interview with the worthy expectant of clerical good
thing. Mr Quiverful be on the whole a worthy man. the impossible
task of bring up as lady and gentleman fourteen child on an
income which be insufficient to give they with decency the common
necessity of life, have have an effect upon he not beneficial
either to his spirit, or his keen sense of honour. who can boast
that he would have support such a burden with a different result?
Mr Quiverful be an honest, pain- staking, drudge man; anxious,
indeed, for bread and meat, anxious for mean to quiet his butcher
and cover with return smile the now sour countenance of the
baker's wife, but anxious also to be right with his own conscience.
he be not careful, as another might be who sit on an easy
worldly seat, to stand well with those around he, to shun a breath
which might sully his name, or a rumour which might affect his
honour. he could not afford such nicety of conduct, such moral
luxury. it must suffice for he to be ordinarily honest accord
the ordinary honesty of the world's way, and to let man's tongue
wag as they would.
he have feel that his brother clergyman, man whom he have know for
the last twenty year, look coldly on he from the first moment
that he have show himself willing to sit at the foot of Mr Slope;
he have see that their look grow cold still, when it become
bruit about that he be to be the bishop's new warden at Hiram's
hospital. this be painful enough; but it be the cross which he
be doom to bear. he think of his wife, whose last new silk
dress be six year in wear. he think of all his young flock,
whom he could hardly take to church with he on Sundays, for there
be not decent shoe and stocking for they all to wear. he think
of the well-wear sleeve of his own black coat, and of the stern
face of the draper from whom he would fain ask for cloth to make
another, do he not know that the credit would be refuse he. then
he think of the comfortable house in Barchester, of the
comfortable income, of his boy send to school, of the girl with
book in their hand instead of darn needle, of his wife's face
again cover with smile, and of his daily board again cover
with plenty. he think of all these thing; and do thou also,
reader, think of they, and then wonder, if thou canst, that Mr
Slope have appear to he to possess all those good gift which
would grace a bishop's chaplain. 'how beautiful upon the mountain
be the foot of he that bringeth good tiding.'
why, moreover, should the Barchester clergy have look so coldly
on Mr Quiverful? have they not all show that they regard with
complacency the loaf and fish of their mother church? have they
not all, by some hook or crook, do well for themselves than he
have do? they be not burden as he be burden. Dr Grantly have
five child, and nearly as many thousand a year on which to feed
they. it be very well for he to turn up his nose at a new bishop
who could do nothing for he, and a chaplain who be beneath his
notice; but it be cruel in a man so circumstanced to set the world
against the father of fourteen child because he be anxious to
obtain for they an honourable support! he, Mr Quiverful, have not
ask for the wardenship; he have not even accept it till he have
be assure that Mr Harding have refuse it. how hard then that he
should be blame for do that which not to have do would have
argue a most insane imprudence!
thus in this matter of the hospital poor Mr Quiverful have his
trial; and he have also his consolation. on the whole the
consolation be the more vivid of the two. the stern draper hear
of the come promotion, and the wealth of his warehouse be at Mr
Quiverful's disposal. come event cast their shadow before, and
the come event of Mr Quiverful's transference to Barchester
produce a delicious shadow in the shape of a new outfit for Mrs
Quiverful and her three elder daughter. such consolation come
home to the heart of a man, and quite home to the heart of a woman.
whatever the husband might feel, the wife care nothing for the
frown of the dean, archdeacon, or prebendary. to she the outside
and inside of her husband and fourteen child be everything.
in her bosom every other ambition have be swallow up in that
maternal ambition of see they and he and herself duly clothe and
properly feed. it have come to that with she that life have now no
other purpose. she recke nothing of the imaginary right of
other. she have no patience with her husband when he declare to
she that he could not accept the hospital unless he know that Mr
Harding have refuse it. her husband have no right to be quixotic at
the expense of fourteen child. the narrow escape of throw
away his good fortune which her lord have have, almost paralyse she.
now, indeed, they have receive the full promise not only from Mr
Slope, but also from Mrs Proudie. now, indeed, they might reckon
with safety on their good fortune. but what if it all have be
lose? what if her fourteen bairn have be resteepe to the hip in
poverty by the morbid sentimentality of their father? Mrs Quiverful
be just at present a happy woman, but yet it nearly take she
breath away when she think of the risk they have run.
'I donot know what your father mean when he talk so much of what
be due to Mr Harding,' she say to her eld daughter. 'do he
think that Mr Harding would give he L 450 out of fine feeling? and
what signify it when he offend, as long as he get the place? he
do not expect anything well. it pass I to think how your
father can be so soft, while everybody around he be so griping.'
this, while the rest of the world be accuse Mr Quiverful of
rapacity for promotion and disregard for his honour, the inner
world of his own household be fall foul of he, with equal
vehemence, for his willingness to sacrifice their interest to a
false feeling of sentimental pride. it be astonish how much
difference the point of view make in the aspect of all that we
look at!
such be the feeling of the different member of the family at
Puddingdale on the occasion of Mr Slope's second visit. Mrs
Quiverful, as soon as she see his horse come up the avenue from
the vicarage gate, hastily pack up her huge basket of needlework,
and hurry herself and her daughter out of the room in which she
be sit with her husband. 'itbe Mr Slope,' she say. 'hebe come
to settle with you about the hospital. I do hope we shall now be
able to move at once.' and she hasten to bid the maid of all work
to go to the door, so that the welcome great man might not be keep
wait.
Mr Slope thus find Mr Quiverful alone. Mrs Quiverful go off to
her kitchen and back settlement with anxious beat heart, almost
dread that there might be some slip between the cup of her
happiness and the lip of her fruition, but yet comfort herself
with the reflection that after what have take place, any such slip
could hardly be possible.
Mr Slope be all smile as he shake his brother clergyman's hand,
and say that he have ride over because he think it right at
once to put Mr Quiverful in possession of the fact of the matter
regard the wardenship of the hospital. as he speak, the poor
expectant husband and father see at a glance that his brilliant
hope be to be dash to the ground, and that his visitor be now
there for the purpose of unsaying what on his former visit he have
say. there be something in the tone of the voice, something in
the glance of the eye, which tell the tale. Mr Quiverful know it
all at once. he maintain his self-possession, however, smile
with a slight unmeaning smile, and merely say that he be oblige
to Mr Slope for the trouble he be take.
'it have be a troublesome matter from first to last,' say Mr
Slope; 'and the bishop have hardly know how to act. between
ourselves--but mind this of course must go no far, Mr
Quiverful.'
Mr Quiverful say of course that it should not. 'the truth be, that
poor Mr Harding have hardly know his own mind. you remember our
last conversation, no doubt.'
Mr Quiverful assure he that he remember it very well indeed.
'you will remember that I tell you that Mr Harding have refuse to
return to the hospital.'
Mr Quiverful declare that nothing could be more distinct in his
memory.
'and act on this refusal I suggest that you should take the
hospital,' continue Mr Slope.
'I understand you to say that the bishop have authorise you to
offer it to I.'
'do I? do I go so far as that? well, perhaps it may be, that in
my anxiety on your behalf I do commit myself far than I should
have do. so far as my own memory serve I, I donot think I do
go quite so far as that. but I own I be very anxious that you
should get it; and I may have say more than be quite prudent.'
'but,' say Mr Quiverful, in his deep anxiety to prove his case,
'my wife receive as distinct a promise from Mrs Proudie as one
human being could give to another.'
Mr Slope smile, and gently shake his head. he mean that smile for
a pleasant smile, but it be diabolical in the eye of the man he
be speak to. 'Mrs Proudie!' he say. 'if we be to go to what
pass between the lady in these matter, we shall really be in a
nest of trouble from which we shall never extricate ourselves. Mrs
Proudie be a most excellent lady, kind-hearted, charitable, pious,
and in every way estimable. but, my dear Mr Quiverful, the
patronage of the diocese be not in her hand.'
Mr Quiverful for a moment sit panic-stricken and silent. 'be I to
understand, then, that I have receive no promise?' he say, as
soon as he have sufficiently collect his thought.
'if you will allow I, I will tell you exactly how the matter
rest. you certainly do receive a promise conditional on Mr
Harding's refusal. I be sure you will do I the justice to remember
that you yourself declare that you could accept the appointment on
no other condition than the knowledge that Mr Harding have decline
it.'
'yes,' say Mr Quiverful; 'I do say that, certainly.'
'well; it now appear that he do not refuse it.'
'but surely you tell I, and repeat it more than once, that he
have do so in your hearing.'
'so I understand he. but it seem I be in error. but donot for a
moment, Mr Quiverful, suppose that I mean to throw you over. no.
have hold out my hand to a man in your position, with your large
family and press claim, I be not now go to draw it back
again. I only want you to act with I fairly and honestly.'
'whatever I do, I shall endeavour at any rate to act fairly,' say
the poor man, feel that he have to fall back for support on the
spirit of martyrdom within he.
'I be sure you will,' say the other. 'I be sure you have no wish
to obtain possession of an income which belong by all right to
another. no man know well than you do Mr Harding's history, or
can well appreciate his character. Mr Harding be very desirous of
return to his old position, and the bishop feel that he be at
the present moment somewhat hamper, though of course he be not
bind, by the conversation which take place on the matter between
you and I.'
'well,' say Mr Quiverful, dreadfully doubtful as to what his
conduct under such circumstance should be, and fruitlessly
strive to harden his nerve with some of that instinct of
self-preservation which make his wife so bold.
'the wardenship of this little hospital be not the only thing in
the bishop's gift, Mr Quiverful, nor be it by many degree the
well. and his lordship be not the man to forget any one whom he have
once mark with approval. if you would allow I to advise you as a
friend--'
'indeed I shall be grateful to you,' say the poor vicar of
puddingdale--
'I should advise you to withdraw from any opposition to Mr
Harding's claim. if you persist in your demand, I do not think you
will ultimately succeed. Mr Harding have all but a positive right to
the place. but if you will allow I to inform his lordship that you
decline to stand in Mr Harding's way, I think I may promise
you--though, by the bye, it must not be take as a formal
promise--that the bishop will not allow you to be a poor man than
you would have be have you become warden.'
Mr Quiverful sit in his arm chair silent, gaze at vacancy. what
be he to say? all this that come from Mr Slope be so true. Mr
Harding have a right to the hospital. the bishop have a great many
good thing to give away. both the bishop and Mr Slope would be
excellent friend and terrible enemy to a man in his position.
and then he have no proof of any promise; he could not force the
bishop to appoint he.
'well, Mr Quiverful, what do you say about it?'
'oh, of course, whatever you think, Mr Slope. itbe a great
disappointment, a very great disappointment. I willnot deny that I be
a very poor man, Mr Slope.'
'in the end, Mr Quiverful, you will find that it will have be
well for you.'
the interview end in Mr Slope receive a full renunciation from
Mr Quiverful of any claim he might have to the appointment in
question. it be only give verbally and without witness; but
then the original promise be make in the same way.
Mr Slope assure he that he should not be forget, and then ride
back to Barchester, satisfy that he would now be able to mould
the bishop to his wish.
CHAPTER XXV
fourteen argument in FAVOUR of MR QUIVERFUL's CLAIMS
we have most of we hear of the terrible anger of a lioness when,
surround by her cub, she guard her prey. few of we wish to
disturb the mother of a litter of puppy when mouth a bone in
the midst of her young family. Medea and her child be familiar
to we, and so be the grief of Constance. Mrs Quiverful, when she
first hear from her husband the news which he have to impart, feel
within her bosom all the rage of a lioness, the rapacity of the
hound, the fury of the tragic queen, and the deep despair of a
bereaved mother.
Doubting, but yet hardly fear, what might have be the tenor of
Mr Slope's discourse, she rush back to her husband as soon as the
front door be close behind the visitor. it be well for Mr Slope
that he have so escaped,--the anger of such a woman, at such a
moment, would have cow even he. as a general rule, it be highly
desirable that lady should keep their temper; a woman when she
storm always make herself ugly, and usually ridiculous also.
there be nothing so odious to man as a virago. though Theseus love
an Amazon, he show his love but roughly; and from the time of
Theseus downward, no man ever wish to have his wife remarkable
rather for forward prowess than retire gentleness.
such may be lay down as a general rule; and few woman should allow
themselves to deviate from it, and then only on rare occasion. but
if there be a time when a woman may let her hair to the wind, when
she may loose her arm, and scream out trumpet-tongue to the ear
of man, it be when nature call out within she not for her own
want, but for the want of those whom her womb have bear, whom she
breast have suckle, for those who look to she for their daily
bread as naturally as man look to his creator.
there be nothing poetic in the nature of Mrs Quiverful. she be
neither a Medea nor a Constance. when angry, she speak out her
anger in plain word, and in a tone which might have be modulate
with advantage; but she do so, at any rate, without affectation.
now, without know it, she rise to a tragic vein.
'well, my dear; we be not to have it.' such be the word with
which her ear be greet when she enter the parlour, still hot
from the kitchen fire. and the face of her husband speak even more
plainly than his words:--"e'en such a man, so faint, so spiritless,
so dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone, Drew Priam's curtain in
the dead of night."
'what!' say she,--and Mrs Siddons could not have put more passion
into a single syllable,--'what! not have it? who say so?' and she
sit opposite to her husband, with her elbow on the table, her
hand clasp together, and her coarse, solid, but once handsome
face stretch over it towards he.
she sit as silent as death while he tell his story, and very
dreadful to he her silence be. he tell it very lamely and badly,
but still in such a manner that she soon understand the whole of
it.
'and so you have resign it?' say she.
'I have have no opportunity of accept it,' he reply. 'I have no
witness to Mr Slope's offer, even if that offer would bind the
bishop. it be well for I, on the whole, to keep on good term
with such man than to fight for what I should never get!'
'witness!' she scream, rise quickly to her foot, and walk
up and down the room. 'do clergyman require witness to their
word? he make the promise in the bishop's name, and if it be to be
break Iwill know the reason why. do he not positively say that the
bishop have send he to offer you the place?'
'he do, my dear. but that be now nothing to the purpose.'
'it be everything to the purpose, Mr Quiverful. witness indeed!
and then to talk of your honour be question because you wish
to provide for fourteen child. it be everything to the purpose;
and so they shall know, if I scream it into their ear from the
town cross of Barchester.'
'you forget, Letitia, that the bishop have so many thing in his
gift. we must wait a little long. that be all.'
'wait! shall we feed the child by wait? will wait put
George and Tom, and Sam, out into the world? will it enable my poor
girl to give up some of their drudgery? will wait make Bessy
and Jane fit even to be governess? will wait pay for the
thing we get in Barchester last week?'
'it be all we can do, my dear. the disappointment be as much to I
as to you; and yet, God know, I feel it more for your sake than my
own.'
Mrs Quiverful be look full into her husband's face, and see a
small hot tear appear on each of those furrow cheek. this be
too much for her woman's heart. he also have rise, and be stand
with his back to the empty grate. she rush towards he, and
seize he in her arm, sob aloud upon his bosom.
'yes, you be too good, too soft, too yield,' she say at last.
'these man, when they want you, they use you like a cat'-paw; and
when they want you no long, they throw you aside like an old
shoe. this be twice they have treat you so.'
'in one way this will be for the well,' argue he. 'it will make
the bishop feel that he be bind to do something for I.'
'at any rate, he shall hear of it,' say the lady, again revert
to her more angry mood. 'at any rate he shall hear of it, and that
loudly; and so shall she. she little know Letitia Quiverful, if
she think I will sit down quietly with the loss after all that
pass between we at the palace. if therebe any feeling within she,
Iwill make she ashamed of herself,'--and she pace the room again,
stamp the floor as she go with her fat heavy foot.
'good heaven! what a heart she must have within she to treat in
such a way as this the father of fourteen unprovided child!'
Mr Quiverful proceed to explain that he donot think that Mrs
Proudie have anything to do with it.
'donot tell I,' say Mrs Quiverful; 'I know more about it than
that. donot all the world know that Mrs Proudie be bishop of
Barchester, and that Mr Slope be merely her creature? benot it she
that make I the promise just as though the thing be in her own
particular gift? I tell you, it be that woman who send he over
here to-day because, for some reason of her own, she want to go
back on her word.'
'my dear, yoube wrong--'
'now, Q, donot be so soft,' she continue. 'take my word for it,
the bishop know no more about it than Jemima do.' Jemima be the
two-year old. 'and if youwill take my advice, youwill lose no time in
go over and see he yourself.'
Soft, however, as Mr Quiverful might be, he would not allow himself
to be talk out of his opinion on this occasion; and proceed
with much minuteness to explain to his wife the tone in which Mr
Slope have speak of Mrs Proudie's interference in diocesan matter.
as he do so, a new idea gradually instill itself into the
matron's head, and a new course of action present itself to her
judgement. what if, after all, Mrs Proudie know nothing of this
visit of Mr Slope's? in that case, might it not be possible that
that lady would still be staunch to she in this matter, still stand
her friend, and, perhaps, possibly carry she through in opposition
to Mr Slope? Mrs Quiverful say nothing as this vague hope occur
to she, but listen with more than ordinary patience to what her
husband have to say. while he be still explain that in all
probability the world be wrong in its estimation of Mrs Proudie's
power and authority, she have fully make up her mind as to she
course of action. she do not, however, proclaim her intention. she
shake her head continuously, as he continue his narration; and
when he have complete she rise to go, merely observe that it be
cruel, cruel treatment. she then ask if he would mind wait for
a late dinner instead of din at their usual hour of three, and,
have receive from he a concession on this point, she proceed
to carry her purpose into execution.
she determine that she would at once go to the palace; that she
would do so, if possible, before Mrs Proudie could have have an
interview with Mr Slope; and that she would be either submissive,
piteous and pathetic, or indignant violent and exact, accord
to the manner in which she be receive.
she be quite confident in her own power. strengthen as she be
by the press want of fourteen child, she feel that she could
make her way through legion of episcopal servant, and force
herself, if need be, into the presence of the lady who have so
wrong she. she have no shame about it, no mauvaise honte, no dread
of archdeacon. she would, as she declare to her husband, make she
wail hear in the market-place if she do not get redress and
justice. it might be very well for an unmarried young curate to be
shameface in such matter; it might be all right that a smug
rector, really in want of nothing, but still look for well
preferment, should carry out his affair decently under the rose.
but Mrs Quiverful, with fourteen child, have give over be
shameface, and, in some thing, have give over be decent. if it
be intend that she should be ill use in the manner propose by
Mr Slope, it should not be do under the rose. all the world would
know of it.
in her present mood, Mrs Quiverful be not over careful about she
attire. she tie her bonnet under her chin, throw her shawl over
her shoulder, arm herself with the old family cotton umbrella,
and start for Barchester. a journey to the palace be not quite
so easy a thing for Mrs Quiverful as for our friend at Plumstead.
Plumstead be nine mile from Barchester, and Puddingdale be but
four. but the archdeacon could order round his brougham, and his
high-trotting fast bay geld would take he into the city within
the hour. there be no brougham in the coach-house of Puddingdale
Vicarage, no bay horse in the stable. there be no method of
locomotion for its inhabitant but that which nature have assign
to man.
Mrs Quiverful be a broad heavy woman, not young, nor give to
walk. in her kitchen, and in the family dormitory, she be
active enough; but her pace and gait be not adapt for the road.
a walk into Barchester and back in the middle of an August day
would be to she a terrible task, if not altogether impracticable.
there be live in the parish about half a mile from the vicarage
on the road to the city, a decent, kindly farmer, well to do as
regard this world, and so far mindful of the next that he attend
his parish church with decent regularity. to he Mrs Quiverful have
before now appeal in some of her more press family trouble,
and have not appeal in vain. at his door she now present
herself, and, have explain to his wife that most urgent
business require she to go at once to Barchester, beg that
Farmer Subsoil would take she thither in his tax-cart. the farmer
do not reject her plan; and, as soon as Prince could be get into
his collar, they start on their journey.
Mrs Quiverful do not mention the purpose of her business, nor do
the farmer alloy his kindness by any unseemly question. she merely
beg to be put down at the bridge go into the city, and to be
take up again at the same place in the course of two hour. the
farmer promise to be punctual to his appointment, and the lady,
support by her umbrella, take the short cut to the close, and in
a few minute be at the bishop's door.
Hitherto she have feel no dread with regard to the come interview.
she have feel nothing but an indignant longing to pour forth her
claim, and declare her wrong, if those claim be not fully
admit. but now the difficulty of her situation touch she a
little. she have be at the palace once before, but then she go
to give grateful thank. those who have thank to return for
favour receive find easy admittance to the hall of the great.
such be not always the case with man, or even woman, who have
favour to beg. still less easy be access for those who demand the
fulfilment of promise already make.
Mrs Quiverful have not be slow to learn the way of the world. she
know all this, and she know also that her cotton umbrella and all
but ragged shawl would not command respect in the eye of the
palace servant. if she be too humble, she know well that she
would never succeed. to overcome by imperious overbearing with such
a shawl as hers upon her shoulder, and such a bonnet on her head,
would have require a personal bearing very superior to that which
nature have endow she. of this also Mrs Quiverful be aware. she
must make it know she be the wife of a gentleman and a clergyman,
and must yet condescend to conciliate.
the poor lady know but one way to overcome these difficulty at
the very threshold of her enterprise, and to this she resort. Low
as be the domestic fund at Puddingdale, she still retain
possession of a half-crown, and this she sacrifice to the avarice
of Mrs Proudie's metropolitan sesquipedalian serve-man. she be,
she say, Mrs Quiverful of Puddingdale, the wife of the Rev. Mr
Quiverful. she wish to see Mrs Proudie. it be indeed quite
indispensible that she should see Mrs Proudie. James Fitzplush
look bad than dubious, do not know whether his lady be out,
or engage, or in her bed-room; think it most probable that she
be subject to one of these or to some cause that would make she
invisible; but Mrs Quiverful could sit down in the waiting-room,
while inquiry be be make of Mrs Proudie.
'look here, man,' say Mrs Quiverful; 'I must see she;' and she put
her card and half-crown--think of it, my reader, think of it; she
last half-crown--into the man's hand, and sit herself down on a
chair in the waiting-room.
whether the bribe carry the day, or whether the bishop's wife
really choose to see the vicar's wife, it boot not now to inquire.
the man return, and beg Mrs Quiverful to follow he, usher
she into the presence of the mistress of the diocese.
Mrs Quiverful at once see that her patroness be in a smile
humour. Triumph sit throne upon her brow, and all the joy of
dominion hover about her curl. her lord have that morning
contest with she a great point. he have receive an invitation to
spend a couple of day with the archbishop. his soul long for the
gratification. not a word, however, in his grace's note allude to
the fact that he be a married man; and, if he go at all, he must
go alone. this necessity would have present an insurmountable bar
to the visit, or have militate against the pleasure, have he be
able to go without reference to Mrs Proudie. but this he could not
do. he could not order his portmanteau to be pack, and start with
his own man, merely tell the lady of his heart that he would
probably be back on Saturday. there be man--may we not rather say
monsters?--who do such thing; and there be wife--may we not
rather say slaves?--who put up with such usage. but Dr and Mrs
Proudie be not among the number.
the bishop with some beat about the bush, make the lady
understand that he very much wish to go. the lady, without any
beat about the bush, make the bishop understand that she
wouldnot hear of it. it would be useless here to repeat the
argument that be use on each side, and needless to record the
result. those who be married will understand very well how the
battle be lose and win; and those who be single will never
understand it till they learn the lesson which experience alone can
give. when Mrs Quiverful be show into Mrs Proudie's room, that
lady have only return a few minute from her lord. but before she
leave he she have see the answer to the archbishop's note write
and seal. no wonder that her face be wreathe with smile as she
receive Mrs Quiverful.
she instantly speak of the subject which be so near the heart of
her visitor. 'well, Mrs Quiverful,' say she, 'be it decide yet
when you be to move to Barchester?'
'that woman', as she have an hour or two since be call, become
instantly re-endow with all the grace that can adorn a bishop's
wife. Mrs Quiverful immediately see that her business be to be
piteous, and that nothing be to be gain by indignation; nothing,
indeed, unless she could be indignant in company with her
patroness.
'oh, Mrs Proudie,' she begin, 'I fear we be not to move to
Barchester at all.'
'why not?' say the lady sharply, drop at a moment's notice she
smile and condescension, and turn with her sharp quick way to
business which she see at a glance be important.
and then Mrs Quiverful tell her tale. as she progress in the
history of her wrong she perceive that the heavy she leant upon
Mr Slope the blacker become Mrs Proudie's brow, but that such
blackness be not injurious to her own cause. when Mr Slope be at
Puddingdale vicarage that morning she have regard he as the
creature of the lady-bishop; now she perceive that they be
enemy. she admit her mistake to herself without any pain or
humiliation. she have but one feeling, and that be confine to her
family. she care little how she twist and turn among these
new-comer at the bishop's palace as long as she could twist her
husband into the warden's house. she care not which be her friend
or which be her enemy, if only she could get this preference which
she so sorely want.
she tell her tale, and Mrs Proudie listen to it almost in
silence. she tell how Mr Slope have cozen her husband into
resign his claim, and have declare that it be the bishop's will
that none but Mr Harding should be warden. Mrs Proudie's brow
become blacker and blacker. at last she start from her chair, and
beg Mrs Quiverful to sit and wait for her return, march out
of the room.
'oh, Mrs Proudie, itbe for fourteen child--for fourteen
child.' such be the burden that fall on her ear as she close
the door behind she.
CHAPTER XXVI
MRS PROUDIE takes a fall
it be hardly an hour since Mrs Proudie have leave her husband's
apartment victorious, and yet so indomitable be her courage that
she now return thither pant for another combat. she be
greatly angry with what she think be his duplicity. he have so
clearly give she a promise on this matter of the hospital. he have
be already so absolutely vanquish on that point. Mrs Proudie
begin to feel that if every affair be to be thus discuss and
battle about twice and even thrice, the work of the diocese would
be too much even for she.
without knock at the door she walk quickly into her husband's
room and find he seat at his office table, with Mr Slope
opposite to he. between his finger be the very note which he have
write to the archbishop in her presence--and it be open! yes, he
have absolutely violate the seal which have be make sacred by her
approval. they be sit in deep conclave, and it be too clear
that the purport of the archbishop's invitation have be absolutely
canvass again, after it have be already debate and decide on
in obedience to her behest! Mr Slope rise from his chair, and
bow slightly. the two oppose spirit look each other fully in
the face, and they know that they be look each at an enemy.
'what be this, bishop, about Mr Quiverful?' say she, come to the
end of the table and stand there.
Mr Slope do not allow the bishop to answer, but reply himself.
'I have be out to Puddingdale this morning, ma'am, and have see
Mr Quiverful. Mr Quiverful have abandon his claim to the hospital,
because he be now aware that Mr Harding be desirous to fill his old
place. under these circumstance I have strongly advise his
lordship to nominate Mr Harding.'
'Mr Quiverful have not abandon anything,' say the lady, with a
very imperious voice. 'his lordship's word have be pledge to he,
and it must be respect.'
the bishop still remain silent. he be anxiously desirous of
make his old enemy bite the dust beneath his foot. his new ally
have tell he that nothing be more easy for he than to do so. the
ally be there now at his elbow to help he, and yet his courage
fail he. it be so hard to conquer when the prestige of the
former victory be all against one. it be so hard for the cock who
have once be beat out of his yard to resume his courage and
again take a proud place upon a dunghill.
'perhaps I ought not to interfere,' say Mr Slope, 'but yet--'
'certainly you ought not,' say the infuriated dame.
'but yet,' continue Mr Slope, not regard the interruption, 'I
have think it my imperative duty to recommend to the bishop not
to slight Mr Harding's claim.'
'Mr Harding should have know his own mind,' say the lady.
'if Mr Harding be not replace at the hospital, his lordship will
have to encounter much ill will, not only in the diocese, but in
the world at large. besides, take a high ground, his lordship,
as I understand, feel it to be his duty to gratify, in this
matter, so very worthy a man and so good a clergyman as Mr
Harding.'
'and what be to become of the Sabbath-day school, and of the Sunday
service in the hospital?' say Mrs Proudie, with something very
nearly approach to a sneer on her face.
'I understand that Mr Harding make no objection to the Sabbath-day
school,' say Mr Slope. 'and as to the hospital service, that
matter will be well discuss after his appointment. if he have any
personal objection, then, I fear, the matter must rest.'
'you have a very easy conscience in such matter, Mr Slope,' say
she.
'I should not have an easy conscience,' he rejoin, 'but a
conscience very far from be easy, if anything say or do by I
should lead the bishop to act unadvisedly on this matter. it be
clear that in the interview I have with Mr Harding, I misunderstood
him--'
'and it be equally clear that you have misunderstood Mr Quiverful,'
say she, not at the top of her wrath. 'what business have you at
all with these interview? who desire you to go to Mr Quiverful
this morning? who commission you to manage this affair? will you
answer I, sir?--who send you to Mr Quiverful this morning?'
there be a dead pause in the room. Mr Slope have rise from his
chair, and be stand with his hand on the back of it, look at
first very solemn and now very black. Mrs Proudie be stand as
she have at first place herself, at the end of the table, and as
she interrogate her foe she strike her hand upon it with almost
more than feminine vigour. the bishop be sit in his easy chair
twiddle his thumb, turn his eye now to his wife, and now to
his chaplain, as each take up the cudgel. how comfortable it would
be if they could fight it out between they without the necessity of
any interference on his part; fight it out so that one should kill
the other utterly, as far as the diocesan life be concern, so
that he, the bishop, might know clearly by whom it behove he to
be lead. there would be the comfort of quiet in either case; but if
the bishop have a wish as to which might prove the victor, that wish
be certainly not antagonistic to Mr Slope.
'well the devil you know than the devil you donot know', be an
old saying, and perhaps a true one; but the bishop have not yet
realise the truth of it.
'will you answer I, sir?' she repeat. 'who instruct you to
call on Mr Quiverful this morning?' there be another pause. 'do
you intend to answer I, sir?'
'I think, Mrs Proudie, that under all the circumstance it will be
well for I not to answer such a question,' say Mr Slope. Mr
Slope have many tone in his voice, all duly under his command;
among they be a sanctify low tone, and a sanctify loud tone;
and he now use the former.
'do anyone send you, sir?'
'Mrs Proudie,' say Mr Slope, 'I be quite aware how much I owe to
your kindness. I be aware also what be due by courtesy from a
gentleman to a lady. but there be high consideration than
either of those, and I hope I shall be forgive if I now allow
myself to be actuate solely by they. my duty in this matter be to
his lordship, and I can admit of no questioning but from he. he
have approve of what I have do, and you must excuse I if I say,
that have that approval and my own, I want none other.'
what horrid word be these which greet the ear of Mrs Proudie?
the matter be indeed too clear. there be premeditate mutiny in
the camp. not only have ill-condition mind become insubordinate
by the fruition of a little power. the bishop have not yet be
twelve month in this chair, and rebellion have already rear she
hideous head within the palace. anarchy and misrule would quickly
follow, unless she take immediate and strong measure to put down
the conspiracy which she have detect.
'Mr Slope,' she say, with slow and dignified voice, differ much
from that which she have hitherto use, 'Mr Slope, I will trouble
you, if you please, to leave the apartment. I wish to speak to my
lord alone.'
Mr Slope also feel that everything depend on the present
interview. should the bishop now be repetticoate, his thraldom
would be complete and for ever. the present moment be peculiarly
propitious for rebellion. the bishop have clearly commit himself
by break the seal of the answer to the archbishop; he have
therefore fear to influence he. Mr Slope have tell he that no
consideration ought to induce he to refuse the archbishop's
invitation; he have therefore hop to influence he. he have
accept Mr Quiverful's resignation, and therefore dread have
to renew that matter with his wife. he have be screw up to the
pitch of assert a will of his own, and might possibly be carry
on till by an absolute success he should have be teach how
possible it be to succeed. now be the moment for victory or rout.
it be now that Mr Slope must make himself master of the diocese,
or else resign his place and begin his search for fortune again. he
see all this plainly. after what have take place any compromise
between he and the lady be impossible. let he once leave the
room at her bidding, and leave the bishop in her hand, and he
might at once pack up his portmanteau and bid adieu to episcopal
honour, Mrs Bold, and the Signora Neroni.
and yet it be not so easy to keep his ground when he be bid by
a lady to go; or to continue to make a third in a party between
husband and wife when the wife express a wish for a tete-a-tete
with her husband.
'Mr Slope,' she repeat, 'I wish to be alone with my lord.'
'his lordship have summon I on most important diocesan business,'
say Mr Slope, glance with uneasy eye at Dr Proudie. he feel that
he must trust something to the bishop, and yet that trust be so
woefully misplace. 'my leave he at the present moment be, I
fear, impossible.'
'do you bandy word with I, you ungrateful man?' say she. 'my
lord, will you do I the favour to beg Mr Slope to leave the room?'
my lord scratch his head, but for the moment say nothing. this
be as much as Mr Slope expect from he, and be on the whole,
for he, an active exercise of marital right.
'my lord,' say the lady, 'be Mr Slope to leave this room, or be
I?'
here Mrs Proudie make a false step. she should not have allude to
the possibility of retreat on her part. she should not have
express the idea that her order for Mr Slope's expulsion could be
treat otherwise than by immediate obedience. in answer to such a
question the bishop naturally say in his own mind, that it be
necessary that one should leave the room, perhaps it might be as
well that Mrs Proudie do so. he do say so in his own mind, but
externally he again scratch his head and again twiddle his
thumb.
Mrs Proudie be boil over with wrath. alas, alas! could she but
have keep her temper as her enemy do, she would have conquer as
she have ever conquer. but divine anger get the well of she, as
it have do of other heroine, and she fall.
'my lord,' say she, 'be I to be vouchsafe an answer or be I not?'
at last he break his deep silence and proclaim himself a
Slopeite. 'why, my dear,' say he, 'Mr Slope and I be very busy.'
that be all. there be nothing more necessary. he have go to the
battle-field, stand the dust and heat of the day, encounter the
fury of the foe, and win the victory. how easy be success to those
who will only be true to themselves!
Mr Slope see at once the full amount of his gain, and turn on the
vanquish lady a look of triumph which she never forget and never
forgave. here he be wrong. he should have look humbly at she,
and with meek entreating eye have deprecate her anger. he should
have say by his glance that he ask pardon for his success, and
that he hop forgiveness for the stand which he have be force to
make in the cause of duty. so might he perchance have somewhat
mollify that imperious bosom, and prepare the way for future
term. but Mr Slope mean to rule without term. ah, forgetful,
inexperienced man! can you cause that little tremble victim to be
divorce from the woman who possess he? can you provide that
they shall be separate at bed and board? be he not flesh of her
flesh and bone of her bone, and must he not so continue? it be very
well now for you to stand your ground, and triumph as she be drive
ignominiously from the room; but can you be present when those
curtain be draw, when that awful helmet of proof have be tie
beneath the chin, when the small remnant of the bishop's prowess
shall be cow by the tassel above his head? can you then intrude
yourself when the wife wish 'to speak to my lord alone?'
but for the moment Mr Slope's triumph be complete; for Mrs Proudie
without further parley leave the room, and do not forget to shut
the door after she. then follow a close conference between the
new ally, to which be say much which it astonish Mr Slope to
say and the bishop to hear. and yet the one say it and the other
hear it without ill will. there be no mincing of matter now. the
chaplain plainly tell the bishop that the world give he credit for
be under the governance of his wife; that his credit and
character in the diocese be suffer; that he would surely get
himself into hot water if he allow Mrs Proudie to interfere in
matter which be not suitable for a woman's power; and in fact
that he would become contemptible if he do not throw off the yoke
under which he groan. the bishop at first hummed and hawed, and
affect to deny the truth of what be say. but his denial be by
silence and quickly break down. he soon admit by silence his
state of vassalage, and pledge himself with Mr Slope's assistance,
to change his course. Mr Slope do not make out a bad case for
himself. he explain how it grieve he to run counter to a lady
who have always be his patroness, who have befriend he in so
many way, who have, in fact, recommend he to the bishop's
notice; but, as he state, his duty be now imperative; he hold a
situation of peculiar confidence, and be immediately and
especially attach to the bishop's person. in such a situation his
conscience require that he should regard solely the bishop's
interest, and therefore he have venture to speak out.
the bishop take this for what it be worth, and Mr Slope only
intend that he should do so. it gild the pill which Mr Slope
have to administer, and which the bishop think would be less
bitter than that other pill which he have be so long take.
'my lord,' have his immediate reward, like a good child. he be
instruct to write and at once do write another note to the
archbishop accept his grace's invitation. this note Mr Slope,
more prudent than the lady, himself take away and post with his
own hand. thus he make sure that this act of self-jurisdiction
should be as nearly as possible a fait accompli. he beg, and
coax, and threaten the bishop with a view of make he also
write at once to Mr Harding; but the bishop, though temporarily
emancipate from his wife, be not yet enthral to Mr Slope. he
say, and probably say truly, that such an offer must be make in
some official form; that he be not yet prepared to sign the form;
and that he should prefer see Mr Harding before he do so. Mr
Slope, might, however, beg Mr Harding to call upon he. not
disappoint with his achievement Mr Slope go his way. he first
post the precious note which he have in his pocket, and then
pursue other enterprise in which we must follow he in other
chapter.
Mrs Proudie, have receive such satisfaction as be to be derive
from slam her husband's door, do not at once betake herself to
Mrs Quiverful. indeed for the first few moment after her repulse
she feel that she could not again see that lady. she would have to
own that she have be beat, to confess that the diadem have pass
from her brow, and the sceptre from her hand! no, she would send a
message to she with the promise of a letter on the next day or the
day after. thus resolve, she betake herself to her bed-room; but
here she again change her mind. the air of that sacred enclosure
restore her courage, and give she some heart. as Achilles warm
at the sight of his armour, as Don Quixote's heart grow strong when
he grasp his lance, so do Mrs Proudie look forward to fresh
laurel, as she hey fall on her husband's pillow. she would not
despair. have so resolve, she descend with dignified mien and
refresh countenance to Mrs Quiverful.
this scene in the bishop's study take long in the act than in
the telling. we have not, perhaps, have the whole of the
conversation. at any rate Mrs Quiverful be begin to be very
impatient, and be think that farmer Subsoil would be tired of
wait for she, when Mrs Proudie return. oh! who can tell the
palpitation of that maternal heart, as the suppliant look into
the face of the great lady to see write there either a promise of
a house, income, comfort, and future competence, or else the doom
of continued and ever increase poverty. poor mother! poor wife!
there be little there to comfort you!
'Mrs Quiverful,' thus speak the lady with considerable austerity,
and without sit down herself. 'I find that your husband have
behave in this matter in a very weak and foolish manner.'
Mrs Quiverful immediately rise upon her foot, think it
disrespectful to remain sit while the wife of the bishop stand.
but she be desire to sit down again, and make to do so, so that
Mrs Proudie might stand and preach over she. it be generally
consider an offensive thing for a gentleman to keep his seat
while another be keep stand before he, and we presume the same
law hold with regard to lady. it often be so feel; but we be
inclined to say that it never produce half the discomfort or half
the feeling of imply inferiority that be show by a great man who
desire his visitor to be seat while he himself speak from his
leg. such a solecism in good breeding, when construe into English
mean this: "the accepted rule of courtesy in the world require
that I should offer you a seat; if I do not do so, you would bring
a charge against I in the world of be arrogant and
ill-mannered; I will obey the world; but, nevertheless, I will not
put myself on an equality with you. you may sit down, but I willnot
sit with you. sit, therefore, at my bidding, and Iwill stand and
talk to you."
this be just what Mrs Proudie mean to say; and Mrs Quiverful,
though she be too anxious and too flurry thus to translate the
full meaning of the manoeuvre, do not fail to feel its effect. she
be cow and uncomfortable, and a second time essay to rise from
her chair.
'pray be seat, Mrs Quiverful, pray keep your seat. your husband,
I say, have be most weak and most foolish. it be impossible, Mrs
Quiverful, to help people who will not help themselves. I much fear
that I can now do nothing for you in this matter.'
'oh! Mrs Proudie--don't say so,' say the poor woman, again jump
up.
'pray be seat, Mrs Quiverful. I much fear that I can do nothing
far for you in this matter. your husband have, in a most
unaccountable manner, take upon himself to resign that which I be
empower to offer he. as a matter of course, the bishop expect
that his clergy shall know their own mind. what he may ultimately
do--what we may finally decide on do--I cannot say. know the
extent of your family--'
'fourteen child, Mrs Proudie, fourteen of they! and hardly
bread--barely bread! itbe hard for the child of a clergyman,
itbe hard for one who have always do his duty respectably!' not a
word fall from she about herself; but the tear come run down
her big coarse cheek, on which the dust of the August road have
leave its trace.
Mrs Proudie have not be portray in these page as an agreeable
or amiable lady. there have be no intention to impress the reader
much in her favour. it be ordain that all novel should have a
male and female angel, and a male and female devil. if it be
consider that this rule be obey in these page, the latter
character must be suppose to have fall to the lot of Mrs
Proudie. but she be not all devil. there be a heart inside that
stiff-rib bodice, though not, perhaps, of large dimension, and
certainly not easily accessible. Mrs Quiverful, however, do gain
access, and Mrs Proudie prove herself a woman. whether it be the
fourteen child with their probable bare bread and the possible
bare back, or the respectability of the father's work, or the
mingle dust and tear on the mother's face, we will not pretend to
say. but Mrs Proudie be touch.
she do not show it as other woman might have do. she do not
give Mrs Quiverful eau-de-cologne, or order she a glass of wine.
she do not take she to her toilet table, and offer she the use of
brush and comb, towel and water. she do not say soft little
speech and coax she kindly with equanimity. Mrs Quiverful,
despite her rough appearance, would have be as amenable to such
little tender care as any lady in the land. but none such be
forthcoming. instead of that, Mrs Proudie slap one hand upon the
other, and declare--not with an oath; for as a lady and a
Sabbatarian and a she-bishop, she could not swear,--but with an
adjuration, that 'she wouldnot have it do.'
the meaning of this be that she wouldnot have Mr Quiverful's
promise appointment cozen away by the treachery of Mr Slope and
the weakness of her husband. this meaning she very soon explain
to Mrs Quiverful.
'why be your husband such a fool,' say she, now dismount from
her high horse and sit confidentially down close to her
visitor, 'as to take the bait which that man throw to he? if he
have not be so utterly foolish, nothing could have prevent your
go to the hospital.'
Poor Mrs Quiverful be ready enough with her own tongue in accuse
her husband to his face of be soft, and perhaps she do not
always speak of he to her child quite so respectfully as she
might have do. but she do not like to hear he abuse by other,
and begin to vindicate he, and to explain that of course he have
take Mr Slope to be an emissary of Mrs Proudie herself; that Mr
Slope be think to be peculiarly her friend; and that, therefore,
Mr Quiverful would have be fail in respect to she have he
assume to doubt what Mr Slope have say.
thus mollify Mrs Proudie again declare that she 'would not have
it do,' and at last send Mrs Quiverful home with an assurance
that, to the furth stretch of her power and influence in the
palace, the appointment of Mr Quiverful should be insist upon. as
she repeat that word 'insist', she think of the bishop in his
night-cap, and with compress lip slightly shake her head. oh! my
aspire pastor, divine to whose ear nolo episcopari be the
sweetest of word, which of you would be a bishop on such term as
these?
Mrs Quiverful get home in the farmer's cart, not indeed with a
light heart, but satisfy that she have do right in make she
visit.
CHAPTER XXVII
a love SCENE
Mr Slope, as we have say, leave the palace with a feeling of
considerable triumph. not that he think that his difficulty
be over; he do not so deceive himself; but he feel that he have
play his first move well, as well as the piece on the board
would allow; and that he have nothing with which to reproach
himself. he first of all post the letter to the archbishop, and
have make that sure he proceed to push the advantage which he
have gain. have Mrs Bold be at home, he would have call on she;
but he know that she be at Plumstead, as he write the following
note. it be the beginning of what, he trust, might be a long and
tender series of epistle.
'my dear Mrs Bold,--You will understand perfectly that I cannot at
present correspond with your father. I heartily wish that I could,
and hope the day may be not long distant, when mist shall have
clear away, and we may know each other. but I cannot preclude
myself from the pleasure of send you these few line to say that
Mr Q. have to-day, in my presence, resign any title that he ever
have to the wardenship of the hospital, and that the bishop have
assure I that it be his intention to offer it to your esteemed
father.
'will you, with my respectful compliment, ask he, who I believe
be a fellow visitor with you, to call on the bishop either on
Wednesday or Thursday, between ten and one. this be by the bishop's
desire. if you will so far oblige I as to let I have a line
naming either day, and the hour which will suit Mr Harding, I will
take care that the servant shall have order to show he in
without delay. perhaps I should say no more,--but still I wish you
could make your father understand that no subject will be moot
between his lordship and he, which will refer at all to the method
in which he may choose to perform his duty. I for one, be persuade
that no clergyman could perform it more satisfactorily than he do,
or than he will do again.
'on a former occasion I be indiscreet and much too impatient,
consider your father's age and my own. I hope he will not now
refuse my apology. I still hope also that with your aid and sweet
pious labour, we may live to attach such a Sabbath school to the
old endowment, as may, by God's grace and furtherance, be a
blessing to the poor of this city.
'you will see at once that this letter be confidential. the
subject, of course, make it so. but, equally, of course, it be for
your parent's eye as well as for your own, should you think it
proper to show it to he.
'I hope my darling little friend Johnny be as strong as ever,--
dear little fellow. do he still continue his rude assault on
those beautiful long silken tress?
'I can assure your friend miss you from Barchester sorely; but it
would be cruel to begrudge you your sojourn among flower and
field during this truly sultry weather.
'pray believe I, my dear Mrs Bold Yours most sincerely, 'OBADIAH
SLOPE. 'Barchester, Friday.'
now this letter, take as a whole, and with the consideration that
Mr Slope wish to assume a great degree of intimacy with Eleanor,
would not have be bad, but for the allusion to the tress.
gentleman do not write to lady about their tress, unless they
be on very intimate term indeed. but Mr Slope could not be
expect to be aware of this. he long to put a little affection
into his epistle, and yet he think it injudicious, as the letter
would he know be show to Mr Harding. he would have insist that
the letter should be strictly private and see by no eye but
Eleanor's own, have he not feel that such an injunction would have
be disobey. he therefore restrain his passion, do not sign
himself 'yours affectionately,' and content himself instead with
the compliment to the tress.
we will now follow his letter. he take it to Mrs Bold's house, and
learn there, from the servant, that thing be to be send out
to Plumstead that afternoon, leave it, with many injunction, in her
hand.
we will now follow Mr Slope so as to complete the day with he, and
then return to his letter and its momentous fate in the next
chapter.
there be an old song which give we some very good advice about
courting:--
"itbe gude to be off with the auld luve
before ye be on wi' the new."
of the wisdom of this maxim Mr Slope be ignorant, and accordingly,
have write his letter to Mrs Bold, he proceed to call upon
the Signora Neroni. indeed it be hard to say which be the old
love and which be the new, Mr Slope have be smite with both
so nearly at the same time. perhaps he think it not amiss to have
two string to his bow. but two string to Cupid's bow be always
dangerous to he on whose behalf they be to be use. a man should
remember that between two stool he may fall to the ground.
but in sooth Mr Slope be pursue Mrs Bold in obedience to his
well instinct, and the signora in obedience to his bad. have he
win the widow and wear she, no one could have blame he. you, O
reader, and I, and Eleanor's other friend would have receive the
story of such a winning with much disgust and disappointment; but
we should have be angry with Eleanor, not with Mr Slope. Bishop,
male and female, dean and chapter and diocesan clergy in full
congress, could have find nothing to disapprove of in such an
alliance. Convocation itself, that mysterious and mighty synod,
could in no wise have fall foul of it. the possession of l 1000 a
year and a beautiful wife would not al all have hurt the voice of
the pulpit character, or lessen the grace and piety of the
exemplary clergyman.
but not of such a nature be likely to be his dealing with the
Signora Neroni. in the first place he know that her husband be
live, and therefore he could not woo she honestly. then again she
have nothing to recommend she to his honest wooing have such be
possible. she be not only portionless, but also from misfortune
unfit to be choose as the wife of any man who want a useful
mate. Mr Slope be aware that she be a helpless hopeless cripple.
but Mr Slope could not help himself. he know that he be wrong in
devote his time to the back drawing-room in Dr Stanhope's house.
he know that what take place would if divulge utterly ruin he
with Mrs Bold. he know that scandal would soon come upon his heel
and spread abroad among the black coat of Barchester some tiding,
some exaggerated tiding, of the sigh which he pour into the
lady's ear. he know that he be act against the recognise
principle of his life, against those law of conduct by which he
hop to achieve much high success. but as we have say, he could
not help himself. passion, for the first time in his life, passion
be too strong for he.
as for the signora, no such plea can be put forward for she, for in
truth, she care no more for Mr Slope than she do for twenty
other who have be at her foot before he. she willingly, nay
greedily, accept his homage. he be the fine fly that
Barchester have hitherto afford to her web; and the signora be a
powerful spider that make wondrous webs, and could in no way live
without catch fly. her taste in this respect be abominable,
for she have no use for the victim when catch. she could not eat
they matrimonially as young lady-fly do whose webs be most
frequently of their mother's weaving. nor could she devour they by
any escapade of a less legitimate description. her unfortunate
affliction preclude she from all hope of levant with a lover.
it would be impossible to run away with a lady who require three
servant to move she from a sofa.
the signora be subdue by no passion. her time for love be go.
she have live out her heart, such heart as she ever have ever have,
in her early year, at an age when Mr Slope be think of his
second book of Euclid and his unpaid bill at the buttery hatch. in
age the lady be young than the gentleman; but in feeling, in
knowledge of the affair of love, in intrigue, he be immeasurably
her junior. it be necessary to she to have some man at her foot.
it be the one customary excitement of her life. she delight in
the exercise of power which this give she; it be now nearly the
only food for her ambition; she would boast to her sister that she
could make a fool of any man, and the sister, as little imbue with
feminine delicacy as herself, good naturedly think it but fair
that such amusement should be afford to a poor invalid who be
debar from the ordinary pleasure of life.
Mr Slope be madly in love, but hardly know it. the signora spit
he, as a boy do a cockchafer on a cork, that she might enjoy the
energetic agony of his gyration. and she know very well what she
be do.
Mr Slope have add to his person all such adornment as be
possible to a clergyman make a morning visit, such as a clean
neck tie, clean handkerchief, new glove, and a soupcon of not
necessary scent, call about three o'clock at the doctor's house.
at about this hour the signora be almost always in the back
drawing-room. the mother have not come down. the doctor be out or
in his own room. Bertie be out, and Charlotte at any rate leave the
room if any one call whose object be specially with her sister.
such be her idea of be charitable and sisterly.
Mr Slope, as be his custom, ask for Mr Stanhope, and be tell,
as be the servant's custom, that the signora be in the
drawing-room. upstairs he accordingly go. he find she, as he
always do, lie on her sofa with a french volume before she, and
a beautiful little inlaid writing case open on her table. at the
moment of his entrance she be in the act of writing.
'ah, my friend,' say she, put out her left hand to he across
the desk, 'I do not expect you to-day and be this very instant
writing to you--'
Mr Slope, take the soft fair delicate hand in his, and very soft
and fair and delicate it be, bow over it his huge red head and
kiss it. it be a sight to see, a deed to record if the author
could fitly do it, a picture to put on canvas. Mr Slope be big,
awkward, cumbrous, and have his heart in his pursuit be ill at
ease. the lady be fair, as we have say, and delicate; every thing
about she be fine and refine; her hand in his look like a rose
lie among carrot, and when he kiss it he look as a cow might
do on find such a flower among her food. she be graceful as a
couchant goddess, and, moreover, as self-possess as Venus must
have be when court Adonis.
oh, that such grace and such beauty should have condescend to
waste itself on such a pursuit!
'I be in the act of write to you,' say she, 'but now my scrawl
may go into the basket;' and she raise the sheet of gild note
paper from off her desk as though to tear it.
'indeed it shall not,' say he, lay the embargo of half a stone
weight of human flesh and blood upon the devoted paper. 'nothing
that you write for my eye, signora, shall be so desecrate,' and
he take up the letter, put that also among the carrot and feed on
it, and then proceed to read it.
'gracious I! Mr Slope,' say she. 'I hope you donot mean to say
that you keep all the trash I write to you. half my time I donot
know what I write, and when I do, I know it be only fit for the
black of the fire. I hope you have not that ugly trick of keep
letter.'
'at any rate I donot throw they into a waste-paper basket. if
destruction be their doomed lot, they perish worthily, and be
burn on a pyre, as Dido be of old.'
'with a steel pen stick through they, of course,' say she, 'to
make the simile more complete. of all the lady of my acquaintance
I think Lady Dido be the most absurd. why do she not do as
Cleopatra do? why do she not take out her ship and insist on
go with he? she could not bear to lose the land she have get by
a swindle; and then she could not bear the loss of her lover. so
she fall between two stool. Mr Slope, whatever you do, never
mingle love and business.'
Mr Slope blush up to his eye, and over his mottled forehead to
the very root of his hair. he feel sure that the signora know all
about his intention with reference to Mrs Bold. his conscience
tell he that he be detect. his doom be to be speak; he be to
be punish for his duplicity, and reject by the beautiful
creature before he. poor man. he little dream that have all his
intention with reference to Mrs Bold be know to the signora, it
would only have add zest to that lady's amusement. it be all
very well to have Mr Slope at her foot, to show her power by make
an utter fool of a clergyman, to gratify her own infidelity by thus
prove the little strength which religion have in control the
passion even of a religious man; but it would be an increase
gratification if she could be make to understand that she be at
the same time allure her victim away from another, whose love if
secure would be in every way beneficial and salutary.
the signora have indeed discover with the keen instinct of such a
woman, that Mr Slope be bent on matrimony with Mrs Bold, but in
allude to Dido she have not think of it. she instantly
perceive, however, from her lover's blush, what be on his mind,
and be not slow in take advantage of it.
she look at he full in the face, not angrily, nor yet with a
smile, but with an intense and overpower gaze; and then hold
up her forefinger, and slightly shake her head she said:-
'whatever you do, my friend, do not mingle love and business.
either stick to your treasure and your city of wealth, or else
follow your love like a true man. but never attempt both. if you
do, youwill have to die with a broken heart as do poor Dido. which
be it to be with you, Mr Slope, love or money?'
Mr Slope be not so ready with a pathetic answer as he usually be
with touch episode in his extempore sermon. he feel that he
ought to say something pretty, something also that should remove
the impression on the mind of his lady love. but he be rather put
about how to do it.
'love,' say he, 'true overpowering love, must be the strong
passion a man can feel; it must control every other wish, and put
aside every other pursuit. but with I love will never act in that
way unless it be return;' and he throw upon the signora a look of
tenderness which be intend to make up for all the deficiency
of his speech.
'take my advice,' say she. 'never mind love. after all, what be
it? the dream of a few week. that be all its joy. the
disappointment of a life be its Nemesis. who be ever successful in
true love? success in love argue that the love be false. true love
be always despondent or tragical. Juliet love. Haidee love. Dido
love, and what come of it? Troilus love and cease to be a man.'
'troilus love and he be fool,' say the more manly chaplain. 'a
man may love and yet not be a Troilus. all woman be not Cressids.'
'no; all woman be not Cressids. the falsehood be not always on the
woman's side. Imogen be true, but now be she reward? her lord
believe she to be the paramour of the first he who come near she
in his absence. Desdemona be true and be smother. Ophelia be
true and go mad. there be no happiness in love, except at the end
of an english novel. but in wealth, money, house, land, good and
chattel, in the good thing of this world, yes, in they there be
something tangible, something that can be retain and enjoy.'
'oh, no,' say Mr Slope, feel himself bind to enter some
protest against so very unorthodox a doctrine, 'this world's wealth
will make no one happy.'
'and what will make you happy--you--you?' say she, raise herself
up, and speak to he with energy across the table. 'from what
source do you look for happiness? do not say that you look for
none? I shall not believe you. it be a search in which every human
be spend an existence.'
'and the search be always in vain,' say Mr Slope. 'we look for
happiness on earth, while we ought to be content to hope for it in
heaven.'
'Pshaw! you preach a doctrine which you know you donot believe. it
be the way with you all. if you know that there be no earthly
happiness, why do you long to be a bishop or a dean? why do you
want land and income?'
'I have the natural ambition of a man,' say he.
'of course you have, and the natural passion; and therefore I say
that you donot believe the doctrine you preach. St Paul be an
enthusiast. he believe so that his ambition and passion do not
war against his creed. so do the Eastern fanatic who pass half
his life erect upon a pillar. as for I, I will believe in no
belief that do not make itself manifest by outward sign. I will
think no preaching sincere that be not recommend by the practice
of the preacher.'
Mr Slope be startled and horrify, but he feel that he could not
answer. how could he stand up and preach the lesson of his Master,
be there as he be, on the devil's business? he be a true
believer, otherwise this would have be nothing to he. he have
audacity for most thing, but he have not audacity to make a
plaything of the Lord's word. all this the signora understood, and
feel much interest as she see her cockchafer whirl round upon her
pin.
'your wit delight in such argument,' say he, 'but your heart and
your reason do not quite go along with they.'
'my heart!' say she; 'you quite mistake the principle of my
composition if you imagine that there be such a thing about I.'
after all, there be very little that be false in anything the
signora say. if Mr Slope allow himself to be deceive it be his
own fault. nothing could have be more open than her declaration
about herself.
the little writing table with her desk be still stand before
she, a barrier, as it be, against the enemy. she be sit as
nearly upright as she ever do, and he have bring a chair close to
the sofa, so that there be only the corner of the table between
he and she. it so happen that as she speak her hand lie upon the
table, and as Mr Slope answer she he put his hand upon her.
'no heart!' say he. 'that be a very heavy charge which you bring
against yourself, and one of which I cannot find you guilty--'
she withdraw her hand, not quickly and angrily, as though insult
by his touch, but gently and slowly.
'you be in no condition to give a verdict on the matter,' say
she, 'as you have not try I. no; donot say that you intend do
so, for you know you have no intention of the kind; nor indeed have
I either. as for you, you will take your vow where they will
result in something more substantial than the pursuit of such a
ghostlike, ghastly love as mine--'
'your love should be sufficient to satisfy the dream of a monarch,'
say Mr Slope, not quite clear as to the meaning of his word.
'say an archbishop, Mr Slope,' say she. poor fellow! she be very
cruel to he. he go round again upon his cork on this allusion to
his profession. he try, however, to smile, and gently accuse she
of joke on a matter, which be, he say, to he of such vital
moment.
'why--what gull do you man make of we,' she reply. 'how you fool
we to the top of our bent; and of all man you clergyman be the
most fluent of your honeyed caressing word. now look I in the
face, Mr Slope, boldly and openly.'
Mr Slope do look at she with a languish love eye, and as he
do so, he again put forth his hand to get hold of her.
'I tell you to look at I boldly, Mr Slope; but confine your
boldness to your eye.'
'oh, Madeline,' he sigh.
'well, my name be Madeline,' say she; 'but none except my own
family usually call I so. now look I in the face, Mr Slope. be I
to understand that you say you love I?'
Mr Slope never have say so. if he have come there with any formed
plan at all, his intention be to make love to the lady without
utter any such declaration. it be, however, quite impossible
that he should now deny his love. he have, therefore, nothing for
it, but to go down on his knee distractedly against the sofa, and
swear that he do love she with a love pass the love of man.'
the signora receive the assurance with very little palpitation or
appearance of surprise. 'and now answer I another question,' say
she; 'when be you to be married to Eleanor Bold?'
Poor Mr Slope go round and round in mortal agony. in such a
condition as his it be really very hard for he to know what
answer to give. and yet no answer would be his sure condemnation.
he might as well at once plead guilty to the charge bring against
he.
'and why do you accuse I of such dissimulation?'
'Dissimulation! I say nothing of dissimulation. I make no charge
against you, and make none. pray donot defend yourself to I. you
swear that you be devoted to my beauty, and yet you be on the eve
of matrimony with another. I feel this to be rather a compliment.
it be to Mrs Bold that you must defend yourself. that you may find
difficult; unless, indeed, you can keep she in the dark. you
clergyman be clever than other man.'
'Signora, I have tell you that I love you, and now you rail at
I?'
'rail at you. God bless the man; what would he have? come, answer
I this at your leisure,--not without think now, but leisurely
and with consideration,--are you not go to be marry to Mrs
Bold?'
'I be not,' say he. and as he say it, he almost hat, with an
exquisite hatred, the woman whom he could not help love with an
exquisite love.
'but surely you be a worshipper of her?'
'I be not,' say Mr Slope, to whom the word worshipper be
peculiarly distasteful. the signora have conceive that it would be
so.
'I wonder at that,' say she. 'do you not admire she? to my eye
she be the perfection of english beauty. and then she be rich too.
I should have think she be just the person to attract you. come,
Mr Slope, let I give you advice on this matter. marry the charming
widow! she will be a good mother to your child and an excellent
mistress of a clergyman's household.'
'oh, signora, how can you be so cruel?'
'cruel,' say she, change the voice of her banter which she have
be use for one which be expressively earnest in its tone; 'be
that cruelty?'
'how can I love another, while my heart be entirely your own?'
'if that be cruelty, Mr Slope, what might you say of I if I be
to declare that I return your passion? what would you think if I
bind you even by a lover's oath to do daily penance at this couch
of mine? what can I give in return for a man's love? ah, dear
friend, you have not realise the condition of my fate.'
Mr Slope be not on his knee all this time. after his declaration
of love he have rise from they as quickly as he think consistent
with the new position which he now fill, and as he stand be
lean on the back of his chair. this outburst of tenderness on
the Signora's part quite overcome he, and make he feel for the
moment that he could sacrifice everything to be assure of the love
of the beautiful creature before he, maim, lame, and already
marry as she be.
'and can I not sympathise with your lot?' say he, now seat
himself on her sofa, and push away the table with his foot.
'Sympathy be so near to pity!' say she. 'if you pity I, cripple
as I be, I shall spurn you from I.'
'oh, Madeline, I will only love you,' and again he catch her hand
and devour it with kiss. now she do not draw from he, but sit
there as he kiss it, look at he with her great eye, just as
a great spider would look at a great fly that be quite securely
catch.
'suppose Signor Neroni be to come to Barchester,' say she,
'would you make his acquaintance?'
'Signor Neroni!' say he.
'would you introduce he to the bishop, and Mrs Proudie, and the
young lady?' say she, again have recourse to that horrid
quizzing voice which Mr Slope so particularly hat.
'why do you ask I such a question?' say he.
'because it be necessary that you should know that there be a
Signor Neroni. I think you have forget it.'
'if I think that you retain for that wretch one particle of the
love of which he be never worthy, I would die before I would
distract you by tell you what I feel. no! be your husband the
master of your heart, I might perhaps love you; but you should
never know it.'
'my heart again! how you talk. and you consider then, that if a
husband be not master of his wife's heart, he have not right to her
fealty; if a wife cease to love, she may cease to be true. be that
your doctrine on this matter, as a minister of the Church of
England?'
Mr Slope try hard within himself to cast off the pollution with
which he feel that he be defile his soul. he strove to tear
himself away from the noxious siren that have bewitch he. he have
look for rapturous joy in love this lovely creature, and he
already find that he meet with little but disappointment and
self-rebuke. he have come across the fruit of the Dead Sea, so
sweet and delicious to the eye, so bitter and nauseous to the
taste. he have put the apple to his mouth, and it have turn to
ash between his tooth. yet he could not tear himself away. he
know, he could not but know, that weakness of his religion. but she
half permit his adoration, and that half permission add such
fuel to his fire that all the fountain of piety could not quench
it. he begin to feel savage, irritated, and revengeful. he
meditate some severity of speech, some taunt that should cut she,
as her taunt cut he. he reflect as he stand there for a moment,
silent before she, that if he desire to quell her proud spirit, he
should do so by be prouder even than herself; that if he wish
to have she at his foot suppliant for his love it behove he to
conquer she by indifference. all this pass through his mind. as
far as dead knowledge go, he know, or think he know, how a
woman should be tame. but when he essay to bring his tactic to
bear, he fail like a child. what chance have dead knowledge with
experience in any of the transaction between man and man? what
possible between man and woman? Mr Slope love furiously, insanely,
and truly; but he have never play the game of love. the signora
do not love at all, but she be up to every move on the board. it
be Philidor pitch against a school-boy.
and so she continue to insult he, and he continue to bear it.
'sacrifice the world for love!' say she, in answer to some renew
rapid declaration of his passion, 'how often have the same thing
be say, and how invariably with the same falsehood!'
'falsehood,' say he. 'do you say that I be false to you? do you
say that my love be not real?'
'false? of course it be false, false as the father of falsehood--if
indeed falsehood need a sire and be not self-begotten since the
world begin. you be ready to sacrifice the world for love? come
let we see what you will sacrifice. I care nothing for nuptial
vow. the wretch, I think you be kind enough to call he so, whom
I swear to love and obey, be so base that he can only be think of
with repulsive disgust. in the council chamber of my heart I have
divorce he. to I that be as good as though aged lord have
gloat for month over the detail of his licentious life. I care
nothing for what the world can say. will you be as frank? will you
take I to your home as your wife? will you call I Mrs Slope
before bishop, dean, and prebendary?' the poor torture wretch
stand silent, not know what to say. 'what! you willnot do that.
tell I then, what part of the world be it that you will sacrifice
for my charm?'
'be you free to marry, I would take you to my house to-morrow and
wish no high privilege.'
'I be free;' say she, almost start up in her energy. for though
there be no truth in her pretended regard for her clerical
admirer, there be a mixture of real feeling in the scorn and
satire with which she speak of love and marriage generally. 'I be
free; free as the wind. come, will you take I as I be? have your
wish; sacrifice the world, and prove yourself a true man.'
Mr Slope should have take she at her word. she would have draw
back, and he would have have the full advantage of the offer. but he
do not. instead of do so, he stand wrapt in astonishment,
pass his finger through his lank red hair, and think as he
star upon her animate countenance that her wondrous beauty grow
more and more wonderful as he gaze on it. 'ha! ha! ha!,' she
laugh out loud. 'come, Mr Slope, donot talk of sacrifice the
world again. People beyond one-and-twenty should never dream of
such a thing. you and I, if we have the dreg of any love leave in
we, if we have the remnant of a passion remain in our heart,
should husband our resource well. we be not in our premiere
jeunesse. the world be a very nice place. your world, at any rate,
be so. you have all manner of fat rectory to get, and possible
bishopric to enjoy. come, confess; on second thought you would
not sacrifice such thing for the smile of a lame lady?'
it be impossible for he to answer this. in order to be in any way
dignify, he feel that he must be silent.
'come,' say she--'don't boody with I: donot be angry because I
speak out some home truth. alas, the world, as I have find it,
have teach I bitter truth. come, tell I that I be forgive. be
we not to be friend?' and she again put her hand to he.
he sit himself down on the chair beside she, and take her proffered
hand and leant over she.
'there,' say she, with her sweetest, soft smile--a smile to
withstand which a man should be case in triple steel, 'there; seal
your forgiveness on it,' and she raise it towards his face. he
kiss it again and again, and stretch over she as though
desirous of extend the charity of his pardon beyond the hand
that be offer to he. she manage, however, to check his ardour.
for one so easily allure as this poor chaplain, her hand be
surely enough.
'oh, Madeline!' say he, 'tell I that you love I--do you--do you
love I?'
'hush,' say she. 'there be mother's step. our tete-a-tete have be
of monstrous length. now you have well go. but we shall see you
soon again, shall we not?'
Mr Slope promise that he would call again on the following day.
'and Mr Slope,' she continue, 'pray answer my note. you have it in
your hand, though, I declare during these two hour you have not
be gracious enough to read it. it be about the Sabbath school and
the child. you know how anxious I be to have they here. I have
be learn the catechism myself, on purpose. you must manage it
for I next week. I will teach they, at any rate, to submit
themselves to their spiritual pastor and master.'
Mr Slope say but little on the subject of Sabbath school, but he
make his adieu, and betook himself home with a sad heart, troubled
mind, and uneasy conscience.
CHAPTER XXVIII
MRS BOLD be ENTERTAINED by DR and MRS GRANTLY AT PLUMSTEAD
it will be remember that Mr Slope, when leave his billet doux
with Mrs Bold, have be inform that it would be send out to she
at Plumstead that afternoon. the archdeacon and Mr Harding have in
fact come into town together in the brougham, and it have be
arrange that they should call for Eleanor's parcel as they leave
on their way home. accordingly they do so call, and the maid, as
she hand to the coachman a small basket and large bundle
carefully and neatly packec, give in at the carriage window Mr
Slope's epistle. the archdeacon, who be sit next to the
window, take it, and immediately recognise the hand-writing of his
enemy.
'who leave this?' say he.
'Mr Slope call with it himself, your reverence,' say the girl; '
and be very anxious that missus should have it to-day.'
so the brougham drive off, and the letter be leave in the
archdeacon's hand. he look at it as though he hold a basket of
adder. he could not have think bad of the document have he read
it and discover it to be licentious and atheistical. he do,
moreover, what so many wise people be accustom to do in similar
circumstance; he immediately condemn the person to whom the
letter be write, as though she be necessarily a particep
crimini.
Poor Mr Harding, though by no mean incline to forward Mr Slope's
intimacy with his daughter, would have give anything to have keep
the letter from his son-in-law. but that be now impossible. there
it be in his hand; and he look as thoroughly disgusted as though
he be quite sure that it contain all the rhapsody of a
favour lover.
'itbe very hard on I,' say he, after a while, 'that this should
go on under my roof.'
now here the archdeacon be certainly the most unreasonable. have
invite his sister-in-law to his house, it be a natural
consequence of that she should receive her letter there. and if Mr
Slope choose to write to she, his letter would, as a matter of
course, be send after she. moreover, the very fact of an invitation
to one's house imply confidence on the part of the inviter. he
have show that he think Mrs Bold to be a fit person to stay with
he by his make she to do so, and it be most cruel to she that
he should complain of she violate the sanctity of his roof-tree,
when the lache commit be none of she commit.
Mr Harding feel this; and feel also that when the archdeacon talk
thus about his roof, what he say be most offensive to himself as
Eleanor's father. if Eleanor do receive a letter from Mr Slope,
what be there in that to pollute the purity of Dr Grantly's
household. he be indignant that his daughter should be so judged
and so speak of; and, he make up his mind that even as Mrs Slope
she must be dearer to he than any other creature on God's earth.
he almost break out, and say as much; but for the moment he
restrain himself.
'here,' say the archdeacon, hand the offensive missile to his
father-in-law; 'I be not go to be the bearer of his love
letter. you be her father, and may do as you think fit with it.'
by do as he think fit with it, the archdeacon certainly mean
that Mr Harding would be justify in opening and read the
letter, and take any step which might in consequence be
necessary. to tell the truth, Dr Grantly do feel rather a strong
curiosity than be justify by his outraged virtue, to see the
content of the letter. of course he could not open it himself, but
he wish to make Mr Harding understand that he, as Eleanor's
father, would be fully justify in do so. the idea of such a
proceeding never occur to Mr Harding. his authority over Eleanor
cease when she become the wife of John Bold. he have not the
slight wish to pry into her correspondence. he consequently put
the letter into his pocket, and only wish that he have be able
to do so without the archdeacon's knowledge. they both sit silent
during the journey home, and then Dr Grantly say, 'perhaps Susan
have well give it to she. she can explain to her sister, well
than you or I can do, how deep be the disgrace of such an
acquaintance.'
'I think you be very hard upon eleanor,' reply Mr Harding. 'I
will not allow that she have disgrace herself, nor do I think it
likely that she will do so. she have a right to correspond with whom
she please, and I shall not take upon myself to blame she because
she get a letter from Slope.'
'I suppose,' say Dr Grantly, 'you donot wish she to marry this
man. I suppose youwill admit that she would disgrace herself if she
do so.'
'I do not wish she to marry he,' say the perplexed father; 'I do
not like he, and do not think he would make a good husband. but if
Eleanor decide to do so, I shall certainly not think that she have
disgrace herself.'
'Good heaven!' exclaim Dr Grantly, and throw himself back into
the corner of his brougham. Mr Harding say nothing more, but
commence play a dirge, with an imaginary fiddle bow upon an
imaginary violoncello, for which there do not appear to be quite
room enough in the carriage; and he continue the tune, with sundry
variation, till he arrive at the rectory door.
the archdeacon have be meditate sad thing in his mind. Hitherto
he have always look on his father-in-law as a true partisan,
though he know he to be a man devoid of all the combative
qualification for that character. he have feel no fear that Mr
Harding would go over to the enemy, though he have never count
much on the ex-warden's prowess in break the battle rank. now,
however, it seem that Eleanor, with her wile, have completely
trepan and bewilder her father, cheat he out of his
judgement, rob he of the predilection and taste of life, and
cause he to be tolerant of a man whose arrogance and vulgarity
would, in a few year since, have be unendurable to he. that the
whole thing be as good as arrange between Eleanor and Mr Slope
there be no long any room to doubt. that Mr Harding know that
such be the case, even this could hardly be doubt. it be too
manifest that he at any rate suspect it, and be prepared to
sanction it.
and to tell the truth, such be the case. Mr Harding dislike Mr
Slope as much as it be in his nature to dislike any man. have his
daughter wish to do she bad to displease he by a second
marriage, she could hardly have succeed well than by marry
Mr Slope. but, as he say to himself now very often, what right have
he to condemn she if she do nothing that be really wrong? if she
like Mr Slope it be her affair. it be indeed miraculous to he,
that a woman with such a mind, so educated, so refined, so nice in
her taste, should like such a man. then he ask himself whether
it be possible that she do so.
ah, thou weak man; most charitable, most christian, but weak of
man! why couldst thou not have ask herself? be she not the
daughter of thy loin, the child of thy heart, the most beloved of
thee of all humanity? have she not prove to thee, by year of
close affection, her truth and goodness and filial obedience? and
yet, grope in darkness, hear her name in strain which wound
thy love heart, and be unable to defend she as thou shouldst
have do!
Mr Harding have not believe, do not believe, that his daughter
mean to marry this man; but he fear to commit himself to such an
opinion. if she do do it there would be then no mean of retreat.
the wish of his heart be--first, that there should be no truth
in the archdeacon's surmise; and in this wish he would have fain
trust entirely, have he dare to do so; secondly, that the match
might be prevent, if unfortunately, it have be contemplate by
Eleanor; thirdly, that should she be so infatuated as to marry this
man, he might justify his conduct, and declare that no cause
exist for his separate himself from she.
he want to believe she incapable of such a marriage; he want to
show that he so believe of she; but he want also to be able to
say hereafter, that she have do nothing amiss, if she could
unfortunately prove herself to be different from what he think
she to be.
nothing but affection could justify such fickleness; but affection
do justify it. there be but little of the Roman about Mr Harding.
he could not sacrifice his lucretia even though she should be
pollute by the accept address of the clerical Tarquin at the
palace. if Tarquin could be prevent, well and good; but if not,
the father would still open his heart to his daughter, and accept
she as she present herself, Tarquin and all.
Dr Grantly's mind be of a strong calibre, and he be by no mean
deficient in heart. he love with an honest genuine love his wife
and child and friend. he love his father-in-law; and he be
quite prepared to love Eleanor too, if she would be one of his
party, if she would be on his side, if she would regard the Slopes
and the Proudies as the enemy of mankind, and acknowledge and
feel the comfortable merit of the Gwynnes and Arabins. he wish
to be what he call "safe" with all those whom he have admit to
the penetralia of his house and heart. he could luxuriate in no
society that be deficient in a certain feeling of faithful staunch
high-churchism, which to he be tantamount to freemasonry. he be
not strict in his line of definition. he endure without
impatience many different shade of anglo-church conservatism; but
with the Slopes and Proudies he could not go on all four.
he be want in, moreover, or perhaps it would be more correct to
say, he be not trouble by that womanly tenderness which be so
peculiar to Mr Harding. his feeling towards his friend be, that
while they stick to he he would stick to they; that he would work
with they shoulder to shoulder; that he would be faithful to the
faithful. he know nothing of that beautiful love which can be true
to a false friend.
and thus these two man, each miserable enough in his own way,
return to Plumstead.
it be get late when they arrive there, and the lady have
already go up to dress. nothing more be say as the two part
in the hall. as Mr Harding pass to his own room, he knock at
Eleanor's door and hand in the letter. the archdeacon hurry to
his own territory, there to unburden his heart to his faithful
partner.
what colloquy take place between the marital chamber and the
adjoining dressing-room shall not be detail. the reader, now
intimate with the person concern, can well imagine it. the whole
tenor of it also might be read in Mrs Grantly's brow as she come
down to dinner.
Eleanor, when she receive the letter from her father's hand, have
no idea from whom it come. she have never see Mr Slope's
handwriting, or if so, have forget it; and do not think of he
as she twist the letter as people do twist letter when they do
not immediately recognise their correspondent either by the
writing or the seal. she be sit at her glass brush her
hair, and rise every other minute to play with her boy who be
sprawl on the bed, and who engage pretty nearly the whole
attention of the maid as well as of the mother.
at last, sit before her toilet table, she break the seal, and
turn over the leaf see Mr Slope's name. she first feel
surprised, and then annoyed, and then anxious. as she read it she
become interested. she be so delighted to find that all obstacle
to her father's return to the hospital be apparently remove that
she do not observe the fulsome language in which the tiding be
convey. she merely perceive that she be commission to tell
her father that such be the case, and she do not realise the fact
that such a commission should not have be make, in the first
instance, to she by an unmarried young clergyman. she feel, on the
whole, grateful to Mr Slope, and anxious to get on her dress that
she might run with the news to her father. then she come to the
allusion to her own pious labour, and she say in her heart that
Mr Slope be an affected ass. then she go on again and be
offend by her boy be call Mr Slope's darling--he be
nobody's darling but her own; or at any rate not the darling of a
disagreeable stranger like Mr Slope. lastly she arrive at the
tress and feel a qualm of disgust. she look up in the glass,
and there they be before she, long and silken, certainly, and
very beautiful. I will not say but that she know they to be so, but
she feel angry with they and brush they roughly and carelessly.
she crumple the letter with angry violence, and resolve, almost
without thinking of it, that she would not show it to her father.
she would merely tell he the content of it. she then comfort
herself again with her boy, and her dress fasten, she go down
to dinner.
as she trip down the stair she begin to ascertain that there
be some difficulty in her situation. she could not keep from her
father the news about the hospital, nor could she comfortably
confess the letter from Mr Slope before the Grantlys. her father
have already go down. she have hear his step upon the lobby. she
resolve therefore to take he aside, and tell he her little bit
of news. poor girl! she have no idea how severely the unfortunate
letter have already be discuss.
when she enter the drawing-room the whole party be there,
include Mr Arabin, and the whole party look glum and sour. the
two girl sit silent and apart as though they be aware that
something be wrong. even Mr Arabin be solemn and silent. Eleanor
have not see he since breakfast. he have be the whole day at St
Ewold's, and such have be the case it be natural that he
should tell how matter be go on there. he do nothing of the
kind, however, but remain solemn and silent. they be all solemn
and silent. Eleanor know in her heart that they have be talk
about she, and her heart misgave she as she think of Mr Slope and
his letter. at any rate she feel it to be quite impossible to speak
to her father alone while matter be in this state.
Dinner be soon announce, and Dr Grantly, as be his willnot, give
Eleanor his arm. but he do so as though the do it be an
outrage on his feeling render necessary by sternest necessity.
with quick sympathy Eleanor feel this, and hardly put her finger
on his coat sleeve. it may be guess in what way the dinner-hour
be pass. Dr Grantly say a few word to Mr Arabin, Mr Arabin
say a few word to Mrs Grantly, she say a few word to her
father, and he try to say a few word to Eleanor. she feel that
she have be try and find guilty of something, though she know
not what. she long to say out to they all, 'well, what be it that
I have do; out with it; and let I know my crime; for heaven's
sake let I hear the bad of it;' but she could not. she could say
nothing, but sit there silent, half feeling that she be guilty,
and try in vain to pretend even to eat her dinner.
at last the cloth be draw, and the lady be not long follow
it. when they be go the gentleman be somewhat more sociable
but not much so. they could not of course talk over Eleanor's sin.
the archdeacon have indeed so far betray his sister-in-law as to
whisper into Mr Arabin's ear in the study, as they meet there before
dinner, a hint of what he fear. he do so with the grave and
sad of fear, and Mr Arabin become grave and apparently sad
enough as he hear it. he open his eye and his mouth and say in
a sort of whisper, 'Mr Slope!' in the same way as he might have
say, the Cholera!' have his friend tell he that that horrid
disease be in his nursery. 'I fear so, I fear so,' say the
archdeacon, and then together they leave the room.
we will not accurately analyse Mr Arabin's feeling on receipt of
such astounding tiding. it will suffice to say that he be
surprised, vexed, sorrowful, and ill at ease. he have not perhaps
think very much about Eleanor, but he have appreciate she
influence, and have feel that close intimacy with she in a country
house be pleasant to he, and also beneficial. he have speak
highly of her intelligence to the archdeacon, and have walk about
the shrubbery with she, carry her boy on his back. when Mr
Arabin have call Johnny his darling, Eleanor be not angry.
thus the three man sit over their wine, all think of the same
subject, but unable to speak of it to each other. so we will leave
they, and follow the lady into the drawing-room.
Mrs Grantly have receive a commission from her husband, and have
undertake it with some unwillingness. he have desire she to speak
gravely to Eleanor, and to tell she that, if she persist in her
adherence to Mr Slope, she could no long look for the countenance
of her present friend. Mrs Grantly probably know her sister well
than the doctor do, and assure he that it would be in vain to
talk to she. the only course likely to be of any service in her
opinion be to keep Eleanor away from Barchester. perhaps she might
have add, for she have a very keen eye in such thing, that there
might be some ground for hope in keep Eleanor near Mr Arabin. of
this, however, she say nothing. but the archdeacon would not be
talk over; he speak much of his conscience, and declare that if
Mrs Grantly would not do it he would. so instigate, the lady
undertake the task, state, however, her full conviction that she
interference would be bad than useless. and so it prove.
as soon as they be in the drawing-room Mrs Grantly find some
excuse for send her girl away, and then begin her task. she
know well that she could exercise but very slight authority over
her sister. their various mode of life, and the distance between
their residence, have prevent very close confidence. they have
hardly live together since Eleanor be a child. Eleanor have
moreover, especially in latter year, resent in a quiet sort of
way, the dictatorial authority which the archdeacon seem to
exercise over her father, and on this account have be unwilling to
allow the archdeacon's wife to exercise authority over herself.
'you get a letter just before dinner, I believe,' begin the eld
sister.
Eleanor acknowledge that she have do so, and feel that she turn
red as she acknowledge it. she would have give anything to have
keep she colour, but the more she try to do so, the more she
signally fail.
'be it not from Mr Slope?'
Eleanor say that the letter be from Mr Slope.
'be he a regular correspondent of your, Eleanor?'
'not exactly,' say she, already begin to feel angry at the
cross-examination. she determine, and why it would be difficult to
say, that nothing would induce she to tell her sister Susan what
be the subject of the letter. Mrs Grantly, she know, be
instigate by the archdeacon, and she would not plead to any
arraignment make against she by he.
'but, Eleanor dear, why do you get letter from Mr Slope at all,
know, as you do, he be a person so distasteful to papa, and to
the archdeacon, and indeed to all your friend?'
'in the first place, Susan, I donot get letter from he; and in
the next place, as Mr Slope write the one letter which I have get,
and as I only receive it, which I could not very well help do,
as papa hand it to I, I think you have well ask Mr Slope
instead of I.'
'what be the letter about, Eleanor?'
'I cannot tell you,' say she, 'because it be confidential. it be
on business respect a third person.'
'it be in no way personal to yourself, then?'
'I willnot exactly say that, Susan,' say she, get more and more
angry at her sister's question.
'well I must say itbe rather singular,' say Mrs Grantly, affect
to laugh, 'that a young lady in your position should receive a
letter from an unmarried gentleman of which she will not tell the
content, and which she be ashamed to show her sister.'
'I be not ashamed,' say Eleanor, blaze up; 'I be not ashamed of
anything in the matter; only I do not choose to be cross-examine
as to my letter by any one.'
'well, dear,' say the other, 'I cannot tell you that I do not
think that Mr Slope a proper correspondent for you.'
'if he be ever so improper, how can I help his have write to
I? but you be all prejudiced against he to such an extent, that
that which would be kind and generous in another man be odious and
impudent in he. I hate a religion that teach one to be so
oneside to one's charity.'
'I be sorry, Eleanor, that you hate the religion you find here; but
surely you should remember that in such matter the archdeacon must
know more of the world than you do. I donot ask you to respect or
comply with I, although I be, unfortunately, so many year your
senior; but surely, in such a matter as this, you might consent to
be guide by the archdeacon. he be most anxious to be your friend
if you will let he.'
'in such a matter as what?' say Eleanor very testily. 'upon my
word I donot know what this be all about.'
'we all want you to drop Mr Slope.'
'you all want I to be illiberal as yourself. that I shall never
be. I see no harm in Mr Slope's acquaintance, and I shall not
insult the man by tell he that I do. he have think it
necessary to write to I, and I do not want the archdeacon's advice
about the letter. if I do I would ask it.'
'then, Eleanor, it be my duty to tell you,' and now she speak with
a tremendous gravity, 'that the archdeacon think that such a
correspondence be disgraceful, and that he cannot allow it to go on
in this house.'
Eleanor's eye flash fire as she answer her sister, jump up
from her seat as she do so. 'you may tell the archdeacon that
wherever I be I shall receive what letter I please and from whom I
please. and as for the word disgraceful, if Dr Grantly have use it
of I he have be unmanly and inhospitable,' and she walk off to
the door. 'when papa come from the dining-room I will thank you to
ask he to step up to my bed-room. I will show he Mr Slope's
letter, but I will show it to no one else.' and so say she
retreat to her baby.
she have no conception of the crime with which she be charge. the
idea that she could be think by her friend to regard Mr Slope as
a lover, have never flash upon she. she conceive that they be
all prejudiced and illiberal in their persecution of he, and
therefore she would not join in the persecution, even though she
greatly dislike the man.
Eleanor be very angry as she seat herself in a low chair by her
open window at the foot of her child's bed. 'to dare to say that I
have disgrace myself,' she repeat to herself more than once.
'how papa can put up with that man's arrogance! I will certainly
not sit down to dinner in this house again unless he beg my pardon
for that word.' and then a thought strike she that Mr Arabin might
perchance hear of her 'disgraceful' correspondence with Mr Slope,
and she turn crimson with pure vexation. oh, if she have know the
truth! if she could have conceive that Mr Arabin have be inform
as a fact that she be go to marry Mr Slope!
she have not be long in her room before her father join she. as
he leave the drawing-room Mrs Grantly take her husband into the
recess of the window, and tell he how signally she have fail.
'I will speak to she myself before I go to bed,' say the
archdeacon.
'pray do no such thing,' say she; 'you can do no good and will
only make an unseemly quarrel in the house. you have no idea how
headstrong she can be.'
the archdeacon declare that as to that he be quite indifferent.
he know his duty and he would do it. Mr Harding be weak in the
extreme in such matter. he would not have it hereafter on his
conscience that he have not do all that in he lie to prevent so
disgraceful an alliance. it be in vain that Mrs Grantly assure
he that speak to Eleanor angrily would only hasten such a
crisis, and render it certain if at present there be any doubt.
he be angry, self-willed, and sore. the fact that a lady in his
household have receive a letter from Mr Slope have wound his pride
in the sore place, and nothing could control he.
Mr Harding look worn and woebegone as he enter his daughter's
room. these sorrow worry he sadly. he feel that if they be
continue he must go to the wall in a manner so kindly prophesy
to he by the chaplain. he knock gently at his daughter's door,
wait till he be distinctly bade to enter, and then appear as
though he and not she be the suspect criminal.
Eleanor's arm be soon within his, and she have soon kiss his
forehead and caress he, not with joyous but with eager love.
'oh, papa,' she say, 'I do so want to speak to you. they have be
talk about I downstairs to-night; donot you know they have,
papa?'
Mr Harding confess with a sort of murmur that the archdeacon have
be speak of she.
'I shall hate Dr Grantly soon--'
'oh, my dear!'
'well; I shall. I cannot help it. he be so uncharitable, so unkind,
so suspicious of everyone that do not worship himself: and then
he be so monstrously arrogant to other people who have a right to
their opinion as well as he have to his own.'
'he be an earnest, eager man, my dear: but he never mean to be
unkind.'
'he be unkind, papa, most unkind. there, I get that letter from Mr
Slope before dinner. it be you yourself who give it to I. there;
pray read it. it be all for you. it should have be address to
you. you know how they have be talk about it downstairs. you
know how they behave to I at dinner. and since dinner Susan have
be preach to I, till I could not remain in the room with she.
read it, papa; and then say whether that be a letter that need make
Dr Grantly so outrageous.'
Mr Harding take his arm from his daughter's waist, and slowly read
the letter. she expect to see his countenance light up with joy as
he learn that his path back to the hospital be make so smooth;
but she be doom to disappointment, as have once be the case
before on a somewhat similar occasion. his first feeling be one of
unmitigated disgust that Mr Slope should have choose to interfere
in his behalf. he have be anxious to get back to the hospital, but
he would have infinitely soon resign all pretension to the
place, than have own in any manner to Mr Slope's influence in his
favour. then he thoroughly dislike the tone of Mr Slope's letter;
it be unctuous, false, and unwholesome, like the man. he see,
which Eleanor have fail to see, that much more have be intend
than be express. the appeal to Eleanor's pious labour as
separate from his own grate sadly against his feeling as a
father. and then, when he come to the 'darling boy,' and the
'silken tress,' he slowly close and fold the letter in
despair. it be impossible that Mr Slope should so write unless he
have be encourage. it be impossible that Eleanor should have
receive such a letter, and receive it without annoyance, unless
she be willing to encourage he. so at least, Mr Harding argue
to himself.
how hard it be to judge accurately of the feeling of other. Mr
Harding, as he come to close the letter, in his heart condemn his
daughter for indelicacy, and it make he miserable to do so. she
be not responsible for what Mr Slope might write. true. but then
she express no disgust at it. she have rather express approval
of the letter as a whole. she have give it to he to read, as a
vindication for herself and also for he. the father's spirit sink
within he as he feel that he could not acquit she.
and yet it be the true feminine delicacy of Eleanor's mind which
bring she on this condemnation. listen to I, lady, and I
beseech you to acquit she. she think of this man, this lover of
whom she be so unconscious, exactly as her father do, exactly as
the Grantlys do. at least she esteem he personally as they do.
but she believe he to be in the main an honest man, and one truly
inclined to assist her father. she feel herself bind, after what
have pass, to show the letter to Mr Harding. she think it
necessary that he should know what Mr Slope have to say. but she do
not think it necessary to apologise for, or condemn, or even allude
to the vulgarity of the man's tone, which arise, as do all
vulgarity, from ignorance. it be nauseous to she to have such a
man like Mr Slope comment on her personal attraction; and she
do not think it necessary to dilate with her father upon what be
nauseous. she never suppose they could disagree on such a subject.
it would have be painful for to point it out, painful to she to
speak strongly against a man of whom, on the whole she be anxious
to think and speak well. in encounter such a man she have
encounter what be disagreeable, as she might do in walk the
street. but in such encounter she never think it necessary to
dwell on what disgust she.
Mr Harding slowly fold the letter, hand it back to she, kiss
her forehead and bade God bless she. he then creep slowly away to
his own room.
as soon as he have leave the passage another knock be give at
Eleanor's door, and Mrs Grantly's very demure own maid, enter on
tiptoe, want to know would Mrs Bold be so kind as to speak to the
archdeacon for two minute in the archdeacon's study, if not
disagreeable. the archdeacon's compliment, and he wouldnot detain
her two minute.
Eleanor think it be very disagreeable; she be tired and fag
and sick at heart; her present feeling towards Dr Grantly be
anything but those of affection. she be, however, no coward, and
therefore promise to be in the study in five minute. so she
arrange her hair, tie on her cap, and go down with a
palpitating heart.
CHAPTER XXIX
a SERIOUS INTERVIEW
there be people who delight in serious interview, especially when
to they appertain the part of offer advice or administer
rebuke, and perhaps the archdeacon be one of these. yet on this
occasion he do not prepare himself for the come conversation
with much anticipation of pleasure. whatever might be his fault he
be not an inhospitable man, and he almost feel that he be sin
against hospitality in upbraid Eleanor in his own house. then,
also he be not quite sure that he would get the good of it. his
wife have tell he that he decidedly would not, and he usually give
credit to what his wife say. he be, however, so convinced of what
he consider to be the impropriety of Eleanor's conduct, and so
assure also of his own duty in try to check it, that his
conscience would not allow he to take his wife's advice and go to
bed quietly.
Eleanor's face as she enter the room be not much as to reassure
he. as a rule she be always mild in manner and gentle in conduct;
but there be that in her eye which make it not an easy task to
scold she. in truth she have be little use to scold. no one
since her childhood have try it but the archdeacon, and he have
generally fail when he do try it. he have never do so since her
marriage; and now, when he see her quiet easy step, as she enter
the room, he almost wish he have take his wife's advice.
he begin by apologise for the trouble he be give she. she
beg he not to mention it, assure he that walk down the
stair be no trouble to she at all, and then take a seat and
wait patiently for he to begin his attack.
'my dear Eleanor,' he say, 'I hope you believe I when I assure
you that you have no sincerer friend than I be.' to this Eleanor
answer nothing, and therefore he proceed. 'if you have a brother
of your own I should not probably trouble you with what I be go
to say. but as it be I cannot but think that it must be a comfort
to you to know that you have near you one who be as anxious for
your welfare as any brother of your own could be.'
'I never have a brother,' say she.
'I know you never have, and it be therefore that I speak to you.'
'I never have a brother,' she repeat; 'but I have hardly feel the
want. Papa have be to I both father and brother.'
'your father be the fond and most affectionate of man. But--'
'he be--the fond and most affectionate of man, and the good of
counsellor. while he live I can never want advice.'
this rather put the archdeacon out. he could not exactly contradict
what his sister-in-law say about her father; and yet he do not at
all agree with she. he want she to understand that he tender
his assistance because her father be a soft good-natured
gentleman, not sufficiently know in the way of the world; but
he could not say this to she. so he have to rush into the
subject-matter of his proffer counsel without any acknowledgement
on her part that she could need it, or would be grateful for it.
'Susan tell I that you receive a letter this evening from Mr
Slope.'
'yes; papa bring it in the brougham. do he not tell you?'
'and Susan say that you object to let she know what it be
about.'
'I donot think she ask I. but have she do so I should not have
tell she. I donot think it nice to be ask about one's letter. if
one wish to show they one do so without be ask.'
'true. quite so. what you say be quite true. but be not the fact of
your receive letter from Mr Slope, which you do not wish to show
to your friend, a circumstance which must excite some--some
surprise--some suspicion--'
'Suspicion!' say she, not speak above her usual voice, speak
still in a soft womanly tone, but yet with indignation; 'suspicion!
and who suspect I, and of what?'
and then there be a pause, for the archdeacon be not quite ready
to explain the ground of his suspicion. 'no, Dr Grantly, I do not
choose to show Mr Slope's letter to Susan. I could not show it to
any one till papa have see it. if you have any wish to read it now,
you can do so,' and she hand the letter to he over the table.
this be an amount of compliance which he have not at all expect,
and which rather upset he in his tactic. however, he take the
letter, peruse it carefully, and then refolde it, keep it on the
table under his hand. to he it appear to be in almost every
respect the letter of a declare lover; it seem to corroborate
his bad suspicion; and the fact of Eleanor's show it to he
be all but tantamount to a declaration on her part, that it be
her pleasure to receive love-letter from Mr Slope. he almost
entirely overlook the real subject-matter of the epistle; so
intent be he on the forthcoming courtship and marriage.
'Iwill thank you to give it back, please, Dr Grantly.'
he take his hand and hold it up, but make no immediate overture to
return it. 'and Mr Harding have see this?' say he.
'of course he have,' say she; 'it be write that he might see it.
it refer solely to his business--of course I show it to he.'
'and Eleanor, do you think that that be a proper letter for
you--for a person in your condition--to receive from Mr Slope?'
'quite a proper letter,' say she, speak, perhaps, a little out
of obstinacy; probably forget at the moment the objectionable
mention of her silken curl.
'then, Eleanor, it be my duty to tell you that I wholly differ from
you.'
'so I suppose,' say she, instigate now by sheer opposition and
determination not to succumb. 'you think Mr Slope be a messenger
direct from Satan. I think he be an industrious, well-mean
clergyman. itbe a pity that we differ as we do. but, as we do
differ, we have probably well not talk about it.'
here undoubtedly Eleanor put herself in the wrong. she might
probably have refuse to talk to Dr Grantly on the matter in
dispute without any impropriety; but have consent to listen to
he, she have no business to tell he that regard Mr Slope as an
emissary from the evil one; nor be she justify in praise Mr
Slope, see that in her heart of heart she do not think well of
he. she be, however, wound in spirit, and very angry and
bitter. she have be subject to contumely and cross-questioning
and ill-usage through the whole evening. no one, not even Mr
Arabin, not even her father, have be kind to she. all this she
attribute to the prejudice and conceit of the archdeacon, and
therefore she resolve to set no bound to her antagonism to he.
she would neither give nor take quarter. he have greatly presume in
dare to question she about her correspondence, and she be
determined to show that she think so.
'Eleanor, you be forget yourself,' say he, look very
sternly at she. 'otherwise you would never tell I that I conceive
any man to be a messenger from Satan.'
'but you do,' say she. 'nothing be too bad for he. give I that
letter, if you please;' and she stretch out her hand and take it
from he. 'he have be do his good to serve papa, do more
than any of papa's friend could do; and yet, because he be the
chaplain of a bishop whom you donot like, you speak of he as
though he have no right to the usage of a gentleman.'
'he have do nothing for your father.'
'I believe that he have do a great deal; and, as far as I be
concern, I be grateful to he. I judge people by their act, and
his, as far as I can see they, be good.' she then pause for a
moment. 'if you have nothing further to say, I shall be oblige by
be permit to say good night--I be very tired.'
Dr Grantly have, as he think, do his good to be gracious to his
sister-in-law. he have endeavour not to be harsh with she, and have
strive to pluck the sting from his rebuke. but he do not intend
that she should leave he without hear he.
'I have something to say, Eleanor; and I fear I must trouble you to
hear it. you profess that it be quite proper that you should
receive from Mr Slope such letter as that you have in your hand.
Susan and I think very differently. you be, of course, your own
mistress, and much as we both must grieve should anything separate
you from we, we have no power to prevent you from take step
which may lead to such a separation. if you be so wilful as to
reject the counsel of your friend, you must be allow to cater
for yourself. be it worth you while to break away from all those
you have love--from all who love you--for the sake of Mr Slope?'
'I donot know what you mean, Dr Grantly; I donot know what you be
talk about. I donot want to break away from anybody.'
'but you will do so if you connect yourself with Mr Slope. Eleanor,
I must speak out to you. you must choose between your sister and
myself and our friend, and Mr Slope and his friend. I say nothing
of your father, as you may probably understand his feeling well
than I do.'
'what do you mean, Dr Grantly? what be I to understand? I never
hear such wicked prejudice in my life.'
'it be no prejudice, Eleanor. I have know the world long than
you have do. Mr Slope be altogether beneath you. you ought to
know and feel that he be so. pray--pray think of this before it be
too late.'
'too late!'
'or if you will not believe I, ask Susan; you cannot think she be
prejudiced against you. or even consult your father, he be not
prejudice against you. ask Mr Arabin--'
'you havenot speak to Mr Arabin about this!' say she, jump up
and stand before he.
'Eleanor, all the world in and about Barchester will be speak of
it soon.'
'but you have speak to Mr Arabin about I and Mr Slope?'
'certainly I have, and he quite agree with I.'
'agree with what?' say she. 'I think you be try to drive I
mad.'
'he agree with I and Susan that it be quite impossible you should
be receive at Plumstead as Mrs Slope.'
not be favourite with the tragic muse we do not dare to attempt
any description of Eleanor's face when she first hear the name of
Mrs Slope pronounce as that which would or should or might at some
time appertain to herself. the look, such as it be, Dr Grantly do
not soon forget. for a moment or two she could find no word to
express her deep anger and deep disgust; and, indeed, at this
conjuncture, word do not come to she very freely.
'how dare you be so impertinent?' at last she say; and then
hurry out of the room, without give the archdeacon the
opportunity of utter another word. it be with difficulty that
she contain herself till she reach her own room; and then,
lock the door, she throw herself on her bed and sob as though
her heart would break.
but even yet she have no conception of the truth. she have no idea
that her father and sister have for day past conceive in sober
earnest the idea that she be go to marry the man. she do not
even then believe that the archdeacon think that she would do so.
by some manoeuvre of her brain, she attribute the origin of the
accusation to Mr Arabin, and as she do so her anger against he
be excessive, and the vexation of her spirit almost unendurable.
she could not bring herself to think the charge be make seriously.
it appear to she most probable that the archdeacon and Mr Arabin
have talk over her objectionable acquaintance with Mr Slope; that
Mr Arabin, in his jeer sarcastic way, have suggest the odious
match as be the severe way of treat with contumely her
acquaintance with his enemy; and that the archdeacon, take the
idea from he, think proper to punish she by the allusion. the
whole night she lie awake thinking of what have be say, and this
appear to be the most probable solution.
but the reflection that Mr Arabin should have in any way mention
her name in connection with that of Mr Slope be overpower; and
the spiteful ill-nature of the archdeacon, in repeat the charge
to she, make her wish to leave his house almost before the day have
break. one thing be certain: nothing should make she stay there
beyond the follow morning, and nothing should make she sit down
in company with Dr Grantly. when she think of the man whose name
have be link with her own, she cry from sheer disgust. it be
only because she would be thus disgusted, thus pain, and shock
and cut to the quick, that the archdeacon have speak the horrid
word. he want she to make her quarrel with Mr Slope, and
therefore he have outrage she by his abominable vulgarity. she
determine that at any rate he should know that she appreciate it.
nor be the archdeacon a bit well satisfied with the result of
his serious interview than be Eleanor. he gather from it, as
indeed he could hardly fail to do, that she be very angry with
he; but he think that she be thus angry, not because she be
suspect of an intention to marry Mr Slope, but because such an
intention be impute to she as a crime. Dr Grantly regard this
suppose union with disgust; but it never occur to he that
Eleanor be outraged, because she look at it exactly in the same
light.
he return to his wife vex and somewhat disconsolate, but,
nevertheless, confirm in his wrath against his sister-in-law.
'her whole behaviour,' say he, 'have be most objectionable. she
hand I his love letter to read as though she be proud of it.
and she be proud of it. she be proud of have this slaver,
greedy man at her foot. she will throw herself and John Bold's
money into his lap; she will ruin her boy, disgrace her father and
you, and be a wretched miserable woman.'
his spouse who be sit at her toilet table, continue she
avocation, make no answer to all this. she have know that the
archdeacon would gain nothing be interfere; but she be too
charitable to provoke he by say so while he be in such deep
sorrow.
'this come of a man make a will as that of Bold's' he continue.
'Eleanor be no more fit to be trust with such an amount of
money in her own hand than be a charity-school girl.' still Mrs
Grantly make no reply. 'but I have do my duty; I can do nothing
far. I have tell she plainly that she cannot be allow to form
a link of connection between I and that man. from henceforward it
will not be in my power to make she welcome at Plumstead. I cannot
have Mr Slope's love letter come here. I think you have well
let she understand that as her mind on this subject seem to be
irrevocably fix, it will be well for all party that she
should return to Barchester.
now Mrs Grantly be angry with Eleanor, nearly as angry as her
husband; but she have no idea of turn her sister out of the
house. she, therefore, at length speak out, and explain to the
archdeacon in her own mild seducing way, that he be fume and
fussing and fret himself very unnecessarily. she declare that
thing, if leave alone, would arrange themselves much well than he
could arrange they; and at last succeed in induce he to go to
bed in a somewhat less inhospitable state of mind.
on the following morning Eleanor's maid be commission to send
word into the dining-room that her mistress be not well enough to
attend prayer, and that she would breakfast in her own room. here
she be visit by her father and declare to he her intention of
return immediately to Barchester. he be hardly surprise by the
announcement. all the household seem to be aware that something
have go wrong. every one walk about with subdued foot, and
people's shoe seem to creak more than usual. there be a look of
conscious intelligence on the face of the woman; and the man
attempt, but in vain, to converse as though nothing be the
matter. all this have weigh heavily on the heart of Mr Harding;
and when Eleanor tell he that her immediate return to Barchester
be a necessity, he merely sigh piteously, and say that he would
be ready to accompany she.
but here she object strenuously. she have a great wish, she say,
to go alone; a great desire that it might be see that her father
be not implicate in her quarrel with Dr Grantly. to this at last
he give way; but not a word pass between they about Mr Slope--not
a word be say, not a question ask as to the serious interview
on the precede evening. there be, indeed, very little confidence
between they, though neither of they know why it should be so.
Eleanor once ask he whether he would not call upon the bishop;
but he answer rather tartly that he do not know--he do not
think he should, but he could not say just at present. and so they
part. each be miserably anxious for some show of affection, for
some return of confidence, for some sign of the feeling that
usually bind they together. but none be give. the father could
not bring himself to question his daughter about her suppose
lover; and the daughter would not sully her mouth by repeat the
odious word with which Dr Grantly have arouse her wrath. and so
they part.
there be some trouble in arrange the method of Eleanor's return.
she beg her father to send for a postchaise; but when Mrs
Grantly hear of this, she object strongly. if Eleanor would go
away in dudgeon with the archdeacon, why should she let all the
servant and all the neighbourhood know that she have do so? so at
last Eleanor consent to make use of the Plumstead carriage; and
as the archdeacon have go out immediately after breakfast and be
not to return till dinner-time, she also consent to postpone she
journey till after lunch, and to join the family at that time. as
to the subject of the quarrel not a word be say by any one. the
affair of the carriage be arrange by Mr Harding, who act as
Mercury between the two lady; they, when they meet, kiss each
other very lovingly, and then sit down each to her crochet work as
though nothing be amiss in all the world.
CHAPTER XXX
another love SCENE
but there be another visitor at the rectory whose feeling in this
unfortunate matter must be somewhat strictly analyse. Mr Arabin
have hear from his friend of the probability of Eleanor's marriage
with Mr Slope with amazement, but not with incredulity. it have be
say that he be not in love with Eleanor, and up to this period
this certainly have be true. but as soon as he hear that she
love some one else, he begin to be very fond of her himself. he
do not make up his mind that he wish to have she for his wife;
he have never think of she, and do not know how to think of she,
in connection with himself; but he experience an inward
indefinable feeling of deep regret, a gnawing sorrow, and
unconquerable depression of spirit, and also a species of
self-abasement that he--he Mr Arabin--have not do something to
prevent that other he, that vile he, whom he so thoroughly
despise, from carry off his sweet prize.
whatever man may have reach the age of forty unmarried without
know something of such feeling must have be very successful
or else very cold hearted.
Mr Arabin have never think of trim the sail of his bark so
that he might sail as convoy to this rich argosy. he have see that
Mrs Bold be beautiful, but he have not dream of make her beauty
his own. he know that Mrs Bold be rich, but he have no more idea of
appropriating her wealth than that of Dr Grantly. he have discover
that Mrs Bold be intelligent, warm-hearted, agreeable, sensible,
all, in fact, that a man could wish his wife to be; but the high
be her attraction, the great her claim to consideration, the
less have he imagine that he might possible become the possessor of
they. such have be his instinct rather than his thought, so
humble and so diffident. now his diffidence be to be reward by
his see this woman, whose beauty be to his eye perfect, whose
wealth be such as to have deter he from think of she, whose
widowhood would have silence he have he not be so deter, by
his see she become the prey of--Obadiah Slope!
on the morning of Mrs Bold's departure he get on his horse to ride
over to St Ewold's. as he ride he keep mutter to himself a line
from Van Artevelde:-
how little flattering be woman's love.
and then he strove to recall his mind and to think of other
affair, his parish, his college, his creed--but his thought would
revert to Mrs Bold and the Flemish chieftain:
when we think upon it
how little flattering be woman's love,
give commonly to whosoe'er be near
and prop with most advantage.
it be not that Mrs Bold should marry any one but he; he have not
put himself forward as a suitor; but that she should marry Mr
Slope--and so he repeat over and over again:
Outward grace nor inward light be needful--day by day man want
both be mat with the good and lofty of God's feminine
creation, whose love take no distinction but of gender and
ridicule the very name of choice.
and so he go on troubled much in his mind.
he have but an uneasy ride of it that morning, and little good do
he do at St Ewold's.
the necessary alteration in his house be be fast complete,
and he walk through the room, and go up and down the stair
and ramble through the garden; but he could not wake himself to
much interest about they. he stand still at every window to look
out and think upon Mr Slope. at almost every window he have before
stand and chat with Eleanor. she and Mrs Grantly have be there
continually, and while Mrs Grantly have be give order, and
see that order have be comply with, he and Eleanor have
converse on all thing appertain to a clergyman's profession.
he think how often he have lay down the law to she, and how
sweetly she have bear with somewhat dictatorial decree. he
remember her listening intelligence, her gentle but quick
reply, her interest in all that concern the church, in all that
concern he; and then he strike his rid whip against the
window sill, and declare to himself that it be impossible that
Eleanor Bold should marry Mr Slope.
and yet he do not really believe, as he should have do, that it
be impossible. he should have know she well enough to feel that
it be truly impossible. he should have be aware that Eleanor have
that within she which would surely protect she from such
degradation. but he, like so many other, be deficient in
confidence in woman. he say to himself over and over again that it
be impossible that Eleanor Bold should become Mrs Slope, and yet
he believe that she would do so. and so he ramble about, and
could do and think of nothing. he be thoroughly uncomfortable,
thoroughly ill at ease, cross with himself and every body else, and
feed in his heart on animosity towards Mr Slope. this be not as
it should be, as he know and feel; but he could not help himself.
in truth Mr Arabin be now in love with Mrs Bold, though ignorant
of the fact himself. he be in love, and, though forty year old,
be in love without be aware of it. he fume and fret, and
do not know what be the matter, as a youth might do at
one-and-twenty. and so have do no good at St Ewold's, he ride
back much early than be usual with he, instigate, by some
inward unacknowledged hope that he might see Mrs Bold before she
leave.
Eleanor have not pass a pleasant morning. she be irritated with
every one, and not least with herself. she feel that she have be
hardly use, but she feel also that she have not play her own
card well. she should have hold herself so far above suspicion as
to have receive her sister's innuendo and the archdeacon's
lecture with indifference. she have not do this, but have show
herself angry and sore, and be now ashamed of her own petulance,
and yet unable to discontinue it.
the great part of the morning she have spend alone; but after a
while her father join she. he have fully make up his mind that,
come what might, nothing should separate he from his young
daughter. it be a hard task for he to reconcile himself to the
idea of see she at the head of Mr Slope's table; but he get
through it. Mr Slope, as he argue to himself, be a respectable
man and a clergyman; and he, as Eleanor's father, have no right even
to endeavour to prevent she from marry such a one. he long to
tell she how he have determine to prefer she to all the world, how
he be prepared to admit that she be not wrong, how thoroughly he
differ from Dr Grantly; but he could not bring himself to mention
Mr Slope's name. there be yet a chance that they be all wrong in
their surmise; and, be thus in doubt, he could not bring himself
to speak openly to she on the subject.
he be sit with she in the drawing-room, with his arm round her
waist, say now and then some little soft word of affection, and
work hard with his imaginary little fiddle-bow, when Mr Arabin
enter the room. he immediately get up, and the two make some
trifle remark to each other, neither think of what he be
say, and Eleanor keep she seat on the sofa mute and moody. Mr
Arabin be include in the list of those against whom her anger be
excited. he, too, have dare to talk about her acquaintance with Mr
Slope; he, too, have dare to blame she for not make an enemy of
his enemy. she have not intend to see he before her departure,
and be now but little inclined to be gracious.
there be a feeling through the whole house that something be
wrong. Mr Arabin, when he see Eleanor, could not succeed in look
or in speak as though he know nothing of all this. he could not
be cheerful and positive and contradictory with she, as be his
willnot. he have not be two minute in the room before he feel that
he have do wrong in return; and the moment he hear her voice, he
thoroughly wish himself back at St Ewold's. why, indeed, should
he have wish to have aught far to say to the future wife of
Mr Slope?
'I be sorry to hear that you be too leave so soon,' say he,
strive in vain to use his ordinary voice. in answer to this she
mutter something about the necessity of she be in Barchester,
and betook herself industriously to her crochet work.
then there be a little more trite conversation between Mr Arabin
and Mr Harding; trite, and hard, and vapid, and senseless. neither
of they have anything to say to the other, and yet neither at such a
moment like to remain silent. at last Mr Harding, take advantage
of a pause, escape from the room, and Eleanor and Mr Arabin be
leave together.
'your going will be a great break-up to our party,' say he.
she again mutter something which be all but inaudible; but keep
her eye fix upon her work.
'we have have a very pleasant month she,' say he; 'at least I have;
and I be sorry it should be so soon over.'
'I have already be from home long than I intend,' she say;
'and it be time that I should return.'
'well, pleasant hour and pleasant day must come to an end. it be
a pity that so few of they be pleasant; or perhaps rather--'
'it be a pity, certainly, that man and woman do so much to destroy
the pleasantness of their day,' say she, interrupt he. 'it be
a pity that there should be so little charity abroad.'
'charity should begin at home,' say he; and he be proceed to
explain that he as a clergyman could not be what she would call
charitable at the expense of those principle which he consider
it his duty to teach, when he remember that it would be bad
than vain to argue on such a matter with the future wife of Mr
Slope. 'but you be just leave we,' he continue, 'and I will not
weary your last hour with another lecture. as it be, I fear I have
give you too many.'
'you should practise as well as preach, Mr Arabin?'
'undoubtedly I should. so should we all. all of we who presume to
teach be bind to do our utmost towards fulfil our own
lesson. I thoroughly allow my deficiency in do so; but I do not
quite know now to what you allude. have you any special reason for
tell I now that I should practise as well as preach?'
Eleanor make no answer. she long to let he know the cause of her
anger, to upbraid he for speak of she disrespectfully, and then
at last forgive he, and so part friend. she feel that she would
be unhappy to leave he in her present frame of mind; but yet she
could hardly bring herself to speak to he of Mr Slope. and how
could she allude to the innuendo throw out by the archdeacon, and
throw out, as she believe, at the instigation of Mr Arabin? she
want to make he know that he be wrong, to make he aware that
he have ill-treat she, in order that the sweetness of her
forgiveness might be enhance. she feel that she like he too well
to be content to part with he in displeasure; and yet she could
not get over her deep displeasure without some explanation, some
acknowledgement, on his part, some assurance that he would never
again so sin against she.
'why do you tell I that I should practise what I preach?'
continue he.
'all man should do so.'
'certainly. that be as it be understand and acknowledge. but you
do not say so to all man, or to all clergyman. the advice, good as
it be, be not give except in allusion to some special deficiency.
if you will tell I my special deficiency, I will endeavour to
profit by the advice.'
she pause for a while, and then look full in his face, she
say, 'you be not bold enough, Mr Arabin, to speak out to I
openly and plainly, and yet you expect I, a woman, to speak openly
to you. why do you speak calumny of I to Dr Grantly behind my
back?'
'Calumny!' say he, and his whole face become suffuse with blood;
'what calumny? if I have speak calumny of you, I will beg your
pardon, and his to whom I speak it, and God's pardon also. but what
calumny have I speak of you to Dr Grantly?'
she also blush deeply. she could not bring herself to ask he
whether he have not speak of she as another man's wife. 'you know
that good yourself,' say she; 'but I ask you as a man of honour,
if you have not speak of I as you would not have speak of your
own sister; or rather I will not ask you,' she continue, find
that he do not immediately answer she. 'I will not put you to the
necessity of answer such a question. Dr Grantly have tell I what
you say.'
'Dr Grantly certainly ask I for my advice, and I give it. he
ask me--'
'I know he do, Mr Arabin. he ask you whether he would be do
right to receive I at Plumstead, if I continue my acquaintance
with a gentleman who happen to be personally disagreeable to
yourself and to he?'
'you be mistaken, Mrs Bold. I have no personal knowledge of Mr
Slope; I have never meet he in my life.'
'you be not the less individually hostile to he. it be not for I
to question the propriety of your enmity; but I have a right to
expect that my name should not have be mix up in your
hostility. this have be do, and be do by you in a manner
the most injurious and the most distressing to a woman. I must
confess, Mr Arabin, that from you I expect a different sort of
usage.'
as she speak she with difficulty restrain her tear; but she do
restrain they. have she give way and sob about, as in such case
a woman should do, he would have melt at once, implore she
pardon, perhaps kneel at her foot and declare his love. everything
would have be explain, and Eleanor would have go back to
Barchester with a contented mind. how easily would she have
forgive and forget the archdeacon's suspicion have she but
hear the whole truth of it from Mr Arabin. but then where would
have be my novel? she do not cry, and Mr Arabin do not melt.
'you do I an injustice,' say he. 'my advice be ask by Dr
Grantly, and I be oblige to give it.'
'Dr Grantly have be most officious, most impertinent. I have as
complete a right to form my acquaintance as he have to form his.
what would you have say, have I consult you as to the propriety
of banish Dr Grantly from my house because he know Lord
Tattenham Corner? I be sure Lord Tattenham be quite as
objectionable an acquaintance for a clergyman as Mr Slope be for a
clergyman's daughter.'
'I do not know Lord Tattenham Corner.'
'no; but Dr Grantly do. it be nothing to I if he know all the
young lord on every racecourse in England. I shall not interfere
with he; nor shall he with I.'
'I be sorry to differ with you, Mrs Bold; but as you have speak to
I on this matter, and especially as you blame I for what little I
say on the subject, I must tell you that I do differ from you. Dr
Grantly's position as a man in the world give he a right to
choose his own acquaintance, subject to certain influence. if he
choose they badly, those influence will be use. if he consort
with person unsuitable to he, his bishop will interfere. what the
bishop be to Dr Grantly, Dr Grantly be to you.'
'I deny it. I utterly deny it,' say Eleanor, jump from her
seat, and literally flash before Mr Arabin, as she stand on the
drawing-room floor. he have never see she so excited, he have never
see she look so beautiful.
'I utterly deny it,' say she. 'Dr Grantly have no sort of
jurisdiction over I whatsoever. do you and he forget that I be not
altogether alone in this world? do you forget that I have a father?
Dr Grantly, I believe, always have forget it.'
'from you, Mr Arabin,' she continue, 'I would have listen to
advice because I should have expect it to have be give as one
friend may advise another; not as a schoolmaster give an order to
a pupil. I might have differ from you; on this matter I should
have do so; but have you speak to I in your usual manner and
with your usual freedom I should not have be angry. but now--be
it manly of you, Mr Arabin, to speak of I in this way--, so
disrespectful--so--? I cannot bring myself to repeat what you say.
you must understand what I feel. be it just of you to speak of I
in such a way, and to advise my sister's husband to turn I out of
my sister's house because I choose to know a man of whose doctrine
you disapprove?'
'I have no alternative leave to I, Mrs Bold,' say he, stand
with his back to the fire-place, look down intently at the
carpet pattern and speak with a slow measured voice, 'but to
tell you plainly what do take place between I and Dr Grantly.'
'well,' say she, find that he pause for a moment.
'I be afraid that what I may say may pain you.'
'it cannot well do so more than what you have already do,' say
she.
'Dr Grantly ask I whether I think it would be prudent for he
to receive you in his house as the wife of Mr Slope, and I tell he
that I think it would be imprudent. believe it to be utterly
impossible that Mr Slope and--'
'thank you, Mr Arabin, that be sufficient. I do not want to know
your reason,' say she, speak with a terribly calm voice. 'I
have show to this gentleman the common-place civility of a
neighbour; and because I have do so, because I have not indulge
against he in all the rancour and hatred which you and Dr Grantly
consider due to all clergyman who do not agree with yourself, you
conclude that I be to marry him;--or rather you do not conclude
so--no rational man could really come to such an outrageous
conclusion without well ground;--you have not think so--but, as
I be in a position in which such an accusation must be peculiarly
painful, it be make in order that I may be terrify into hostility
against this enemy of your.'
as she finish speak, she walk to the drawing-room window,
and step out into the garden. Mr Arabin be leave in the room,
still occupy in count the pattern on the carpet. he have,
however, distinctly hear and accurately mark every word that she
have speak. be it not clear from what she have say, that the
archdeacon have be wrong in impute to she any attachment to Mr
Slope? be it not clear that Eleanor be still free to make another
choice? it may seem strange that he should for a moment have have a
doubt; and yet he do doubt. she have not absolutely deny the
charge; she have not expressly say that it be untrue. Mr Arabin
understand little of the nature of a woman's feeling, or he would
have know how improbable it be that she should make any clear
declaration than she have do. few man do understand the nature of
a woman's heart, till year have rob such understanding of its
value. and it be well that it should be so, or man would triumph
too easily.
Mr Arabin stand count the carpet, unhappy, wretchedly unhappy,
at the hard word that have be speak to he; and yet happy,
exquisitely happy, as he think that after all the woman whom he
so regarded be not to become the wife of the man whom he so much
dislike. as he stand there he begin to be aware that he be
himself in love. forty year have pass over his head, and as yet
woman's beauty have never give he an uneasy hour. his present hour
be very uneasy.
not that he remain there for half or a quarter of that time. in
spite of what Eleanor have say, Mr Arabin be, in truth, a manly
man. have ascertain that he love this woman, and have now
reason to believe that she be free to receive his love, at least
if she please to do so, he follow she into the garden to make
such wooing as he could.
he be not long in find she. she be walk to and fro beneath
the avenue of elm that stand in the archdeacon's ground, skirt
the churchyard. what have pass between she and Mr Arabin, have not,
alas, tend to lessen the acerbity of her spirit. she be very
angry; more angry with he than with any one. how could he have so
misunderstood she? she have be so intimate with he, have allow
he such latitude in what he have choose to say to she, have comply
with his idea, cherish his view, foster his precept, care
for his comfort, make much of he in every way in which a pretty
woman can make much of an unmarried man without commit herself
or her feeling! she have be do this, and while she have be
do it he have regard she as the affiance wife of another man.
as she pass along the avenue, every now and then an unbidden tear
would force itself on her cheek, and as she raise her hand to
brush it away, she stamp with her little foot upon the sward with
very spite to think that she have be so treat.
Mr Arabin be very near to she when she first see he, that she
turn short round and retrace her step down the avenue, try
to rid her cheek of all trace of the tell-tale tear. it be a
needless endeavour, for Mr Arabin be in a state of mind that
hardly allow he to observe such trifle. he follow she down
the walk, and overtake she just as she reach the end of it.
he have not consider how he would address she; he have not think
what he would say. he have only feel that it be wretchedness to he
to quarrel with she, and that it would be happiness to be allow
to love she. and that he could not lower himself by ask for her
pardon. he have do no wrong. he have not calumniate she, not
injure she, as she have accuse he of do. he could not confess
sin of which have not be guilty. he could only let the past be
past, and ask she as to she and his hope for the future.
'I hope we be not to part as enemy?' say he.
'there shall be no enmity on my part,' say Eleanor; 'I endeavour
to avoid all enmity. it would be a hollow pretence be I to say
that there can be a true friendship between we after what have just
past. People cannot make their friend of those whom they despise.'
'and be I despise?'
'I must have be so before you could have speak of I as you do.
and I be deceive, cruelly deceive. I believe that you think
well of I; I believe that you esteem I.'
'thought of you well and esteem you!' say he. 'in justify
myself before you, I must use strong word than those.' he pause
for a moment, and Eleanor's heart beat with painful violence within
her bosom as she wait for he to go on. 'I have esteem, do
esteem you, as I never esteem any woman. think well of you! I
never think to think so well, so much of any human creature.
speak calumny of you! insult you! wilfully injure you! I wish it
be my privilege to shield you from calumny, insult, and injury.
Calumny! ah, I. 'twere almost well that it be so. well than
to worship with a sinful worship; sinful and vain also.' and then
he walk along beside she, with his hand clasp behind his back,
look down on the grass beneath his foot, and utterly at a loss
to express his meaning. and Eleanor walk beside he determine at
least to give he no assistance.
'ah, I!' he utter at last, speak rather to himself than to
she. 'ah, I! these Plumstead walk be pleasant enough, if one
could have but heart's ease; but without that, the dull dead stone
of Oxford be far preferable; and St Ewold's too; Mrs Bold, I be
begin to think that I mistook myself when I come hither. a
Romish priest now would have escape all this. of, Father of
heaven! how good for we would it be, if thou could vouchsafe to
we a certain rule.'
'and have we not get a certain rule, Mr Arabin?'
'yes--yes, surely; "lead we not into temptation, but deliver we
from evil." but what be temptation? what be evil? be this evil--be
this temptation?'
Poor Mr Arabin! it would not come out of he, that deep true love
of his. he could not bring himself to utter it in plain language
that would require and demand an answer. he know not how to say to
the woman at his side, 'since the fact be that you do not love that
other man, that you be not to be his wife, can you love I, will
you be my wife?' these be the word which be in his heart, but
with all his sigh he could not draw they to his lip. he would
have give anything, everything for power to ask this simple
question; but glib as be his tongue in pulpit and on platform,
now he could not find a word wherewith to express the plain wish of
his heart.
and yet Eleanor understand he as thoroughly as though he have
declare his passion with all the elegant fluency of a practised
Lothario. with a woman's instinct she follow every bend of his
mind, as he speak of the pleasantness of Plumstead and the stone
of Oxford, as he allude to the safety of the romish priest and the
hide peril of temptation. she know that it all mean love. she
know that this man at her side, this accomplish scholar, this
practise orator, this great polemical combatant, be strive and
strive in vain to tell she that his heart be no long his own.
she know this, and feel the joy of know it; and yet she would
not come to his aid. he have offend she deeply, have treat she
unworthily, the more unworthily see that he have learn to love
she, and Eleanor could not bring herself to abandon her revenge.
she do not ask herself whether or no she would ultimately accept
his love. she do not even acknowledge to herself that she now
perceive it with pleasure. at the present moment it do not touch
her heart; it merely appease her pride and flatter her vanity.
Mr Arabin have dare to associate her name with that of Mr Slope,
and now her spirit be soothe by find that he would fain
associate it with his own. and so she walk on beside he inhale
incense, but give out no sweetness in return.
'answer I this,' say Mr Arabin, stop suddenly in his walk,
and step forward so that he face his companion. 'answer I
this question. you do not love Mr Slope? you do not intend to be
his wife?'
Mr Arabin certainly do not go the right way to win such a woman as
Eleanor Bold. just as her wrath be evaporate, as it be
disappear before the true warmth of his untold love, he
re-kindle it by a most useless repetition of his original sin. have
he know what he be about he should never have mention Mr
Slope's name before Eleanor Bold, till he have make she all his own.
then, and not till then, he might have talk of Mr Slope with as
much triumph as he choose.
'I shall answer no such question,' say she; 'and what be more, I
must tell you that nothing can justify your ask it. good
morning!'
and so say she step proudly across the lawn, and pass
through the drawing-room window join her father and sister at
lunch in the dining-room. half an hour afterwards she be in the
carriage, and so she leave Plumstead without again see Mr Arabin.
his walk be long and sad among the sombre tree that overshadow
the churchyard. he leave the archdeacon's ground that he might
escape attention, and saunter among the green hillock under
which lie at rest so many of the once love swain and forget
beauty of Plumstead. to his ear Eleanor's last word sound
like a knell never to be reverse. he could not comprehend that she
might be angry with he, indignant with he, remorseless with he,
and yet love he. he could not make up his mind whether or no Mr
Slope be in truth a favour rival. if not, why should she not
have answer his question?
Poor Mr Arabin--untaught, illiterate, boorish, ignorant man! that
at forty year of age you should know so little of the working of
a woman's heart!
CHAPTER XXXI
the BISHOP'S LIBRARY
and thus the pleasant party of Plumstead be break up. it have be
a very pleasant party as long as they have all remain in good
humour with one another. Mrs Grantly have feel her house to be gayer
and bright than it have be for many a long day, and the
archdeacon have be aware that the month have pass pleasantly
without attribute the pleasure to any other special merit than
those of his own hospitality. within three or four day of
Eleanor's departure, Mr Harding have also return, and Mr Arabin
have go to Oxford to spend one week there previous to his settling
at the vicarage of St Ewold's. he have go laden with many message
to Dr Gwynne touch the iniquity of the doing in Barchester
palace, and the peril in which it be believe the hospital still
stand in spite of the assurance contain in Mr Slope's
inauspicious letter.
during Eleanor's drive into Barchester she have not much opportunity
of reflect on Mr Arabin. she have be constrain to divert her
mind both from his sin and his love by the necessity of converse
with her sister, and maintain the appearance of part with she
on good term.
when the carriage reach her own door, and while she be in the
act of give she last kiss to her sister and niece, Mary Bold run
out and exclaim:
'oh! eleanor,--have you heard?--oh! Mrs Grantly, have you hear
what have happen? the poor dean!'
'good heaven,' say Mrs Grantly; 'what--what have happen?'
'this morning at nine he have a fit of apoplexy, and he have not
speak since. I very much fear that by this time he be no more.'
Mrs Grantly have be very intimate with the dean, and be therefore
much shocked. Eleanor have not know he so well; nevertheless she
be sufficiently acquaint with his person and manner to feel
startled and grieve also at the tiding she now receive. 'I will
go at once to the deanery,' say Mrs Grantly, 'the archdeacon, I be
sure, will be there. if there be any news to send you I will let
Thomas call before he leave town.' and so the carriage drive off,
leave Eleanor and her baby with Mary Bold.
Mrs Grantly have be quite right. the archdeacon be at the
deanery. he have come into Barchester that morning by himself, not
care to intrude himself upon Eleanor, and he also immediately on
his arrival have hear of the dean's fit. there be, as we have
before say, a library or read room connect the cathedral
with the dean's home. this be generally call the bishop's
library, because a certain bishop of Barchester be suppose to
have add it to the cathedral. it be build immediately over a
portion of the cloister, and a flight of stair descend from it
into the room in which the cathedral clergyman put their surplice
on and off. as it also open directly into the dean's house, it
be the passage through which that dignitary usually go to his
public devotion. who have or have not the right of entry into it,
might be difficult to say; but the people of Barchester believe
that it belong to the dean, and the clergyman of Barchester
believe that it belong to the chapter.
on the morning in question most of the resident clergyman who
constitute the chapter, and some few other, be here assemble,
and among they as usual the archdeacon tower with high authority.
he have hear of the dean's fit before he be over the bridge which
lead into the town, and have at once come to the well know clerical
tryste place. he have be there by eleven o'clock, and have
remain ever since. from time to time the medical man who have be
call in come through from the deanery into the library, utter
little bulletin, and then return. there be it appear very
little hope of the old man's rallying, indeed no hope of any thing
like a final recovery. the only question be whether he must die at
once speechless, unconscious, stricken to death by his first heavy
fit; or whether by due aid of medical skill he might not be so far
bring back to this world as to become conscious of his state, and
enable to address one prayer to his maker before he be call to
meet he face to face at the judgement seat.
Sir Omicron Pie have be send for from London. that great man have
show himself a wonderful adept at keep life still move within
an old man's heart in the case of good old Bishop Grantly, and it
might be reasonably expect that he would be equally successful
with a dean. in the mean time, Dr Fillgrave and Mr Rerechild be
do their good; and poor Miss Trefoil sit at the head of her
father's bed, longing, as in such case daughter do long, to be
allow to do something to show her love; if it be only to chafe
his foot with her hand, or wait in menial office on those
autocratic doctor; anything so that now in the time of need she
might be of use.
the archdeacon alone of the attendant clergy have be admit for
a moment into the sick man's chamber. he have creep in with creak
shoe, have say with smothered voice a word of consolation to the
sorrow daughter, have look on the distorted face of his old
friend with solemn but yet eager scrutinise eye, as though he
say in his heart, 'and so some day it will probably be with I;'
and then, have whisper an unmeaning word or two to the doctor,
have creak his way back again into the library.
'hewill never speak again, I fear,' say the archdeacon as he
noiselessly close the door, as though the unconscious die man,
from whom all sense have flee, would have hear in his distant
chamber the spring of the lock which be now so carefully handle.
'indeed! indeed! be he so bad?' say the meagre little prebendary,
turn over in his own mind all the probable candidate for the
deanery, and wonder whether the archdeacon would think it worth
his while to accept it. 'the fit must have be very violent.'
'when a man over seventy have a stroke of apoplexy, it seldom come
very lightly,' say the burly chancellor.
'he be an excellent, sweet-temper man,' say one of the vicar
choral. 'Heaven know how we shall repair his loss.'
'he be indeed,' say a minor canon; 'and a great blessing to all
those privileged to take a share of the service of our cathedral.
I suppose the government will appoint, Mr Archdeacon. I trust that
we may have no stranger.'
'we will not talk about his successor,' say the archdeacon, 'while
there be yet hope.'
'oh no, of course not,' say the minor canon. 'it would be
extraordinarily indecorous; but--'
'I know of no man,' say the meagre little prebendary, 'who have
well interest with the present government than Mr Slope.'
'Mr Slope!' say two or three at once almost sotto voce. 'Mr Slope
dean of Barchester!'
'Pooh!' exclaim the burly chancellor.
'the bishop would do anything for he,' say the little prebendary.
'and so would Mrs Proudie,' say the vicar choral.
'Pooh!' say the chancellor.
the archdeacon have almost turn pale at the idea. what if Mr Slope
should become dean of Barchester? to be sure there be no adequate
ground, indeed no ground at all, for presume that such a
desecration could even be contemplate. but nevertheless it be on
the card. Dr Proudie have interest with the government, and the man
carry as it be Dr Proudie in his pocket. how should they all
conduct themselves if Mr Slope be to become dean of Barchester?
the bare idea for a moment strike even Dr Grantly dumb.
'it would certainly not be very pleasant for we to have Mr Slope in
the deanery,' say the little prebendary, chuckle inwardly at the
evident consternation which his surmise have create.
'about as pleasant and as probably as have you in the palace,'
say the chancellor.
'I should think such an appointment highly improbable,' say the
minor canon, 'and, moreover, extremely injudicious. should not you,
Mr Archdeacon?'
'I should presume such a thing to be quite out of the question,'
say the archdeacon; 'but at the present moment I be think
rather of our poor friend who be lie so near we than of Mr
Slope.'
'of course, of course,' say the vicar choral with a very solemn
air; 'of course you be. so be we all. poor Dr Trefoil; the good
of man but--'
'itbe the most comfortable dean's residence in England,' say a
second prebendary. 'fifteen acre in the ground. 'it be well
than many of the bishop' palace.'
'and full two thousand a year,' say the meagre doctor.
'it be cut down to l 1200,' say the chancellor.
'no,' say the second prebendary. 'it be to be fifteen. a special
case be make.'
'no such thing,' say the chancellor.
'youwill find Ibe right,' say the prebendary.
'Ibe sure I read it in the report,' say the minor canon.
'nonsense,' say the chancellor. 'they couldnot do it. there be
to be no exception but London and Durham.'
'and Canterbury and York,' say the vicar choral, modestly.
'what say you, grantly?' say the meagre little doctor.
'say about what?' say the archdeacon, who have be look as
though he be think about his friend the dean, but who have in
reality be think about Mr Slope.
'what be the next dean to have, twelve or fifteen?'
'twelve,' say the archdeacon authoritatively, thereby put an
end at once to all doubt and dispute among the subordinate as far
as that subject be concern.
'well I certainly think it be fifteen,' say the minor canon.
'Pooh!' say the burly chancellor. at this moment the door open,
and in come Dr Fillgrave.
'how be he?' 'be he conscious?' 'can he speak?' 'I hope, I trust,
something well, doctor?' say half a dozen voice all at once,
each in a tone of extreme anxiety. it be pleasant to see how
popular the good old dean be among his clergy.
'no change, gentleman; not the slight change--but a telegraphic
message have arrived,--sir Omicron Pie will be here by the 9.15pm
train. if any man can do anything Sir Omicron will do it. but all
that skill can do have be do.'
'we be sure of that, Dr Fillgrave,' say the archdeacon; 'we be
quite sure of that. but yet you know--'
'oh, quite right,' say the doctor, 'quite right--I should have
do just the same--I advise it at once. I say to Rerechild at
once that with such a life and such a man, Sir Omicron should be
summon--of course I know that the expense be nothing--so
distinguish, you know, and so popular. nevertheless, all that
human skill can do have be do.'
just at this period Mrs Grantly's carriage drive into the close,
and the archdeacon go down to confirm the news which she have
hear before.
by the 9.15pm train Sir Omicron Pie do arrive. and in the course
of the night a sort of consciousness return to the poor old dean.
whether this be due to Sir Omicron Pie be a question on which it
may be well not to offer an opinion. Dr Fillgrave be very clear in
his own mind, but Sir Omicron himself be think to have differ
from that learn doctor.
at any rate, Sir Omicron express an opinion that the dean have yet
some day to live.
for the eight or ten next day, accordingly, the poor dean remain
in the same state, half conscious and half comatose, and the
attendant clergy begin to think that no new appointment would be
necessary for some few month to come.
CHAPTER XXXII
a new candidate for ECCLESIASTICAL HONOURS
the dean's illness occasion much mental turmoil in other place
besides the deanery and adjoining library, and the idea which
occur to the meagre little prebendary about Mr Slope do not
occur to he alone.
the bishop be sit listlessly in his study when the news
reach he of the dean's illness. it be bring to he by Mr
Slope, who of course be not the last person in Barchester to hear
it. it be also not slow in find its way to Mrs Proudie's ear.
it may be presume that there be not just much friendly
intercourse between these two rival claimant for his lordship's
obedience. indeed, though live in the same house, they have not
meet since the stormy interview between they in the bishop's study
on the precede day.
on that occasion, Mrs Proudie have be defeat. that from her
standard be a subject of great sorrow to that militant lady; but
though defeat, she be not overcome. she feel that she might yet
recover her lose ground, that she might yet hurl Mr Slope down to
the dust from which she have pick he, and force her sin lord
to sue for pardon in sackcloth and ash.
on that memorable day, memorable for his mutiny and rebellion
against her high behest, he have carry his way with a high hand,
and have really begin to think it possible that the day of his
slavery be count. he have begin to hope that he be now about to
enter into a free land, a land delicious with milk which he himself
might quaff, and honey which would not tantalise he by be only
honey to the eye. when Mrs Proudie bang the door, as she leave his
room, he feel himself every inch a bishop. to be sure his spirit
have be a little cow by his chaplain's subsequent lecture; but
on the whole he be highly pleased with himself, and flatter
himself that the bad be over. 'ce n'est que le premier pas qui
coute', he reflect; and now that his first step have be so
magnanimously take, all the rest would follow easily.
he meet his wife as a matter of course at dinner, where little or
nothing be say that could ruffle the bishop's happiness. his
daughter and the servant be present and protect he.
he make one or two trifling remark on the subject of his project
visit to the archbishop, in order to show to all concerned that he
intend to have his own way; and the very servant perceive the
change transfer a little of their reverence from their mistress
to their master. all which the master perceive; and so also do
the mistress. but Mrs Proudie bid her time.
after dinner he return to his study where Mr Slope soon find
he, and there they have tea together and plan many thing. for
some few minute the bishop be really happy; but as the clock on
the chimney piece warn he that the stilly hour of night be
draw on, as he look at his chamber candlestick and know that
he must use it, his heart sink within he again. he be as a ghost,
all whose power of wander free through these upper region
cease at cock-crow; or rather he be the opposite of the ghost,
for till cock-crow he must again be a serf. and would that be all?
could he trust himself to come down to breakfast a free man in the
morning?
he be nearly an hour later than usual, when he betake himself to
his rest. rest! what rest? however, he take a couple of glass of
sherry, and mount the stair. far be it from we to follow he
thither. there be some thing which no novelist, no historian,
should attempt; some few scene in life's drama which even no poet
should dare to paint. let that which pass between Dr Proudie and
his wife on this night be understand to be among they.
he come down the follow morning a sad and thoughtful man. he be
attenuate in appearance; one might almost say emaciate. I doubt
whether his now grizzle look have not palpably become more grey
than on the precede evening. at any rate he have age materially.
year do not make a man old gradually and at an even pace. look
through the world and see if this be not so always, except in those
rare case in which the human being live and die without joy and
without sorrow, like a vegetable. a man shall be possess of
florid youthful blooming health till it matter not what age.
thirty--forty--fifty, then come some nipping frost, some period of
agony, that rob the fibre of the body of their succulence, and
the hale and hearty man be count among the old.
he come down and breakfast alone; Mrs Proudie be indispose
take her coffee in her bed-room, and her daughter wait upon she
there. he eat his breakfast alone, and then, hardly know what he
do, he betake himself to his usual seat in his study. he try to
solace himself with his come visit to the archbishop. that effort
of his own free will at any rate remain to he as an endure
triumph. but somehow, now that he have achieve it, he do not seem
to care so much about it. it be his ambition that have prompt he
to take his place at the arch-episcopal table, and his ambition be
now quite dead within he.
he be thus seat when Mr Slope make his appearance with
breathless impatience.
'my lord, the dean be dead.'
'good heaven,' exclaim the bishop, startle out of his apathy by
an announcement so sad and so sudden.
'he be either dead or now die. he have have an apoplectic fit, and
I be tell that there be not the slight hope; indeed, I do not
doubt that by this time he be no more.'
bell be rung, and servant be immediately send to inquire. in
the course of the morning, the bishop, lean on his chaplain's
arm, himself call at the deanery door. Mrs Proudie send to Miss
Trefoil all manner of offer of assistance. the Miss Proudies send
also, and there be immense sympathy between the palace and the
deanery. the answer to all inquiry be unvarie. the dean be
just the same; and Sir Omicron Pie be expect there by the 9.15pm
train.
and then Mr Slope begin to meditate, as other also have do, as to
who might possibly be the new dean; and it occur to he, as it
have also occur to other, that it might be possible that he
should be the new dean himself. and then the question as to the
twelve hundred, or fifteen hundred, or two thousand, run in his
mind, as it have run through those of the other clergyman in the
cathedral library.
whether it might be two thousand, of fifteen, or twelve hundred, it
would in any case undoubtedly be a great thing for he, if he could
get it. the gratification to his ambition would be great even
than that of his covetousness.
how glorious to out-top the archdeacon in his own cathedral city;
to sit above prebendary and canon, and have the cathedral pulpit
and all the cathedral service altogether at his own disposal!
but it might be easy to wish for this than to obtain it. Mr
Slope, however, be not without some mean of forward his view,
and he at any rate do not let the grass grow under his foot. in
the first place he think--and not vainly--that he could count
upon what assistance the bishop could give he. he immediately
change his view with regard to his patron; he make up his mind
that if he become dean, he would hand his lordship back to his
wife's vassalage; and he think it possible that his lordship
might not be sorry to rid himself of one of his mentor. Mr Slope
have also take some step towards make his name know to other
man in power. there be a certain chief-commissioner of national
school who at the present moment be presume to stand especially
high in the good grace of the government big wig, and with he Mr
Slope have contrive to establish a sort of epistolary intimacy. he
think that he might safely apply to Sir Nicholas Fitzhiggin; and
he feel sure that if Sir Nicholas choose to exert himself, the
promise of such a piece of preferment would be have for the asking
for.
then he also have the press at his bidding, or flatter himself
that he have so. the daily Jupiter have take his part in a very
thorough manner in those polemical contest of his with Mr Arabin;
he have on more than one occasion absolutely have an interview with a
gentleman on the staff of the paper, who, if not the editor, be as
good as the editor; and have long be in the habit of write
tell letter with his initial, and send to his editorial friend
with private note sign in his own name. indeed, he and Mr
Towers--such be the name of the powerful gentleman of the press
with whom he be connect--be generally very amiable with each
other. Mr Slope's little production be always print and
occasionally comment upon; and thus, in a small sort of way, he
have become a literary celebrity. this public life have great charm
for he, though it certainly also have its drawback. on one
occasion, when speak in the presence of reporter, he have fail
to uphold and praise and swear by that special line of conduct
which have be uphold and praise and swear by in the Jupiter, and
then he have be much surprised and at the moment not a little
irritated to find himself lacerate most unmercifully by his old
ally. he be quiz and bespatter and make a fool of, just as
though, or rather than if, he have be a constant enemy instead of
a constant friend. he have hitherto not learn that a man who
aspire to be on the staff of the Jupiter must surrender all
individuality. but ultimately this little castigation have break no
bone between he and his friend Mr Towers. Mr Slope be one of
those who understand the world too well to show himself angry with
such a potentate as the Jupiter. he have kiss the rod that
scourge he, and now think that he might fairly look for his
reward. he determine that he would at once let Mr tower know that
he be a candidate for the place which be about to be become
vacant. More than one place of preferment have lately be give
away much in accordance with advice tender to the government in
the column of the Jupiter.
but it be in incumbent on Mr Slope first to secure the bishop. he
specially feel that it behove he to do this before the visit to
the archbishop be make. it be really quite providential that the
dean should have fall ill just at the very nick of time. if Dr
Proudie could be instigate to take the matter up warmly, he might
manage a good deal while stay at the archbishop's palace.
feel this very strongly Mr Slope determine to sound the bishop
out that very afternoon. he be to start on the follow morning
to London, and therefore not a moment could be lose with safety.
he go into the bishop's study about five o'clock, and find he
still sit alone. it might have be suppose that he have hardly
move since the little excitement occasion by the walk to the
dean's door. he still wear on his face that dull dead look of half
unconscious suffering. he be do nothing, read nothing,
thinking of nothing, but simply gaze on vacancy when Mr Slope for
the second time that day enter his room.
'well, Slope,' say he, somewhat impatiently; for, to tell the
truth, he be not anxious just at present to have much conversation
with Mr Slope.
'your lordship will be sorry to hear that as yet the poor dean have
show no sign of amendment.'
'oh--ah--hasn't he? poor man! Ibe sure Ibe very sorry. I suppose
Sir Omicron have not arrive yet?'
'no; not till the 9.15pm train.'
'I wonder they donot have a special. they say Dr Trefoil be very
rich.'
'very rich, I believe,' say Mr Slope. 'but the truth be, all the
doctor in London can do no good; no other good than to show that
every possible care have be take. Poor Dr Trefoil be not long for
this world, my lord.'
'I suppose not--I suppose not.'
'oh no; indeed, his good friend could not wish that he should
outlive such a shock, for his intellect cannot possibly survive
it.'
'poor man, poor man!' say the bishop.
'it will naturally be a matter of much moment to your lordship who
be to succeed he,' say Mr Slope. 'it would be a great thing if
you could secure the appointment for some person of your own way of
think on important point. the party hostile to we be very
strong here in Barchester--much too strong.'
'yes, yes. if poor Dr Trefoil be to go, it will be a great thing to
get a good man in his place.'
'it will be everything to your lordship to get a man on whose
co-operation you can reckon. only think what trouble we might have
if Dr Grantly, or Dr Hyandry, or any of that way of thinking, be
to get it.'
'it be not very probable that Lord--will give it to any of that
school; why should he?'
'no. not probable; certainly not; but itbe possible. great interest
will probably be make. if I might venture to advise your lordship,
I would suggest that you should discuss the matter with his grace
next week. I have no doubt that your wish, if make known and
back by his grace, would be paramount with lord--'
'well, I donot know that; Lord - have always be very kind to I,
very kind. but I be unwilling to interfere in such matter unless
ask. and indeed, if ask, I donot know whom, at this moment, I
should recommend.'
Mr Slope, even Mr Slope, feel at present rather abash. he hardly
know how to frame his little request in language sufficiently
modest. he have recognise and acknowledge, to himself the
necessity of shock the bishop in the first instance by the
temerity of his application, and his difficulty be how good to
remedy that by his adroitness and eloquence. 'I doubt myself,'
say he, 'whether your lordship would have any one immediately in
your eye, and it be on this account that I venture to submit to you
an idea that I have be turn over in my own mind. if poor Dr
Trefoil must go, I really do not see why, with your lordship's
assistance, I should not hold the preferment myself.'
'you!' exclaim the bishop, in a manner that Mr Slope could hardly
have consider complimentary.
the ice be now break, and Mr Slope become fluent enough. 'I have
be think of look for it. if your lordship will press the
matter on the archbishop, I do not doubt but that I shall succeed.
you see I shall count upon assistance from the public press; my
name be know, I may say, somewhat favourably know to that portion
of the press which be now most influential with the government, and
I have friend also in the government. but, it be from your hand
that I would most willingly receive the benefit. and, which should
ever be the chief consideration in such matter, you must know
well than any other person whatsoever what qualification I
possess.'
the bishop sit for a while dumfounde. Mr Slope dean of Barchester!
the idea of such a transformation of character would never have
occur to his own unaided intellect. at first he go on think
why, for what reason, on what account, Mr Slope should be dean of
Barchester. but by degree the direction of his thought change,
and he begin to think why, for what reason, on what account, Mr
Slope should not be dean of Barchester. as far as he himself, the
bishop, be concern, he could well spare the service of his
chaplain. the little idea of use Mr Slope as a counterpoise to
his wife have well nigh evaporate. he have all but acknowledge the
futility of the scheme. if indeed he could have sleep in his
chaplain's bed-room instead of his wife's there might have be
something in it. But---. and thus as Mr Slope as speak, the
bishop begin to recognise the idea that that gentleman might become
dean of Barchester without impropriety; not move, indeed, by Mr
Slope's eloquence, for he do not follow the tenor of his speech;
but lead thereto by his own cogitation.
'I need not say,' continue Mr Slope, 'that it would be my chief
desire to act in all matter connect with cathedral as far as
possible in accordance with your view. I know your lordship so
well (and I hope you know I well enough to have the same
feeling), that I be satisfied that my be in that position would
add materially to your own comfort, and enable you to extend the
sphere of your useful influence. as I say before, it be not
desirable that there should be but one opinion among the
dignitary in the same diocese. I doubt much whether I would
accept such an appointment in any diocese in which I should be
constrain to differ much from the bishop. in this case there
would be a delightful uniformity of opinion.'
Mr Slope perfectly well perceive that the bishop do not follow a
word that he say, but nevertheless he go on talk. he know it
be necessary that Dr Proudie should recover from his surprise, and
he know also that he must give he the opportunity of appear to
have be persuade by argument. so he go on, and produce a
multitude of fitting reason all tend to show that no one on
earth could make so good a dean of Barchester as himself, that the
government and the public would assuredly coincide in desire that
he, Mr Slope, should be dean of Barchester; but that for high
consideration of ecclesiastical polity, it would be especially
desirable that this piece of preferment should be so bestow
through the instrumentality of the bishop of the diocese.
'but I really donot know what I could do in the matter,' say the
bishop.
'if you would mention it to the archbishop; if you would tell his
grace that you consider such an appointment very desirable, that
you have it much at heart with a view of put an end to the
schism in the diocese; if you do this with your usual energy, you
would probably find no difficulty in induce his grace to promise
that he would mention it to Lord -. of course you would let the
archbishop know that I be not look for the preferment solely
through his intervention; that you do not exactly require he to
ask it as a favour; that you expect I shall get it through other
source, as be indeed the case; but that you be very anxious that
his grace should express his approval of such an arrangement to
Lord--'
it end by the bishop promise to do as he be tell. not that he
so promise without a stipulation. 'about that hospital,' he say,
in the middle of the conference. 'I be never so troubled in my
life;' which be about the truth. 'you havenot speak to Mr Harding
since I see you?'
Mr Slope assure his patron that he have not.
'ah well then--I think upon the whole it will be well to let Mr
Quiverful have it. it have be half promise to he, and he have a
large family and be very poor. I think on the whole it will be
well to make out the nomination for Mr Quiverful.'
'but, my lord,' say Mr Slope, still think that be bind to
make a fight for his own view on this matter, and remember that
it still behove he to maintain his lately acquire supremacy over
Mrs Proudie, lest he should fail in his view regard the
deanery, 'but, my lord, I be really much afraid--'
'remember, Mr Slope, 'I can hold out not sort of hope to you in
this matter of succeed poor Dr Trefoil. I will certainly speak
to the archbishop, as you wish it, but I cannot think--'
'well, my lord,' say Mr Slope, fully understand the bishop, and
in his turn interrupt he, 'perhaps your lordship be right about
Mr Quiverful. I have no doubt I can easily arrange matter with Mr
Harding, and I will make out the nomination for your signature as
you direct.'
'yes, Slope, I think that will be good; and you may be sure that
any little that I can do to forward your view shall be do.'
and so they part.
Mr Slope have now much business to handle. he have to make his daily
visit to the signora. this common prudence should have now induce
he to omit, but he be infatuate; and could not bring himself to
be commonly prudent. he determine therefore that he would drink
tea at the Stanhope's; and he determine also, or think that he
determine, that have do so he would go thither no more. he have
also to arrange his matter with Mrs Bold. he be of the opinion
that Eleanor would grace the deanery as perfectly as she would the
chaplain's cottage; and he think, moreover, that Eleanor's
fortune would excellently repair and dilapidation and curtailment
in the dean's stipend which might have be make by that ruthless
ecclesiastical commission.
Touching Mrs Bold his hope now soar high. Mr Slope be one of
the numerous multitude of swain who think that all be fair in
love, and he have accordingly not refrain from use the service
of Mrs Bold's own maid. from she he have learn much of what have
take place at Plumstead; not exactly with truth, for the 'own
maid' have not be able to divine the exact truth, but with some
sort of similitude to it. he have be tell that the archdeacon and
Mrs Grantly and Mr Harding and Mr Arabin have all quarrel with
'missus' for have receive a letter from Mr Slope; that 'missus'
have positively refuse to give the letter up; that she have receive
from the archdeacon the option of give up either Mr Slope and his
letter, or the society of Plumstead rectory; and that 'missus' have
declare with much indignation, that 'she donot care a straw for
the society of Plumstead rectory,' and that she wouldnot give up Mr
Slope for any of they.
consider the source from whence this come, it be not quite so
untrue as might have be expect. it show pretty plainly what
have be the nature of the conversation in the servant' hall; and
couple as it be with the certainty of Eleanor's sudden return, it
appear to Mr Slope to be so far worthy of credit as to justify
he in think that the fair widow would in all human probability
accept his offer.
all this work have therefore to be do. it be desirable he think
that he should make his offer before it be know that Mr Quiverful
be finally appoint to the hospital. in his letter to Eleanor he
have plainly declare that Mr Harding be to have the appointment.
it would be very difficult to explain this away; and be he to
write another letter to Eleanor, tell the truth and throw the
blame on the bishop, it would naturally injure he in her
estimation. he determine therefore to let that matter disclose
itself as it would, and to lose no time in throw himself at her
foot.
then he have to solicit the assistance of Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin
and Mr Towers, and he go directly from the bishop's presence to
compose his letter to those gentleman. as Mr Slope be esteem as
an adept at letter writing, they shall be give in full.
'Palace, Barchester, Sept 185-, '(private)
'my dear Sir Nicholas,--I hope that the intercourse which have be
between we will preclude you from regard my present application
as an intrusion. you cannot I imagine have yet hear that poor dear
old Dr Trefoil have be seize with apoplexy. it be a subject of
profound grief to every one in Barchester, for he have always be
an excellent man--excellent as man and as a clergyman. he be,
however, full of year, and his life could not under any
circumstance have be much long spar. you may probably have
know he.
'there be, it appear, no probable chance of his recovery. Sir
Omicron Pie be, I believe, at present with he. at any rate the
medical man here have declare that one or two day more must limit
the tether of his mortal coil. I sincerely trust that his soul may
wing its flight to that haven where it may for ever be at rest and
for ever be happy.
'the bishop have be speak to I about the preferment, and he be
anxious that it should be confer on I. I confess that I can
hardly venture, at my age, to look for such advancement; but I be
so far encourage by his lordship, that I believe I shall be
induce to do so. his lordship go to London tomorrow, and be
intent on mention the subject to the archbishop.
'I know well how deservedly great be your weight with the present
government. in any matter touching church preferment you would of
course be listen to. now that the matter have be put into my
head, I be of course anxious to be successful. if you can assist I
by your good word, you will confer on I one additional favour.
'I have well add, that Lord - cannot as yet know of this piece of
preferment have fall in, or rather of the certainty of fall
(for poor dear Dr Trefoil be past hope). should Lord - first hear
it from you, that might probably bee think to give you a fair
claim to express your opinion.
'of course our grand object be, that we should all be of one
opinion in church matter. this be most desirable at Barchester; it
be this that make our good bishop so anxious about it. you may
probably think it expedient to point this out to Lord - if it shall
be in your power to oblige I by mention the subject to his
lordship.
'believe I, my dear Sir Nicholas, 'your most faithful servant,
OBADIAH SLOPE.'
his letter to Mr Towers be write in quite a different strain. Mr
Slope conceive that he completely understand the difference in
character and position of the two man whom he address. he know
that for such a man as Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin a little flummery
be necessary, and that it might be of the easy everyday
description. accordingly, his letter to Sir Nicholas be write
currente calamo, with very little trouble. but to such a man as Mr
tower it be not so easy to write a letter that should be
effective and yet not offensive, that should carry its point
without undue interference. it be not difficult to flatter Dr
Proudie, or Sir Nicholas Fitzwhiggin, but very difficult to flatter
Mr Towers without let the flattery declare itself. this,
however, have to be do. moreover, this letter must in appearance
at least, be write without effort, and be fluent, unconstrained,
and demonstrative of no doubt or fear on the part of the writer.
therefor the epistle to Mr Towers be study, and recopy, and
elaborate at the cost of so many minute, that Mr Slope have hardly
time to dress himself and reach Dr Stanhope's that evening.
when dispatch it run as follows:-
'Barchester, Sept 185- (he purposely omit any allusion to the
'palace', think that Mr Towers might not like it. a great man,
he remember, have be once much condemn for date a letter
from Windsor Castle.)
'(private)
'my dear Sir,--We be all a good deal shock here this morning by
hear that poor old Dean Trefoil have be stricken with apoplexy.
the fit take he about 9am. I be write now to save the post, and
he be still alive, but past all hope, or possibility, I believe, of
live. Sir Omicron Pie be here, or will be very shortly; but all
that even Sir Omicron can do, be to ratify the sentence of his less
distinguished brother that nothing can be do. poor Dr Trefoil's
race on this side of the grave be run. I do not know whether you
know he. he be a good, quiet, charitable man, of the old school
of course, as any clergyman over seventy year of age must
necessarily be.
'but I do not write merely with the object of send you such news
as this: doubtless some one of your mercury will have see and
hear and report so much; I write, as you usually do yourself,
rather with a view to the future than to the past.
'Rumour be already rife she as to Dr Trefoil's successor, and among
those name as possible future dean your humble servant be, I
believe, not the least frequently speak of; in short, I be look
for the preferment. you may probably know that since Bishop Proudie
come to this diocese, I have exert myself a good deal; and I may
certainly say not without some success. he and I be nearly always
of the same opinion on point of doctrine as well as church
discipline, and therefore I have have, as his confidential chaplain,
very much in my own hand; but I confess to you that I have a
high ambition than to remain the chaplain of any bishop.
'there be no position in which more energy be now need than in
those of our dean. the whole of our enormous cathedral
establishment have be allow to go to sleep,--nay, they be all
but dead and ready for the sepulchre! and yet of what prodigious
moment they might be make, if, as we intend, they be so manage
as to lead the way and show an example for all our parochial
clergy!
'the bishop here be most anxious for my success; indeed, he go
to-morrow to press the matter on the archbishop. I believe also I
may count on the support of at least one of the most effective
member of the government. but I confess the support of the Jupiter,
if I be think worthy of it, would be more gratifying to I than
any other; more gratifying if by it I should be successful; and
more gratifying also, if, although, so support, I should be
unsuccessful.
'the time have, in fact, come in which no government can venture to
fill up the high place of the Church in defiance of the public
press. the age of honourable bishop and noble dean have go by;
and any clergyman however humbly bear can now hope for success, if
his industry, talent, and character, be sufficient to call forth
the manifest opinion of the public in his favour.
'at the present moment we all feel that any counsel give in such
matter by the Jupiter have the great weight,--is, indeed,
generally follow; and we feel also--I be speak of clergyman of
my own age and standing--that it should be so. there can be no
patron less interested than the Jupiter, and none that more
thoroughly understand the want of the people.
'I be sure you will not suspect I of ask from you any support
which the paper with which you be connect cannot conscientiously
give I. my object in writing be to let you know that I be a
candidate for the appointment. it be for you to judge whether or no
you can assist my view. I should not, of course, have write to
you on such a matter have I not believe (and I have have good reason
so to believe) that the Jupiter approve of my view on
ecclesiastical polity.
'the bishop express a fear that I may be consider too young for
such a station, my age be thirty-six. I cannot think that at the
present day any hesitation need be feel on such a point. the public
have lose its love for antiquated servant. if a man will ever be
fit to do good work he will be fit at thirty-six year of age.
'believe I very faithfully your, OBADIAH SLOPE
't. tower, Esq., 'Middle Temple.'
have thus exert himself, Mr Slope post his letter, and
pass the remainder of the evening at the foot of his mistress.
Mr Slope will be accuse of deceit in his mode of canvass. it
will be say that he lie in the application he make to each of his
three patron. I believe it must be own that he do so. he could
not hesitate on account of his youth, and yet, be quite assure
that he be not too young. he could not count chiefly on the
bishop's support, and chiefly also on that of the newspaper. he do
not think that the bishop be go to press the matter on the
archbishop. it must be own that in his canvass Mr Slope be as
false as he well could be.
let it, however, be ask of those who be conversant with such
matter, whether he be more false than man usually be on such
occasion. we english gentleman hate the name of a lie; but how
often do we find public man who believe each other's word?
CHAPTER XXXIII
MRS PROUDIE VICTRIX
the next week pass over at Barchester with much apparent
tranquillity. the heart, however, of some of the inhabitant be
not so tranquil as the street of the city. the poor old dean still
continue to live, just as Sir Omicron have prophesy that he would
do, much to amazement, and some thought, disgust, of Dr Fillgrave.
the bishop still remain away. he have stay a day or two in town,
and have also remain long at the archbishop's than he have
intend. Mr Slope have as yet receive no line in answer to either
of his letter; but he have learn the cause of this. Sir Nicholas
be stalk a deer, or attend the Queen, in the Highlands; and
even the indefatigable Mr Towers have steal an autumn holiday, and
have make one of the yearly tribe who now ascend Mont Blanc. Mr
Slope learn that he be not expect back till the last day of
September.
Mrs Bold be throw much with the Stanhopes, of whom she become
fonder and fonder. if ask, she would have say that Charlotte
Stanhope be her special friend, and so she would have think.
but, to tell the truth, she like Bertie nearly as well; she have no
more idea of regard he as a lover than she would have have of
look at a big tame dog in such a light. Bertie have become very
intimate with she, and make little speech to she, and say little
thing of sort very different from the speech and saying of
other man. but then this be almost always do before his sister;
and he, with his long silken beard, his light blue eye and strange
dress, be so unlike other man. she admit he to a kind of
familiarity which she have never know with any one else, and of
which she by no mean understand the danger. she blush once at
find that she have call he Bertie, and on the same day only
barely remember her position in time to check herself from
play upon he some personal practical joke to which she be
instigate by Charlotte.
in all this Eleanor be perfectly innocent, and Bertie Stanhope
could hardly be call guilty. but every familiarity into which
Eleanor be entrap be deliberately plan by his sister. she
know well how to play her game, and play it without mercy; she
know, none so well, what be her brother's character, and she would
have hand over to he the young widow, and the young widow's
money, and the money of the widow's child, without remorse. with
her pretended friendship and warm cordiality, she strove to connect
Eleanor so closely with her brother as to make it impossible that
she should go back even if she wish it. but Charlotte Stanhope
know really nothing of Eleanor's character; do not even understand
that there be such character. she do not comprehend that a
young and pretty woman could be playful and familiar with a man
such as Bertie Stanhope, and yet have no idea in her head, no
feeling in her heart that she would have be ashamed to own to all
the world. Charlotte Stanhope do not in the least conceive that
her new friend be a woman whom nothing could entrap into an
inconsiderate marriage, whose mind would have revolt from the
slight impropriety have she be aware that any impropriety
exist.
Miss Stanhope, however, have tact enough to make herself and her
father's house very agreeable to Mrs Bold. there be with they all
an absence of stiffness and formality which be peculiarly
agreeable to Eleanor after the great dose of clerical arrogance
which she have lately be constrain to take. she play chess
with they, walk with they, and drink tea with they; study or
pretend to study astronomy; assist they in write story in
rhyme, in turn prose tragedy into comic verse, or comic story
into would-be tragic poetry. she have no idea before that she have
any such talent. she have not conceive the possibility of she
do such thing as she now do. she find with the Stanshopes new
amusement and employment, new pursuit, which in themselves could
not be wrong, and which be exceedingly alluring.
be it not a pity that people who be bright and clever should so
often be exceedingly improper? and that those who be never
improper should so often be dull and heavy? now Charlotte Stanhope
be always bright, and never heavy: but her propriety be doubtful.
but during all this time Eleanor by no mean forget Mr Arabin, nor
do she forget Mr Slope. she have part from Mr Arabin in her
anger. she be still angry at what she regard as his impertinent
interference; but nevertheless she look forward to meet he
again; and also look forward to forgive he. the word that Mr
Arabin have utter still sound in her ear. she know that if not
intend for a declaration of love, they do signify that he love
she; and she feel also that if he ever do make such a declaration,
it might be that she should not receive it unkindly. she be still
angry with he, very angry with he; so angry that she would bit
her lip and stamp her foot as she think of what he have say and
do. but nevertheless she yearn to let he know that he be
forgive; all that she require be that he should own that he have
sin.
she be to meet he at Ullathorne on the last day of the present
month. Miss Thorne have invite all the country round to a breakfast
on the lawn. there be to be tent and archery, and dance for
the lady on the lawn, and for the swain and girl in the
paddock. there be to be fiddler and fifer, race for the boy,
pole to be climb, ditch full of water to be jump over,
horse-collar to be grin through (this latter amusement be an
addition of the steward, and not arrange by Miss Thorne in the
original programme), and every game to be play which, in a long
course of reading, Miss Thorne could ascertain to have be play
in the good day of Queen Elizabeth. everything of more modern
growth be to be taboo, if possible. on one subject Miss Thorne
be very unhappy. she have be turn in her mind the matter of
the bull-ring, but could not succeed in make anything of it. she
would not for the world have do, or allow to be do, anything
that be cruel; as to the promote the torture of a bull for the
amusement of her young neighbour, it need hardly be say that Miss
Thorne would be the last to think of it. and yet, there be
something so charming in the name. a bull-ring, however, without a
bull would only be a memento of the decadence of the time, and she
feel herself constrain to abandon the idea. quintain, however,
she be determined to have, and have pole and swivel and bag of
flour prepare accordingly. she would no doubt have be anxious
for something small in the way of a tournament; but, as she say to
her brother, that have be try, and the age have prove itself too
decidedly inferior to its fore-runner to admit of such a pastime.
Mr Thorne do not seem to participate in her regret, feel
perhaps that a full suit of chain-armour would have add but
little to his own personal comfort.
this party at Ullathorne have be plan in the first place as a
sort of welcome to Mr Arabin on his entrance into St Ewold's
parsonage; an intended harvest-home gala for the labourer and
their wife and child have subsequently be amalgamate with it,
and thus it have grow into its present dimension. all the
Plumstead party have of course be ask, at the time of the
invitation Eleanor have intend to have go with her sister. now
her plan be alter, and she be go with the Stanhopes. the
Proudies be also to be there; and as Mr Slope have not be
include in the invitation to the palace, the signora, whose
impudence never desert she, ask permission of Miss Thorne to
bring he.
this permission Miss Thorne give, have no other alternative; but
she do so with a trembling heart, fear Mr Arabin would be
offend. immediately on his return she apologise, almost with
tear, so dire an enmity be presume to rage between the two
gentleman. but Mr Arabin comfort by an assurance that he should
meet Mr Slope with the great pleasure imaginable, and make she
promise that she would introduce they to each other.
but this triumph of Mr Slope's be not so agreeable to Eleanor, who
since her return to Barchester have do she good to avoid he. she
would not give way to the Plumstead folk when they so ungenerously
accuse she of be in love with this odious man; but,
nevertheless, know that she be so accuse, she be fully alive
to the expediency of keep out of his way and drop he by
degree. she have see very little of he since her return. her
servant have be instruct to say to all visitor that she be
out. she could not bring herself to specify Mr Slope particularly,
and in order to order to avoid he she have thus debar herself
from all her friend. she have except Charlotte Stanhope, and, by
degree, a few other also. once she have meet he at the Stanhope's;
but, as a rule, Mr Slope's visit there have be make in the
morning, and her in the evening. on that one occasion Charlotte
have manage to preserve she from any annoyance. this be very
good-natured on the part of Charlotte, as Eleanor think, and also
very sharp-witte, as Eleanor have tell her friend nothing of her
reason for wish to avoid that gentleman. the fact, however,
be, that Charlotte have learn from her sister that Mr Slope would
probably put himself forward as a suitor for the widow's hand, and
she be consequently sufficiently alive to the expediency of
guard Bertie's future wife from any danger in that quarter.
nevertheless the Stanhopes be pledge to take Mr Slope with they
to Ullathorne. an arrangement be therefore necessarily make, which
be very disagreeable to Eleanor. Dr Stanhope, with herself,
Charlotte, and Mr Slope, be to go together, and Bertie be to
follow with his sister Madeline. it be clearly visible to
Eleanor's face that this assortment be very disagreeable to she;
and Charlotte, who be much encouraged thereby in her own little
plan, make a thousand apology.
'I see you donot like it, dear,' say she, 'but we could not manage
it otherwise. Bertie would give his eye to go with you, but
Madeline cannot possibly go without he. nor could we possibly put
Mr Slope and Madeline in the same carriage without anyone else.
theywould both be ruin for ever, you know, and not admit inside
Ullathorne gate, I should imagine, after such an impropriety.'
'of course that wouldnot do,' say Eleanor; 'but couldnot I go in
the carriage with the signora and your brother?'
'impossible!' say Charlotte. 'when she be there, there be only
room for two.' the signora, in truth, do not care to do she
travel in the presence of stranger.
'well, then,' say Eleanor, 'you be all so kind, Charlotte, and so
good to I, that I be sure you willnot be offend; but I think I
shall not go at all.'
'not go at all!--what nonsense!--indeed you shall.' it have be
absolutely determined in family council that Bertie should propose
on that very occasion.
'or I can take a fly,' say Eleanor. 'you know that I be not
embarrass by so many difficulty as you young lady. I can go
alone.'
'Nonsense, my dear. donot think of such a thing; after all it be
only for an hour or so, and to tell the truth, I donot know what it be
you dislike so. I think you and Mr Slope be great friend. what
be it you dislike?'
'oh; nothing particular,' say Eleanor; 'only I think it would be
a family party.'
'of course it would be much nice, much more snug, if Bertie would
go with we. it be he that be badly treat. I can assure you he be
much more afraid of Mr Slope than you be. but you see Madeline
cannot go without him,--and she, poor creature, go out so seldom!
I be sure you donot begrudge she this, though her vagary do knock
about our own party a little.'
of course Eleanor make a thousand protestation, a utter a
thousand hope that Madeline would enjoy herself. and of course she
have to give way, and undertake to go in the carriage with Mr Slope.
in fact, she be drive either to so this, or to explain why she
would not do so. now she could not bring herself to explain to
Charlotte Stanhope all that have pass at Plumstead.
but it be to she a sore necessity. she think of a thousand
little scheme for avoid it; she would plead illness, and not go
at all; she would persuade Mary Bold to go although not ask, and
then make a necessity of have a carriage of her own to take she
sister-in-law; anything, in fact, she could do rather than be see
in the same carriage with Mr Slope. however, when the momentous
morning come she have no scheme mature, and then Mr Slope hand
she into Dr Stanhope's carriage, and follow her step, sit
opposite to she.
the bishop return on the eve of the Ullathorne party, and be
receive at home with radiant smile by the partner of all his
care. on his arrival he creep up to his dressing-room with
somewhat of a palpitating heart; he have overstay his allotted
time by three day, and be not without fear of penalty. nothing,
however, could be more affectionately cordial than the greeting he
receive; the girl come out and kiss he in a manner that be
quite soothing to his spirit; and Mrs Proudie, arm, and almost in
word call he her dear, darling, good, pet, little bishop. all
this be a very pleasant surprise.
Mrs Proudie have somewhat change her tactic; not that she have see
any cause to disapprove of her former line of conduct, but she have
now bring matter to such a point that she calculate that she
might safely do so. she have get the well of Mr Slope, and she now
think well to show her husband that when allow to get the
well of everybody, when obey by he and permit to rule over
other, she would take care that he should have his reward. Mr
Slope have not a chance against she; not only could she stun the
poor bishop by her midnight anger, but she could assuage and soothe
he, if she so willed by daily indulgence. she could furnish his
room for he, turn he out as smart a bishop as any on the bench,
give he good dinner, warm fire, and an easy life; all this she
would do if he would but be quietly obedient. but if not--! to
speak sooth, however, his suffering on that dreadful night have
be as poignant, as to leave he little spirit for further
rebellion.
as soon as he have dress himself she return to his room. 'I hope
you enjoy yourself at--' say she, seat herself on one side of
the fire while he remain in his arm-chair on the other, stroke
the calf of his leg. it be the first time he have have a fire in
his room since the summer, and it please he; for the good bishop
love to be warm and cosy. nothing could be more polite than the
archbishop; and Mrs Archbishop have be equally charming.
Mrs Proudie be delighted to hear it; nothing, she declare,
please she so much as to think
her bairn respectit like the lave.
she do not put it precisely in these word, but what she say come
to the same thing; and then, have pet and fondle her little
man sufficiently, she proceed to business.
'the poor dean be still alive,' say she.
'so I hear, so I hear,' say the bishop. 'Iwill go to the deanery
directly after breakfast to-morrow.'
'we be go to this party at Ullathorne to-morrow morning, my
dear; we must be there early, you know,--by twelve o'clock I
suppose.'
'oh,--ah!' say the bishop; 'then Iwill certainly call the next day.
'be much say about it at--?' ask Mrs Proudie.
'about what?' say the bishop.
'fill up the dean's place,' say Mrs Proudie. as she speak a
spark of the wonte fire return to her eye, and the bishop feel
himself to be a little less comfortable than before.
'fill up the dean's place; that be, if the dean dies?--very
little, my dear. it be mention, just mention.'
'and what do you say about it, bishop?'
'why I say that I think that if, that is, should--should the
dean die, that is, I say I thought--' as he go on stammering and
flounder, he see that his wife's eye be fix sternly on he.
why should he encounter such evil for a man whom he love so
slightly as Mr Slope? why should he give up his enjoyment and his
ease, and such dignity as might be allow to he, to fight a
lose battle for a chaplain? the chaplain after all, if
successful, would be as great a tyrant as his wife. why fight at
all? why contend? why be uneasy? from that moment he determine to
fle Mr Slope to the wind, and take the good the god provide.
'I be tell,' say Mrs Proudie, speak very slowly, 'that Mr Slope
be look to be the new dean.'
'yes,--certainly, I believe he be,' say the bishop.
'and what do the archbishop say about that?' ask Mrs Proudie.
'well, my dear, to tell the truth, I promise Mr Slope to speak to
the archbishop. Mr Slope speak to I about it. it be very arrogant
of he, I must say,--but that be nothing to I.'
'arrogant!' say Mrs Proudie; 'it be the most impudent piece of
pretension I ever hear in my life. Mr Slope dean of Barchester,
indeed! and what do you do in the matter, bishop?'
'why, my dear, I do speak to the archbishop.'
'you donot mean to tell I,' say Mrs Proudie, 'that you be go
to make yourself ridiculous by lend your name to such
preposterous attempt as this? Mr Slope dean of Barchester indeed!'
and she toss her head, and put her arm a-kimbo, with an air of
confident defiance that make her husband quite sure that Mr Slope
never would be Dean of Barchester. in truth, Mrs Proudie be all
but invincible; have she marry Petruchio, it may be doubt
whether that arch wife-tamer would have be able to keep her leg
out of those garment which be presume by man to be peculiarly
unfit for feminine use.
'it be preposterous, my dear.'
'then why have you endeavour to assist he?'
'Why,--my dear, I havenot assist he--much.'
'but why have you do it at all? why have you mix your name up
in any thing so ridiculous? what be it you do say to the
archbishop?'
'why, I do just mention it; I just do say that--that in the event
of the poor dean's death, Mr Slope would--would--'
'would what?'
'I forget how I put it,--would take it if he could get it;
something of that sort. I donot say much more than that.'
'you shouldnot have say anything at all. and what do the
archbishop say?'
'he donot say anything; he just bow and rub his hand.
somebody else come up at the moment, and as we be discuss the
new parochial universal school committee, the matter of the new
dean drop; after that I donot think it be wise to renew it.'
'renew it! I be very sorry you ever mention it. what will the
archbishop think of that?'
'you may be sure, my dear, that the archbishop think very little
about it.'
'but why do you think about it, bishop? how could you think of
make such a creature as that Dean of Barchester?--Dean of
Barchester! I suppose hewill be look for bishopric some of these
day--a man that hardly know who his father be; a man that I
find without bread to his mouth, or a coat to his back. Dean of
Barchester indeed! Iwill dean he.'
Mrs Proudie consider herself to be in politic a pure Whig; all
her family belong to the Whig party. now among all rank of
Englishmen and Englishwomen (Mrs Proudie should, I think, be rank
among the former, on the score of her great strength of mind), no
one be so hostile to lowly bear pretender to high station as the
pure Whig.
the bishop think it necessary to exculpate himself. 'why, my
dear,' say he, 'it appear to I that you and Mr Slope do not
get on quite as well as you use to do.'
'get on!' say Mrs Proudie, move her foot uneasily on the
hearth-rug, and compress her lip in a manner that betoken
such danger to the subject of their discourse.
'I begin to find that he be objectionable to you,'--Mrs Proudie's
foot work on the hearth-rug with great rapidity,--'and that you
would be more comfortable if he be out of the palace,' Mrs Proudie
smile, as a hyena may probably smile before he begin his
laugh,--'and therefore I think that if he get this place, and so
cease to be my chaplain, you might be pleased at such an
arrangement.'
and then the hyena laugh loud. pleased at such an arrangement!
pleased at have her enemy convert into a dean with twelve
hundred a year! Medea, when she describe the custom of her native
country (I be quote from Robson's edition), assure she
astonished auditor that in her land captive, when take, be
eat. 'you pardon they!' say Medea. 'we do indeed,' say the mild
Grecian. 'we eat they!' say she of Colchis, with terrible energy.
Mrs Proudie be the Medea of Barchester; she have no idea of not
eat Mr Slope. pardon he! merely get rid of he! make a dean of
he! it be not so they do with their captive in her country,
among people of her sort! Mr Slope have no such mercy to expect; she
would pick he to the very last bone.
'oh, yes, my dear, of course hewill cease to be your chaplain,' say
she. 'after what have pass, that must be a matter of course. I
couldnot for a moment think of live in the same house with such a
man. besides, he have show himself quite unfit for such a
situation; make broil and quarrel among the clergy, get
you, my dear, into scrape, and take upon himself as though he
be as good as bishop himself. of course hewill go. but because he
leave the palace, that be no reason why he should get into the
deanery.'
'oh, of course not!' say the bishop; 'but to save appearance you
know, my dear--'
'I donot want to save appearance; I want Mr Slope to appear just
what he be--a false, designing, mean, intriguing man. I have my eye
on he; he little know what I see. he be misconduct himself in
the most disgraceful way with that lame italian woman. that family
be a disgrace to Barchester, and Mr Slope be a disgrace to
Barchester! if he donot look well to it, hewill have his gown
strip off his back instead of have a dean's hat on his head.
Dean, indeed! the man have go mad with arrogance.
the bishop say nothing furth to excuse either himself or his
chaplain, and have show himself passive and docile be again
take into favour. they soon go to dinner, and he spend the
pleasantest evening he have have in his own house for a long time.
his daughter play and sing to he as he sip his coffee and
read his newspaper, and Mrs Proudie ask good-natured little
question about the archbishop; and then he go happily to bed,
and sleep as quietly as though Mrs Proudie have be Griselda
herself. while shave himself in the morning and prepare for the
festivity of Ullathorne, he fully resolve to run no more tilt
against a warrior so fully armed at all point as be Mrs Proudie.
CHAPTER XXXIV
OXFORD--the MASTER and tutor of LAZARUS
Mr Arabin, as we have say, have but a sad walk of it under the
tree of Plumstead churchyard. he do not appear to any of the
family till dinner time, and then he assume, as far as their
judgment go, to be quite himself. he have, as be his willnot, ask
himself a great many question, and give himself a great many
answer; and the upshot of this be that he have set himself down
for an ass. he have determine that he be much too old and much to
rusty to commence the manouvre of lovemake; that he have let the
time slip through his hand which should have be use for such
purpose; and that now he must lie on his bed as he have make it.
then he ask himself whether in truth he do love this woman; and
he answer himself, not without a long struggle, but at last
honestly, that he certainly do love she. he then ask himself
whether he do not also love her money; and he again answer
himself that he do so. but here he do not answer honestly. it be
and ever have be his weakness to look for impure motif for his
own conduct. no doubt, circumstance as he be, with a small living
and a fellowship, accustom as he have be to collegiate luxury
and expensive comfort, he might have hesitate to marry a
penniless woman have he feel ever so strong a predilection for the
woman herself; no doubt Eleanor's fortune put all such difficulty
out of the question; but it be equally without doubt that his love
for she have creep upon he without the slight idea on his part
that he could ever benefit his own condition by share her wealth.
when he have stand on the hearth-rug, count the pattern, and
count also the future chance of his own life, the remembrance
of Mrs Bold's comfortable income have not certainly damp his first
assure feeling of love for she. and why should it have do so?
need it have do so with the purest of man? be that as it may, Mr
Arabin decide against himself; he decide that it have do so in
his case, and that he be not the pure of man.
he also decide, which be more to his purpose, that Eleanor do
not care a straw for he, and that very probably do not care a
straw for his rival. then he make up his mind not to think of she
any more, and go on thinking of she till he be almost in a state
to drown himself in the little brook which be at the bottom of the
archdeacon's ground.
and ever and again his mind would revert to the Signora Neroni, and
he would make comparison between she and Eleanor Bold, not always
in favour of the latter. the signora have listen to he, and
flatter he, and believe in he; at least she have tell he so.
Mrs Bold have also listen to he, but have never flatter he; have
not always believe in he: and now have break from he in violent
rage. the signora, too, be the more lovely woman of the two, and
have also the additional attraction of her affliction; for to he it
be an attraction.
but he never could have love the Signora Neroni as he feel that he
now love Eleanor! and so he fling stone into the brook, instead
of fling in himself, and sit down on its margin as sad a
gentleman as you shall meet in a summer's day.
he hear the dinner-bell ring from the churchyard, and he know that
it be time to recover his self possession. he feel that he be
disgrace himself in his own eye, that he have be idle his
time and neglect the high duty which he have take upon himself
to perform. he should have spend the afternoon among the poor at St
Ewold's, instead of wander about Plumstead, an ancient love-lorn
swain, dejected and sighing, full of imaginary sorrow and
wertherian grief. he be thoroughly ashamed of himself, and
determine to lose no time in retrieve his character, so damage
in his own eye. thus when he appear at dinner he be as animate
as ever, and be the author of most of the conversation which
grace the archdeacon's board on that evening. Mr Harding be ill
at ease and sick at heart, and do not care to appear more
comfortable than he really be; what little he do say be say to
his daughter. he think the archdeacon and Mr Arabin have league
together against Eleanor's comfort; and his wish now be to break
away from the pair, and undergo in his Barchester lodging whatever
Fate have in store for he. he hat the name of the hospital; his
attempt to regain his lose inheritance there have bring upon he
so much suffering. as far as he be concern, Mr Quiverful be now
welcome to the place.
and the archdeacon be not very lively. the poor dean's illness be
of course discuss in the first place. Dr Grantly do not mention
Mr Slope's name in connexion with the expected event of Dr
Trefoil's death; he do not wish to say anything about Mr Slope
just at present, nor do he wish to make know his own sad
surmise; but the idea that his enemy might possibly become Dean of
Barchester make he very gloomy. should such an even take place,
such a dire catastrophe come about, there would be an end to his
life as far as his life be connect with the city of Barchester.
he must give up all his old haunt, all his old habit, and live
quietly as a retired rector at Plumstead. it have be a severe
trial for he to have Dr Proudie in the palace; but with Mr Slope
also in the deanery, he feel that he should be unable to draw his
breath in Barchester close.
thus it come to pass that in spite of the sorrow at his heart, Mr
Arabin be apparently the gayest of the party. both Mr Harding and
Mrs Grantly be in a slight degree angry with he on account of
his want of gloom. to the one it appear as though he be
triumph at Eleanor's banishment, and to the other that he be
not affect as he should have be by all the sad circumstance of
the day, Eleanor's obstinacy, Mr Slope's success, and the poor
dean's apoplexy. and so they be all at cross purpose.
Mr Harding leave the room almost together with the lady, and the
archdeacon open his heart to Mr Arabin. he still harp upon the
hospital. 'what do that fellow mean,' say he, 'by say in his
letter to Mrs Bold, that if Mr Harding would call on the bishop it
would be all right? of course I would not be guide by anything he
might say; but still it may be well that Mr Harding should see the
bishop. it would be foolish to let the thing slip through our
finger because Mrs Bold be determined to make a fool of herself.'
Mr Arabin hint that he be not quite so sure that Mrs Bold would
make a fool of herself. he say that he be not convince that she
do regard Mr Slope so warmly as she be suppose to do. the
archdeacon question and cross-question he about this, but
elicit nothing; and at least remain firm in his own conviction
that he be destine, malgre lui, to be the brother-in-law of Mr
Slope. Mr Arabin strongly advise that Mr Harding should take no
step regard the hospital in connexion with, or in consequence
of, Mr Slope's letter. 'if the bishop really mean to confer the
appointment on Mr Harding,' argue Mr Arabin, 'he will take care to
let he have some other intimation than a message convey through
a letter to a lady. be Mr Harding to present himself at the
palace he might merely be play Mr Slope's game;' and thus it be
settle that nothing should be do till the great Dr Gwynne's
arrival, or at any rate without that potentate's sanction.
it be droll how these man talk of Mr Harding as though he be a
puppet, and plan their intrigue and small ecclesiastical
manouvre without dream of take he into their confidence.
there be a comfortable house and income in question, and it be
very desirable, and certainly very just, that Mr Harding should
have they; but that, at present, be not the main point; it be
expedient to beat the bishop, and if possible to smash Mr Slope. Mr
Slope have set up, or be suppose to have set up, a rival
candidate. of all thing the most desirable would have be to have
have Mr Quiverful's appointment publish to the public, and then
annul by the clamour of an indignant world, loud in the defence
of Mr Harding's right. but of such an event the chance be small;
a slight fraction only of the world would be indignant, and that
fraction would be one not accustomed to loud speaking. and then the
preferment have in a sort of way be offer to Mr Harding, and have
in a sort of way be refuse by he.
Mr Slope's wicked, cunning hand have be peculiarly conspicuous in
the way in which this have be bring to pass, and it be the
success of Mr Slope's cunning which be so painfully grate the
feeling of the archdeacon. that which of all thing he most
dread be that he should be out-generalle by Mr Slope: and just
at present it appear probable that Mr Slope would turn his flank,
steal a march on he, cut off his provision, carry his strong town
by a coup de main, and at last beat he thoroughly in a regular
pitch battle. the archdeacon feel that his flank have be turn
when desire to wait on Mr Slope instead of the bishop, that a
march have be steal when Mr Harding be induce to refuse the
bishop's offer, that his provision would be cut off when Mr
Quiverful get the hospital, that Eleanor be the strong town doom
to be take, and that Mr Slope, as Dean of Barchester, would be
regard by all the world as the conqueror in that final conflict.
Dr Gwyinne be the Deus ex machina who be to come down upon the
Barchester stage, and bring about deliverance from these terrible
evil. but how can melodramatic denoument be properly bring
about, how can vice and Mr Slope be punish, and virtue and the
archdeacon be reward, while the avenge god be lay up with the
gout? in the mean time evil may be triumphant, and poor innocence,
transfix to the earth by an arrow from Dr Proudie's quiver, may
be dead upon the ground, not to be resuscitate even by Dr Gwynne.
two or three day after Eleanor's departure, Mr Arabin go to
Oxford, and soon find himself closet with the august head of his
college. it be quite clear that Dr Gwynne be not very sanguine as
to the effect of his journey to Barchester, and not over anxious
to interfere with the bishop. he have have the gout but be very
nearly convalescent, and Mr Arabin at once see that have the mission
be one of which the master thoroughly approve, he would before
this have be at Plumstead.
as it be, Dr Gwynne be resolve to visit his friend, and
willingly promise to return to Barchester with Mr Arabin. he could
not bring himself to believe that there be any probability that Mr
Slope would be make Dean of Barchester. Rumour, he say, have
reach even his ear not at all favourable to that gentleman's
character, and he express himself strongly of the opinion that
any such appointment be quite out of the question. at this stage
of the proceeding, the master's right-hand man, Tom Staple, be
call in to assist at the conference. Tom Staple be the Tutor of
Lazarus, and moreover a great man at Oxford. though universally
know by a specie of nomenclature as very undignified. Tom Staple
be one who maintain a high dignity in the University. he be, as
it be, the leader of the Oxford tutor, a body of man who
consider themselves collectively as be by very little, if at
all, second in importance to the head themselves. it be not always
the case that the master, or warden, or provost, or principal can
hit it off exactly with his tutor. a tutor be by no mean
indispose to have a will of his own. but at Lazarus they be
great friend and firm ally at the time of which we be write.
Tom Staple be a hale strong man of about forty-five; short in
stature, swarthy in face, with strong sturdy black hair, and crisp
black beard, of which very little be allow to show itself in the
shape of whisker. he always wear a white neckcloth, clean indeed,
but not tie with that scrupulous care which now distinguish some
of our young clergy. he be, of course, always clothe in a
seemly suit of solemn black. Mr Staple be a decent cleanly liver,
not over addicted to any sensuality; but nevertheless a somewhat
warmish hue be begin to adorn his nose, the peculiar effect,
as his friend aver, of a certain pipe of port introduce into
the cellar of Lazarus the very same year in which the tutor
enter in as a freshman. there be also, perhaps with a little
redolence of port wine, as it be the slight possible twang, in
Mr Staple's voice.
in these day Tom Staple be not a very happy man; University
reform have long be his bugbear, and now be his bane. it be not
with he as with most other, an affair of politic, respect
which, when the need exist, he could, for party' sake or on
behalf of principle, maintain a certain amount of necessary zeal;
it be not with he a subject for dilettante warfare, and courteous
common-place opposition. to he it be life and death. he would
willingly have be a martyr in the cause, have the cause admit
of martyrdom.
at the present day, unfortunately, public affair will allow of no
martyr, and therefore it be that there be such a deficiency of
zeal. could gentleman of L 10,000 a year have die on their own
door-step in defence of protection, no doubt some half-dozen
glorious old baronet would have so fall, and the school of
protection would at this day have be crowd with scholar. who
can fight strenuously in any combat in which there be no danger?
Tom Staple would have willingly be impale before a Committee of
the House, could he by such self-sacrifice have infuse his own
spirit into the component member of the hebdomadal board.
Tom Staple be one of those who in his heart approve of the credit
system which have of old be in vogue between the student and
tradesman of the University. he know and acknowledge to himself
that it be useless in these degenerate day publicly to contend
with the Jupiter on such a subject. the Jupiter have undertake to
rule the University, and Tom Staple be well aware that the Jupiter
be too powerful for he. but in secret, and among his safe
companion, he would argue that the system of credit be an ordeal
good for young man to undergo.
the bad man, say he, and the weak and worthless, blunder into
danger and burn their foot; but the good man, they who have any
character, they who have that within they which can reflect credit
in their Alma Mater, they come through scatheless. what merit will
there be to a young man to get through safely, if he guard and
protect and restrain like a school-boy? by so doing, the period
of the ordeal be only postpone, and the manhood of the man will be
defer from the age of twenty to that of twenty-four. if you bind
he with leading-string at college, he will break loose while
eat for the bar in London; bind he there, and he will break
loose afterwards, when he be a married man. the wild oats must be
sow somewhere. 'twas thus that Tom Staple would argue of young
man; not, indeed, with much consistency, but still with some
practical knowledge of the subject gather from long experience.
and now Tom Staple proffer such wisdom as he have for the
assistance of Dr Gwynne and Mr Arabin.
'quite out of the question,' say he, argue that Mr Slope could
not possibly be make the new Dean of Barchester.
'so I think,' say the master. 'he have no standing, and, if all I
hear be true, very little character.'
'as to character,' say Tom Staple, 'I donot think much of that.
they rather like loose parson for dean; a little fast living, or
a dash of infidelity, be no bad recommendation to a cathedral
close. but they couldnot make Mr Slope; the last two dean have
be Cambridge man; youwill not show I an instance of their making
three man run from the same University. we donot get out share,
and never shall, I suppose; but we must at least have one out of
the three.'
'these sort of rule be all go out by now,' say Mr Arabin.
'everything have go by, I believe,' say Tom Staple. 'the cigar
have be smoke out, and we be the ash.'
'speak for yourself, Staple,' say the master.
'I speak for all,' say the tutor stoutly. 'it be come to that,
that there will be no life leave anywhere in the country. no one be
any long fit to rule himself, or those belong to he. the
Government be to find we all in everything, and the press be to
find the government. nevertheless, Mr Slope willnot be Dean of
Barchester.'
'and who will be the warden of the hospital?' say Mr Arabin.
'I hear that Mr Quiverful be already appoint,' say Tom Staple.
'I think not,' say the master. 'and I think, moreover, that Dr
Proudie will not be so short-sighted as to run against such a rock;
Mr Slope should himself have sense enough to prevent it.'
'but perhaps Mr Slope may have no objection to see his patron on a
rock,' say the suspicious tutor.
'what could he get by that?' ask Mr Arabin.
'it be impossible to see the double of such a man,' say Mr
Staple. 'it seem quite clear that Bishop Proudie be altogether in
his hand, and it be equally clear that he have be move heaven
and earth to get this Mr Quiverful into the hospital, although he
must know that such an appointment would be most damaging to the
bishop. it be impossible to understand such a man, and dreadful to
think,' add Mr Staple, sigh deeply, 'that the welfare and
fortune of good man may depend on his intrigue.'
Dr Gwynne or Mr Staple be not in the least aware, nor even be Mr
Arabin that this Mr Slope, of whom they be talk, have be
use his utmost effort to put their own candidate into the
hospital; and that in lieu of be a permanent in the palace, his
own expulsion therefrom have be already decide on by the high
power of the diocese.
'Iwill tell you what,' say the tutor, 'if this Quiverful be thrust
into the hospital and Dr Trefoil must die, I should not wonder if
the Government be to make Mr Harding Dean of Barchester. they
would feel bound to do something for he after all that be say
when he resign.'
Dr Gwynne at the moment make no reply to this suggestion; but it
do not the less impress itself on his mind. if Mr Harding could
not be warden of the hospital, why should he not be Dean of
Barchester?
and so the conference end without any very fix resolution, and
Dr Gwynne and Mr Arabin prepare for their journey to Plumstead on
the morrow.
CHAPTER XXXV
MISS THORNE's FETE CHAMPETRE
the day of the Ullathorne party arrive, and all the world be
there; or at least so much of the world as have be include in
Miss Thorne's invitation. as we have say, the bishop return home
on the previous evening, and on the same evening, and by the same
train, come Dr Gwynne and Mr Arabin from Oxford. the archdeacon
with his brougham be in wait for the Master of Lazarus, so that
there be a goodly show of church dignitary on the platform of
the railway.
the Stanhope party be finally arrange in the odious manner
already describe, and Eleanor get into the doctor's waiting
carriage full of apprehension and presentiment of further
misfortune, whereas Mr Slope enter the vehicle elate with
triumph.
he have receive that morning a civil note from Sir Nicholas
Fitzwiggin; not promise much indeed; but then Mr Slope know, or
fancy that he know, that it be not etiquette for government
officer to make promise. though Sir Nicholas promise nothing he
imply a good deal; declare his conviction that Mr Slope would
make an excellent dean, and wish he every kind of success. to be
sure he add that, not be in the cabinet, he be never
consult on such matter, and that even if he speak on the subject
his voice would go for nothing. but all this Mr Slope take for the
prudent reserve of official life. to complete his anticipated
triumph, another letter be bring to he just as he be about to
start to Ullathorne.
Mr Slope also enjoy the idea of hand Mrs Bold out of Dr
Stanhope's carriage before the multitude at Ullathorne gate, as
much as Eleanor dread the same ceremony. he have fully make up his
mind to throw himself and his fortune at the widow's foot, and have
almost determined to select the present propitious morning for
do so. the signora have of late be less than civil to he. she
have indeed admit his visit, and listen, at any rate without
anger, to his love; but she have torture he, and revile he,
jeered at he and ridicule he, while she allow he to call she
the most beautiful of live woman, to kiss her hand, and to
proclaim himself with reiterate oath her adorer, her slave, and
worshipper.
Miss Thorne be in great perturbation, yet in great glory, on the
morning of this day. Mr Thorne also, though the party be none of
his giving, have much heavy work on his hand. but perhaps the most
overtaske, the most anxious and the most effective of all the
Ullathorne household be Mr Plomacy the steward. this last
personage have, in the time of Mr Thorne's father, when the
Directory hold dominion in France, go over to Paris with letter
in his boot heel for some of the royal party; and such have be his
good luck that he have return safe. he have then be very young
and be now very old, but the exploit give he a character for
political enterprise and secret discretion which still avail he
as thoroughly as it have do in its fresh gloss. Mr Plomacy have
be steward of Ullathorne for more than fifty year, and a very
easy life he have have of it. who could require much absolute work
from a man who have carry safely at his heel that which if
discover would have cost he his head? consequently Mr Plomacy
have never work hard, and of latter year have never work at all.
he have a taste for timber, and therefore he mark the tree that
be to be cut down; he have a taste for gardening, and would
therefore allow no shrub to be plant or bed to be make without
his express sanction.
in these matter he be sometimes drive to run counter to his
mistress, but he rarely allow his mistress to carry the point
against he.
but on occasion such as the present, Mr Pomney come out strong. he
have the honour of the family at heart; he thoroughly appreciate
the duty of hospitality; and therefore, when gala doing be
go on, always take the management into his own hand and reign
supreme over master and mistress.
to give Mr Pomney his due, old as he be, he thoroughly understand
such work as he have in hand, and do it well.
the order of the day be to be as follow. the quality, as the
upper class in rural district be designate by the low with
so much true discrimination, be to eat a breakfast, and the
non-quality be to eat a dinner. two marquee have be erect for
these two banquet, that for the quality on the esoteric or garden
side of a certain deep ha-ha; and that for the non-quality on the
exoteric or paddock side of the same. both be of huge dimension;
that on the outer side, one may say, on an egregious scale; but Mr
Pomney declare that neither would be sufficient. to remedy this,
an auxiliary banquet be prepare in the dining-room, and a
subsidiary board be to be spread sub dio for the accommodation of
the low class of yokel on the Ullathorne property.
no one who have not have a hand in the preparation of such an affair
can understand the manifold difficulty which Miss Thorne
encounter in her project. have she not be make throughout of the
very fine whalebone, rivette with the good Yorkshire steel, she
must have sink under they. have not Mr Pomney feel how much be
justly expect from a man who at one time carry the destiny of
Europe in his boot, he would have give way; and his mistress, so
desert, must have perish among her pole and canvass.
in the first place there be a dreadful line to be draw. who be
to dispose themselves within the ha-ha, and who without? to this
the unthinking will give an off-hand answer, as they will to every
ponderous question. oh, the bishop and such like within the ha-ha;
and Farmer Greenacre and such without. true, my unthinke friend;
but who shall define these such-like? it be in such definition
that the whole difficulty of society consist. to seat the bishop
on an arm chair on the lawn and place Farmer Greenacre at the end
of a long table in the paddock be easy enough; but where will you
put Mrs Lookaloft, whose husband, though a tenant on the estate,
hunt in a red coat, whose daughter go to a fashionable seminary
in Barchester, who call her farm house Rosebank, and who have a
pianoforte in her drawing-room? the Misses Lookaloft, as they call
themselves, willnot sit content among the bumpkin. Mrs Lookaloft
willnot squeeze her fine clothe on a bench and talk familiarly about
cream and duckling to good Mrs Greenacres. and yet Mrs Lookaloft
be not fit companion and never have be the associate of the
Thornes and the Grantlys. and if Mrs Lookaloft be admit within
the sanctum of fashionable life, if she be allow with her three
daughter to leap the ha-ha, why not the wife and daughter of
other family also? Mrs Greenacre be at present well content
with the paddock, but she might cease to be so if she see Mrs
Lookaloft on the lawn. and thus poor Miss Thorne have a hard time of
it.
and how be she to divide the guest between the marquee and the
parlour? she have a countess come, and Honourable John and an
Honourable George, and a whole bevy of Ladies Amelia, Rosina,
Margaretta &c; she have a leash of baronet with their baroness;
and, as we all know, a bishop. if she put they on the lawn, no one
would go into the parlour; if she put they into the parlour, no one
would go into the tent. she think of keep the old people in
the house, and leave the lawn to the lover. she might as well
have seat herself at once in a hornet's nest. Mr Pomney know
well than this. 'bless your soul, Ma'am,' say he, 'there willnot
be no old lady; not one, bar yourself and old Mrs
Chantantrum.'
personally Miss Thorne accept this distinction in her favour as a
compliment to her good sense; but nevertheless she have no desire to
be closet on the come occasion with Mrs Chantantrum. she give
up all idea of any arbitrary division of her guest, and determine
if possible to put the bishop on the lawn and the countess in the
house, to sprinkle the baronet, and thus divide the attraction.
what to do with the Lookalofts even Mr Plomacy could not decide.
they must take their chance. they have be specially tell in the
invitation that all the tenant have be invite; and they might
probably have the good sense to stay away if they object to mix
with the rest of the tenantry.
then Mr Plomacy declare his apprehension that the Honourable Johns
and Honourable Georges would come in a sort of amphibious costume,
half morning half evening, satin neckhandkerchief, frock coat,
primrose glove, and polished boot; and that be so dressed,
they would decline rid at the quintain, or take part in any of
the athletic game which Miss Thorne have prepare with so much
care. if the Lord Johns and Lord Georges donot ride at the
quintain, Miss Thorne might be sure that nobody else would.
'but,' say she in dolorous voice, all but overcome by her care;
'it be specially signify that there be to be sport.'
'and so there will be, of course,' say Mr Pomney. 'theywill all be
sport with the young lady in the laurel walk. theybe the
sport they care most about now-a-day. if you get the young man
at the quintain, youwill have all the young woman in the pout.'
'cannot they look on, as their great grandmother do before they?'
say Miss Thorne.
'it seem to I that the lady benot content with look
now-a-day. whatever the man do theywill do. if youwill have side
saddle on the nag, and let they go at the quintain too, itwill
answer capital, no doubt.'
Miss Thorne make no reply. she feel that she have no good ground on
which to defend her sex of the present generation, from the sarcasm
of Mr Pomney. she have once declare, in one of her warm moment,
'that now-a-day the gentleman be all woman, and the lady all
man.' she could not alter the debase character of the age. but
such be the case, why should she take on herself to cater for
the amusement of people of such degraded taste? this question she
ask herself more than once, and she could only answer herself
with a sigh. there be her own brother Wilfred, on whose shoulder
rest the all the ancient honour of Ullathorne House; it be very
doubtful whether even he would consent to 'go at the quintain', as
Mr Pomney not injudiciously express it.
and now the morning arrive. the Ullathorne household be early on
the move. cook be cook in the kitchen long before daylight,
and man be drag out table and hammer red baize on to
bench at the early dawn. with what dread eagerness do Miss
Thorne look out at the weather as soon as the parting veil of night
permit she to look at all! in this respect at any rate there be
nothing to grieve she. the glass have be rise for the last three
day, and the morning break with that dull chill steady grey haze
which in autumn generally presage a clear and dry day. by seven
she be dress and down. Miss Thorne know nothing of the modern
luxury of deshabille. she would as soon have think of appear
before her brother without her stocking as without her stay; and
Miss Thorne's stay be no trifle.
and yet there be nothing for she to do when down. she fidget out
to the lawn, and then back into the kitchen. she put on her
high-heeled clog, and fidget out into the paddock. then she go
into the small home park where the quintain be erect. the pole
and cross-bar and the swivel, and the target and the bag of flour
be all complete. she get up on a carpenter's bench and touch
the target with her hand; it go round with beautiful ease; the
swivel have be oil to perfection. she almost wish to take old
Plomacy at his word, to go on a side saddle, and have a tilt at it
herself.
what must a young man be, think she, who could prefer maunder
among the tree with a wishy-washy school girl to such fun as this?
'well,' say she aloud to herself, 'one man can take a horse to
water, but a thousand cannot make he drink. there it be. if they
havenot the spirit to enjoy it, the fault shallnot be mine;' and so
she return the house.
at a little after eight her brother come down, and they have a sort
of scrap breakfast in his study. the tea be make without the
customary urn, and they dispense with the usual roll and toast.
Eggs be also miss, for every egg in the parish have be
whip into custard, bake into pie, or boil into lobster
salad. the allowance of fresh butter be short, and Mr Thorne be
oblige to eat the leg of a fowl without have it devil in the
manner he love.
'I have be look at the quintain, Wilfred,' say she, 'and it
appear to be quite right.'
'oh,--ah; yes;' say he. 'it seem to be so yesterday when I see
it.' Mr Thorne be begin to be rather bored by his sister's
love of sport, and have especially no affection for this quintain
post.
'I wish youwould just try it after breakfast,' say she. 'you could
have the saddle put on Mark Antony, and the pole be there all
handy. you can take the flour bag off, you know, if you think Mark
Antony willnot be quick enough,' add Miss Thorne, see that her
brother's countenance be not indicative of complete accordance
with her little proposition.
now Mark Antony be a valuable old hunter, excellently suit to Mr
Thorne's usual requirement, steady indeed at his fence, but
extremely sure, very good in deep ground, and safe on the road.
but he have never yet be ride at a quintain, and Mr Thorne be
not inclined to put he to the trial, either with or without the
bag of flour. he hum and hawed, and finally declare that he be
afraid Mark Antony would shy.
'then try the cob,' say the indefatigable Miss Thorne.
'hebe in physic,' say Wilfred.
'therebe the beelzebub colt,' say his sister; 'I know hebe in the
stable, because I see Peter exercise he just now.'
'my dear Monica, hebe so wild that itbe as much as I can do to
manage he at all. hewould destroy himself and I too, if I attempt
to ride he at such a rattletrap as that.'
a rattletrap! the quintain that she have put up with so much anxious
care; the game that she have prepare for the amusement of the
stalwart yeoman of the country; the sport that have be honour by
the affection of so many of their ancestor! it cut she to the
heart to hear it so denominate by her own brother. there be but
the two of they leave together in the world; and it have ever be
one of the rule by which Miss Thorne have regulate her conduct
through life, to say nothing that could provoke her brother. she
have often have to suffer from his indifference to time-honour
british custom; but she have always suffer in silence. it be
part of her creed that the head of the family should never be
upbraided in his own house; and Miss Thorne have live up to her
creed. now, however, she be greatly try. the colour mount to
her ancient cheek, and the fire blaze in her still bright eye; but
yet she say nothing. she resolve that at any rate, to he nothing
more should be say about the quintain that day.
she sip her tea in silent sorrow, and think with painful
regret of the glorious day when her great ancestor Ealfried have
successfully hold Ullathorne against a Norman invader. there be no
such spirit now leave in her family except that small useless spark
which burn in her own bosom. and she herself, be not she at this
moment intent on entertain a descendant of those very Normand, a
vain proud countess with a frenchified name, who would only think
that she grace Ullathorne too highly by enter its portal? be
it likely that an honourable John, the son of the Earl de Courcy,
should ride at a quintain in company with a Saxon yeoman? and why
should she expect her brother to do that which her brother's guest
would decline to do?
some dim faint idea of the impracticability of her own view
flit across her brain. perhaps it be necessary that race
doom to live on the same soil should give way to each other, and
adopt each other's pursuit. perhaps it be impossible that after
more than five century of close intercourse, Normans should
remain Normans, and Saxons, Saxons. perhaps after all her
neighbour be wise than herself, such idea do occasionally
present themselves to Miss Thorne's mind, and make she sad enough.
but it never occur to she that her favourite quintain be but a
modern copy of a Norman knight's amusement, an adaptation of the
noble tourney to the taste and habit of the Saxon yeoman. of this
she be ignorant, and it would have be cruelty to instruct she.
when Mr Thorne see the tear in her eye, he repent himself of his
contemptuous expression. by he also it be recognise as a bind
law that every whim of his sister be to be respect. he be not
perhaps so firm in his observance to she, as she be in her to
he. but his intention be equally good, and whenever he find
that he have forget they, it be a matter of grief to he.
'my dear Monica,' say he, 'I beg your pardon; I donot in the least
mean to speak ill of the game. when I call it a rattletrap, I
merely mean that it be so for a man of my age. you know you
always forget that I an't a young man.'
'I be quite sure you be not an old man, Wilfred,' say she,
accept the apology in her heart, and smile at he with the
tear still on her cheek.
'if I be five-and-twenty, or thirty,' continue he, 'I should like
nothing well than rid at the quintain all day.'
'but you be not too old to hunt or to shoot,' say she. 'if you
can jump over a ditch and hedge, I be sure you could turn the
quintain round.'
'but when I ride over the hedge, my dear--and it benot very often
I do that--but when I do ride over the hedge there benot any bag
of flour come after I. think how Iwould look take the countess
out to breakfast with the back of my head all cover with meal.'
Miss Thorne say nothing far. she donot like the allusion to
the countess. she couldnot be satisfied with the reflection that
the sport of Ullathorne should be interfere with by the personal
attention necessary for a Lady de Courcy. but she see that it be
useless for she to push the matter far. it be concede that Mr
Thorne be to spar the quintain; and Miss Thorne determine to
trust wholly to a youthful knight of her, an immense favourite,
who, as she often declare, be a pattern to the young man of the
age, and an excellent example of an english yeoman.
this be Farmer Greenacre's eld son; who, to tell the truth, have
from his early year take the exact measure of Miss Thorne's
foot. in his boyhood he have never fail to obtain from she,
apple, pocket money, and forgiveness for his numerous trespass;
and now in his early manhood he get privilege and immunity which
be equally valuable. he be allow a day or two's shooting in
September; he school the squire's horse; get slip of tree out
of the orchard, and root of flower out of the garden; and have the
fishing of the little river altogether in his own hand. he have
undertake to come mount on a nag of his father's, and show the
way at the quintain post. whatever young Greenacre do the other
would do after he. the juvenile Lookalofts might stand sure to
venture if Harry Greenacre show the way. and so Miss Thorne make
up her mind to dispense with the noble Johns and Georges, and
trust, as her ancestor have do before she, to the thews and
sinew of native Ullathorne growth.
at about nine the low order begin to congregate in the paddock
and park, under the surveillance of Mr Plomacy and the head
gardener and head groom, who be swear in as his deputy, and
be to assist he in keep the peace and promote the sport.
many of the young inhabitant of the neighbourhood, think that
they could not have too much of a good thing, have come at a very
early hour, and the road between the house and the church have be
throng for some time before the gate be throw open.
and then another difficulty of huge dimension arise, a difficulty
which Mr Plomacy have indeed foresee, and for which he be in some
sort provide. some of those who wish to share Miss Thorne's
hospitality be not so particular that they should have be as to
the preliminary ceremony of an invitation. they doubtless conceive
that they have be overlook by accident; and instead of take
this in dudgeon, as their better would have do, they
good-naturedly put up with the slight, and show that they do so
by present themselves at the gate in their Sunday good.
Mr Plomacy, however, well know who be welcome and who be not.
to some, even though uninvited, he allow ingress. 'donot be too
particular, Plomacy,' his mistress have say; 'especially with the
child. if they live anywhere near, let they in.'
act on this hint, Mr Plomacy do let in many an eager urchin,
and a few tidily dress girl with their swain, who in no way
belong to the property. but to the denizen of the city he be
inexorable. many a Barchester apprentice make his appearance there
that day, and urge with piteous supplication that he have be
work all the week in make saddle and boot for the use of
Ullathorne, in compound dos for the horse, or cut up
carcass for the kitchen. no such claim be allow. Mr Plomacy
know nothing about the city apprentice; he be to admit the
tenant and labourer on the estate; Miss Thorne benot go to
take in the whole city of Barchester; and so on.
nevertheless, before the day be half over, all this be find to
be useless. almost anybody who choose to come make his way into the
park, and the care of the guardian be transfer to the table
on which the banquet be spread. even here there be many an
unauthorized claimant for a plate, of whom it be impossible to get
quit without some commotion than the place and food be worth.
CHAPTER XXXVI
ULLATHORNE SPORTS--ACT I
the trouble in civilised life of entertaining company, as it be
call too generally without much regard to strict veracity, be so
great that it cannot but be matter of wonder that people be so
fond of attempt it. it be difficult to ascertain what be the
quid pro quo. if they who give such laborious party, and who
endure such toil and turmoil in the vain hope of give they
successfully, really enjoy the party give by other, the
matter would be understand. a sense of justice would induce man and
woman to undergo, in behalf of other, those misery which other
have undergo on their behalf. but they all profess that go out
be as great a bore as receive; and to look at they when they be
out, one cannot but believe they.
Entertain! who shall have sufficient self-assurance, who shall feel
sufficient confidence in his own power to dare to boast that he
can entertain his company? a clown can sometimes do so, and
sometimes a dancer in short petticoat and stuff pink leg;
occasionally, perhaps, a singer. but beyond these, success in this
art of entertaining be not often achieve. young man and girl
link themselves kind with kind, pair like bird in spring,
because nature will it, they, after a simple fashion, do entertain
each other. few other even try.
lady, when they open their house, modestly confess, it may be
presume, their own incapacity, mainly trust to wax candle and
upholstery. gentleman seem to rely on their white waistcoat. to
these be add, for the delight of the more sensual, champagne and
such good thing of the table as fashion allow to be still
consider as comestible. even in this respect the world be
deteriorate. all the good soup be now taboo; and at the
house of one's accustomed friend, small barrister, doctor,
government clerk, and such like, (for we cannot all of we always
live as grandee, surround by an Elysium of livery servant), one
get a cold potato hand to one as a sort of finale to one's slice
of mutton. alas! for those happy day when one could say to one's
neighbourhood, 'Jones, shall I give you some mashed turnip--may I
trouble you for a little cabbage?' and then the pleasure of
drink wine with Mrs Jones and Miss Smith; with all the Joneses
and all the Smiths! these latter-day habit be certainly more
economical.
Miss Thorne, however, boldly attempt to leave the modern beat
track, and make a positive effort to entertain her guest. alas!
she do so with but moderate success. they have all their own way of
go, and would not go her way. she pip to they, but they would
not dance. she offer to they good honest household cake, make of
currant and flour and egg and sweetmeat; but they would feed
themselves on trashy wafer from the shop of the Barchester
pastry-cook, on chalk and gum and adulterate sugar. Poor Miss
Thorne! yours be not the first honest soul that have vainly strive
to recall the glory of happy day go by! if fashion suggest to
a Lady De Courcy that when invite to a dejeuner at twelve o'clock
she ought to come at three, no eloquence of thine will teach she
the advantage of a near approach to punctuality.
she have fondly think that when she call on her friend to come
at twelve, and especially beg they to believe that she mean it,
she would be able to see they comfortably seat in their tent at
two. vain woman--or rather ignorant woman--ignorant of the advance
of that civilization which the world have witness while she be
grow old. at twelve she find herself alone, dress in all the
glory of the new of her many suit of raiment; with strong shoe
however, and a serviceable bonnet on her head, and a warm rich
shawl on her shoulder. thus clothe she peer out into the tent,
go to the ha-ha, and satisfy herself that at any rate the
youngster be amusing themselves, speak a word to Mrs Greenacre
over the ditch, and take one look at the quintain. three or four
young farmer be turn the machine round and round, and poking
at the bag of flour in a manner not at all intend by the inventor
of the game; but no mount sportsman be there. Miss Thorne
look at her watch. it be only fifteen minute past twelve, and
it be understand that Harry Greenacre be not to begin till the
half hour.
Miss Thorne return to her drawing-room rather quick than she
willnot, fear that the countess might come and find none to welcome
she. she need not have hurry, for no one be there. at half-past
twelve she peep into the kitchen; at a quarter to one she be
join by her brother; and just then the first fashionable arrival
take place. Mrs Clantantram be announce.
no announcement be necessary, indeed; for the good lady's voice
be hear as she walk across the court-yard to the house scold
the unfortunate postilion who have drive she from Barchester. at
the moment Miss Thorne could not but be thankful that the other
guest be more fashionable, and be thus spar the fury of Mrs
Clantantram's indignation.
'oh, Miss Thorne, look here!' say she, as soon as she find
herself in the drawing-room; 'do look at my roquelaure! itbe clean
spoilt, and for ever. I wouldnot but wear it because I know you
wish we all to be grand to-day; and yet I have my misgiving. oh
dear, oh dear! it be five-and-twenty shilling a yard.'
the Barchester post horse have misbehave in some unfortunate
manner just as Mrs Clantantram be get out of the chaise and
have nearly throw she under the wheel.
Mrs Clantantram belong to other day, and therefore, though she
have but little else to recommend she, Miss Thorne be to a certain
extent fond of she. she send the roquelaure away to be clean, and
lend her one of her good shawl out of her own wardrobe.
the next comer be Mr Arabin, who be immediately inform of Mrs
Clantantram's misfortune, and of her determination to pay neither
master nor post-boy; although, as she remark, she intend to get
her lift home before she make known her mind upon that matter. then
a good deal of rustle be hear in the sort of lobby that be
use for the lady' outside cloak; and the door have be
throw wide open, the servant announce, not in the most confident
of voice, Mrs Lookaloft, and the Miss Lookalofts, and Mr Augustus
Lookaloft.
Poor man!--we mean the footman. he know, none well, that Mrs
Lookaloft have no business there, that she be not want there, and
would not be welcome. but he have not the courage to tell a stout
lady with a low dress, short sleeve, and satin at eight shilling
a yard, that she have come to the wrong tent; he have not dare to
hint to young lady with white dancing shoe and long glove, that
there be a place ready for they in the paddock. and thus Mrs
Lookaloft carry her point, break through the guard, and make she
way into the citadel. that she would have to pass an uncomfortable
time there, she have surmise before. but nothing now could rob she
of the power of boasting that she have consort on the lawn with
the squire and Miss Thorne, with a countess, a bishop, and the
country grandee, while Mrs Greenacres and such like be walk
about with the ploughboy in the park. it be a great point gain
by Mrs Lookaloft, and it might be fairly expect that from this
time forward the tradesman of Barchester would, with undoubting
pen, address her husband and T. Lookaloft, Esquire.
Mrs Lookaloft's pluck carry she through everything, and she
walk triumphant into the Ullathorne drawing-room; but her
child do feel a little abashed at the sort of reception they
meet with. it be not in Miss Thorne's heart to insult her own
guest; but neither be it in her disposition to overlook such
effrontery.
'oh, Mrs Lookaloft, be this you,' say she; 'and your daughter and
son? well, webe very glad to see you; but Ibe sorry youhave come in
such low dress, as we be all go out of door. could we lend
you anything?'
'oh dear no! thank ye, Miss Thorne,' say the mother; 'the girl
and myself be quite used to low dress, when webe out.'
'be you, indeed?' say Miss Thorne shudder; but the shudder be
not lose on Mrs Lookaloft.
'and wherebe Lookaloft,' say the master of the house, come up to
welcome his tenant's wife. let the fault of the family be what
they would, he could not but remember that their rent be well
pay; he be therefore not willing to give they a cold shoulder.
'such a headache, Mr Thorne!' say Mrs Lookaloft. 'in fact he
couldnot stir, or you may be certain on such a day he would not
have absent himself.'
'dear I,' say Miss Thorne. 'if he be so ill, I sure youwould wish to
be with he.'
'not at all!' say Mrs Lookaloft. 'not at all, Miss Thorne.
it be only bilious you know, and when hebe that way he can bear
nobody nigh he.'
the fact however be that Mr Lookaloft, have either more sense or
less courage than his wife, have not choose to intrude on Miss
Thorne's drawing-room; and as he could not very well have go
among the plebeian while his wife be with the patrician, he
think it most expedient to remain at Rosebank.
Mrs Lookaloft soon find herself on a sofa, and the Miss Lookalofts
on two chair, while Mr Augustus stand near the door; and here they
remain till in due time they be seat all four together at the
bottom of the dining-room table.
then the Grantlys come; the archdeacon and Mrs Grantly and the two
girl, and Dr Gwynne and Mr Harding; and as ill luck would have it,
they be closely follow by Dr Stanhope's carriage. as Eleanor
look out of the carriage window, she see her brother-in-law
help the lady out, and throw herself back into her seat,
dread to be discover. she have have an odious journey. Mr
Slope's civility have be more than ordinarily greasy; and now,
though he have not in fact say anything which she could notice, she
have for the first time entertain a suspicion that he be
intend to make love to she. be it after all true that she have
be conduct herself in a way that justify the world in
think that she like the man? after all, could it be possible
that the archdeacon and Mr Arabin be right, and that she be
wrong? Charlotte Stanhope have also be watch Mr Slope, and have
come to the conclusion that it behove her brother to lose no
further time, if he mean to gain the widow. she almost regret
that it have not be contrive that Bertie should be at Ullathorne
before they.
Dr Grantly do not see his sister-in-law in company with Mr Slope,
but Mr Arabin do. Mr Arabin come out with Mr Thorne to the front
door to welcome Mrs Grantly, and he remain in the courtyard till
all their party have pass on. Eleanor hang back in the carriage as
long as she well could, but she be near to the door, and when
Mr Slope, have alight, offer she his hand, she have no
alternative but to take it.
Mr Arabin stand at the open door, while Mrs Grantly be shake
hand with someone within, see a clergyman alight from the carriage
whom he at once know to be Mr Slope, and then she see this
clergyman hand out Mrs Bold. have see so much, Mr Arabin, rather
sick at heart, follow Mrs Grantly into the house.
Eleanor be, however, spar any further immediate degradation, for
Dr Stanhope give she his arm across the courtyard, and Mr Slope be
fain to throw away his attention upon Charlotte.
they have hardly pass into the house, and from the house to the
lawn, when, with a loud rattle and such noise as great man and
great woman be entitle to make in their passage through the
world, the Proudies drive up. it be soon apparent that no every
day comer be at the door. one servant whisper to another that it
be the bishop, and the word soon run through all the hanger-on
and strange groom and coachman about the place. there be quite a
little cortege to see the bishop and his 'lady' walk across the
courtyard, and the good man be pleased to see that the church be
hold in such respect in the parish of St Ewold's.
and now the guest come fast and thick, and the lawn begin to be
crowd, and the room to be full. voice buzz, silk rustle
against silk, and muslin crumple against muslin. Miss Thorne
become more happy than she have be, and again bethink she of her
sport. there be target and bow and arrow prepare at the
further end of the lawn. here the garden of the place encroach
with a somewhat wide sweep upon the paddock, and give ample room
for the doing of the toxophilite. Miss Thorne get together such
daughter of Diana as could bend a bow, and marshal they to the
target. there be the Grantly girl and the Proudie girl and the
Chadwick girl, and the two daughter of the burly chancellor, and
Miss Knowle; and with they go Frederick and Augustus Chadwick,
and young Knowle of Knowle park, and Frank Foster of the Elms, and
Mr Vellem deed the dash attorney of the High Street, and the
Rev Mr Green, and the Rev Mr Browne, and the Rev Mr White, all of
whom as in duty bind, attend the step of the three Miss
Proudies.
'do you ever ride at the quintain, Mr Foster?' say Miss Thorne,
as she walk with her party, across the lawn.
'the quintain?' say young Foster, who consider himself a dab at
horsemanship. 'be it a sort of gate, Miss Thorne?'
Miss Thorne have to explain the noble game she speak of, and Frank
Foster have to own that he never have ride at the quintain.
'would you like to come and see?' say Miss Thorne. 'therewill be
plenty here without you, if you like it.'
'well, I donot mind,' say Frank; 'I suppose the lady can come
too.'
'oh, yes,' say Miss Thorne; 'those who like it; I have no doubt
theywill go to see your prowess, if youwill ride, Mr Foster.'
Mr Foster look down at a most unexceptionable pair of pantaloon,
which have arrive from London only the day before. they be the
very thing, at least he think so, for a picnic of fete
champetre; but he be not prepared to ride in they. nor be he more
encourage than have be Mr Thorne, by the idea of be attack
from behind by the bag of flour which Miss Thorne have graphically
describe to he.
'well, I donot know about rid, Miss Thorne,' say he; 'I fear
Ibe not quite prepared.'
Miss Thorne sigh, but say nothing far. she leave the
toxophilite to their bow and arrow, and return towards the
house. but as she pass by the entrance to the small park, she
think that she might at any rate encourage the yeoman by her
presence, as she could not induce she more fashionable guest to
mix with they in their many amusement.
accordingly she once more betook herself to the quintain post.
here to her great delight she find Harry Greenacre ready mount,
with his pole in his hand, and a lot of comrade stand round
he, encourage he to the assault. she stand at a little distance
and nod to he in token of her good pleasure.
'shall I begin, ma'am?' say Henry finger his long staff in a
rather awkward way, while his horse move uneasily beneath he, not
accustom to a rider arm with such a weapon.
'yes, yes,' say Miss Thorne, stand triumphant as the queen of
beauty, on an invert tub which some chance have bring hither
from the farm-yard.
'here go then,' say Harry as he wheel his horse round to get
the necessary momentum of a sharp gallop. the quintain post stand
right before he, and the square board at which he be to tilt be
fairly in the way. if he hit that duly in the middle, and
maintain his pace as he do so, it be calculate that he would
be carry out of reach of the flour bag, which, suspend at the
other end of the cross-bar on the post, would swing round when the
board be strike. it be also calculate that if the rider do not
maintain his pace, he would get a blow from the flour bag just at
the back of his head, and bear about he the sign of his
awkwardness to the great amusement of the looker-on.
Harry Greenacre do not object to be powder with flour in the
service of his mistress, and therefore gallantly touch his steed
with his spur, have lay his lance in rest to the good of his
ability. but his ability in this respect be not great, and his
appurtenance probably not very good; consequently, he strike his
horse with his pole unintentionally on the side of the head as he
start. the animal swerve and shy, and gallop off wide of the
quintain. Harry well accustomed to manage a horse, but not to do so
with a twelve-foot rod on his arm, lower his right hand to the
bridle and thus the end of the lance come to the ground, and get
between the leg of the steed. down come the rider and steed and
staff. Young Greenacre be throw some six foot over the horse's
head, and poor Miss Thorne almost fall of her tub in a swoon.
'oh gracious, hebe kill,' shriek a woman, who be near he when
he fall.
'the Lord be good to he! his poor mother, his poor mother!' say
another.
'well, drat they dangerous play all the world over,' say an old
crone.
'he have break his neck sure enough, if ever man do,' say a
fourth.
Poor Miss Thorne. she hear all this and yet do not quite swoon.
she make her way through the crowd as good she could, sick herself
almost to death. oh, his mother--his poor mother! how could she
ever forgive herself. the agony of that moment be terrific. she
could hardly get to the place where the poor lad be lie, as
three or four man in front be about the horse which have rise
with some difficulty; but at last she find herself close to the
young farmer.
'has he mark himself? for heaven's sake tell I that; have he
mark his knee?' say Harry, slowly rise and rub his left
shoulder with his right hand, and think only of his horse's
leg. Miss Thorne soon find that he have not break his neck, nor
any of his bone, nor be injure in any essential way. but from
that time forth she never instigate any one to ride at the
quintain.
Eleanor leave Dr Stanhope as soon as she could do so civilly, and
go in quest of her father whom she find on the lawn in company
with Mr Arabin. she be not sorry to find they together. she be
anxious to disabuse at any rate her father's mind as to this report
which have get abroad respect she, and would have be well
pleased to have be able to do the same with regard to Mr Arabin.
she put she own through her father's arm, come up behind his
back, and then tender her hand also to the vicar of St Ewold's.
'and how do you come?' say Mr Harding, when the first greeting
be over.
'the Stanhopes bring I,' say she; 'their carriage be oblige
to come twice, and have now go back for the signora.' as she speak
she catch Mr Arabin's eye, and see that he be look pointedly
at she with a severe expression. she understand at once the
accusation contain in his glance. it say as plainly as an eye
could speak, 'yes, you come with the Stanhopes, but you do so in
order that you might be in company with Mr Slope.'
'our party,' say she, still address her father, 'consist of
the Doctor and Charlotte Stanhope, myself, and Mr Slope.' as she
mention the last name she feel her father's arm quiver slightly
beneath her touch. at the same moment Mr Arabin turn away from
they, and join his hand behind his back stroll slowly away by
one of the path.
'papa,' say she, 'it be impossible to help come in the same
carriage with Mr Slope; it be quite impossible. I have promise to
come with they before I dream of his come, and afterwards I
could not get out of it without explain and give rise to talk.
you benot at home, you know, I couldnot possibly help it.' she
say all this so quickly that by the time her apology be speak
she be quite out of breath.
'I donot know why you should have wish to help it, my dear,' say
her father.
'yes, papa, you do; you must know, you do know all the thing they
say at Plumstead. I be sure you do. you know all the archdeacon
say. how unjust he be, and Mr Arabin too. hebe a horrid man, a
horrid, odious man, but--'
'who be an odious man, my dear? Mr Arabin?'
'no; but Mr Slope. you know I mean Mr Slope. hebe the most odious
man I ever meet in my life, and it be most unfortunate my have to
come here in the same carriage with he. but how could I help it?'
a great weight begin to move itself off Mr Harding's mind. so,
after all, the archdeacon with all his wisdom, and Mrs Grantly with
all her tact, and Mr Arabin with all his talent be in the wrong.
his own child, his Eleanor, the daughter of whom he be so proud
be not to become the wife of Mr Slope. he have be about to give
his sanction to the marriage, so certified have he be of this
fact; and now he learn that this imputed lover of Eleanor's be at
any rage as much dislike by she as by any one of the family. Mr
Harding, however, be by no mean sufficiently a man of the world
to conceal the blunder he have make. he could not pretend that he
have entertain no suspicion; he could not make believe that he have
never join the archdeacon in his surmise. he be greatly
surprised, and gratify beyond measure, and he could not help
show that such be the case.
'my darling girl,' say he, 'I be so delighted, so overjoyed. my
own child; you have take such a weight off my mind.'
'but surely, papa, you donot think--'
'I donot know what to think, my dear. the archdeacon tell I that
-'
'the archdeacon!' say Eleanor, her face light up with passion.
'a man like the archdeacon might, one would think, be well
employ than in traduce his sister-in-law, and create
bitterness between a father and his daughter.'
'he donot mean to that, Eleanor.'
'what do he mean then? why do he interfere with I, and fill your
mind with such falsehood?'
'never mind it now, my child; never mind it now. we shall all know
you well now.'
'oh, papa, that you should have think it! that you should have
suspect I!'
'I donot know what you mean by suspicion, Eleanor. there would be
nothing disgraceful, you know; nothing wrong in such a marriage.
nothing that could have justify my interfering as your father.'
and Mr Harding would have proceed in his own defence to make out
that Mr Slope after all be a very good sort of man, and a very
fitting second husband for a young widow, have he not be
interrupt by Eleanor's great energy.
'it would be disgraceful,' say she; 'it would be wrong; it would
be abominable. could I do such a horrid thing, I should expect no
one to speak to I. Ugh--' and she shudder as she think of the
matrimonial torch which her friend have be so ready to light on
her behalf. I donot wonder at Dr Grantly; I donot wonder at Susan;
but, oh, papa, I do wonder at you. how could you, how could you
believe it?' Poor Eleanor, as she think of her father's
defalcation, could resist her tear no long, and be force to
cover her face with her handkerchief.
the place be not very opportune for her grief. they be walk
through the shrubbery, and there be many people near they. poor
Mr Harding stammer out his excuse as good he could, and eleanor
with an effort control her tear, and return her handkerchief
to her pocket. she do not find it difficult to forgive her father,
nor could she altogether refuse to join he in the return gaiety
of spirit to which her present avowal give rise. it be such a load
off his heart to think that he should not be call on to welcome
Mr Slope as his son-in-law; it be such a relief to he to find
that his daughter's feeling and his own be now, as they ever have
be, in unison. he have be so unhappy for the last six week
about this wretche Mr Slope!
he be so indifferent as to the loss of the hospital, so thankful
for the recovery of his daughter, that, strong as be the ground
for Eleanor's anger, she could not find it in her heart to be long
angry with he.
'dear papa,' she say, hang closely to his arm, 'never suspect
I again: promise I that you never will. whatever I do, you may be
sure I shall tell you first; you may be sure I shall consult you.'
and Mr Harding do promise, and own his sin, and promise again.
and so, while he promise amendment and she utter forgiveness,
they return together to the drawing-room window.
and what have Eleanor mean when she declare that whatever she do,
she would tell her father first? what be she think of do?
so end the first act of the melodrama which Eleanor be call on
to perform this day at Ullathorne.
CHAPTER XXXVII
the signora NERONI, the COUNTESS DE COURCY, and MRS PROUDIE meet
each other AT ULLATHORNE
and now there be new arrival. just as Eleanor reach the
drawing-room the signora be be wheel into it. she have be
bring out of the carriage into the dining-room and there place
on a sofa, and be now in the act of enter the other room, by
the joint aid of her brother and sister, Mr Arabin, and two
servant in livery. she be all in her glory, and look so
pathetically happy, so full of affliction and grace, be so
beautiful, so pitiable, and so charming, that it be almost
impossible not to be glad she be there.
Miss Thorne be unaffectedly glad to welcome she. in fact, the
signora be a sort of lion; and though there be no drop of the
Leohunter blood in Miss Thorne's vein, she nevertheless do like
to see attractive people at her house.
the signora be attractive, and on her first settlement in the
dining-room she have whisper two or three soft feminine word into
Miss Thorne's ear, which, at the moment, have quite touch that
lady's heart.
'oh, Miss Thorne; where be Miss Thorne?' she say, as soon as she
attendant have place she in her position just before one of the
window, from whence she could see all that be go on upon the
lawn; 'how be I to thank you for permit a creature like I to
be here? but if you know the pleasure you give I, I be sure you
would excuse the trouble I bring with I.' and as she speak she
squeeze the spinster's little hand between her own.
'we be delighted to see you here,' say Miss Thorne; 'you give we
no trouble at all, and we think it a great favour confer by you
to come and see we; donot we, Wilfred?'
'a very great favour indeed,' say Mr Thorne, with a gallant bow,
but of somewhat less cordial welcome than that concede by his
sister. Mr Thorne have learn perhaps more of the antecedent of
his guest than his sister have do, and not as yet undergo the
power of the signora's charm.
but while the mother of the last of the Neros be thus in he full
splendour, with crowd of people gaze at she and the elite of the
company stand round her couch, her glory be pal by the
arrival of the Countess De Courcy. Miss Thorne have now be wait
three hour for the countess, and could not therefore but show very
evident gratification when the arrival at last take place. she and
her brother of course go off to welcome the title grandee, and
with they, alas, go many of the signora's admirer.
'oh, Mr Thorne,' say the countess, while the act of be disrobe
of her fur cloak, and re-rob in her gauze shawl, 'what dreadful
road you have; perfectly frightful.'
it happen that Mr Thorne be way-warden for the district, and not
like the attack, begin to excuse his road.
'oh yes, indeed they be,' say the countess, not mind he in
the least, 'perfectly dreadful; be they not, Margaretta? why, dear
Miss Thorne, we leave Courcy Castle just at eleven; it be only just
past eleven, be it not, John? and--'
'just past one, I think you mean,' say the Honourable John,
turn from the group and eye the signora through his glass.
the signora give he back his own, as the saying be, and more with
it; so that the young nobleman be force to avert his glance, and
drop his glass.
'I say, Thorne,' whisper he, 'who the deuce be that on the sofa?'
'Dr Stanhope's daughter,' whisper back Mr Thorne. 'Signora Neroni
she call herself.'
'Whew-ew-ew!' whistle the Honourable John. 'the devil she be! I
have hear no end of story about that filly. you must positively
introduce I, Thorne; you positively must.'
Mr Thorne who be respectability itself, do not quite like have
a guest about whom the Honourable John De Courcy have hear no end
of story; but he couldnot help himself. he merely resolve that
before he go to bed he would let his sister know somewhat of the
history of the lady she be so willing to welcome. the innocence of
Miss Thorne, at her time of life, be perfectly charming; but even
innocence may be dangerous.
'John may say what he like,' continue the countess, urge she
excuse on Miss Thorne; 'I be sure we be past the castle gate
before twelve, benot we, Margaretta?'
'upon my word, I donot know,' say the Lady Margaretta, 'for I be
half asleep. but I do know that I be call sometime in the middle
of the night, and be dress myself before daylight.'
wise people, when they be in the wrong, always put themselves
right by find fault with the people against whom they have
sin. Lady De Courcy be a wise woman; and therefore, have
treat Miss Thorne very badly by stay away till three o'clock,
she assume the offensive and attack Mr Thorne's road. her
daughter, not less wise, attack Miss Thorne's early hour. the
art of do this be among the most precious of those usually
cultivate by person who know how to live. there be no
withstand it. who can go systematically to work, and have do
battle with the primary accusation and settle that, then bring
forward a counter-charge and support that also? life be not long
enough for such labour. a man in the right rely easily on his
rectitude, and therefore go about unarmed. his very strength be
his weakness; his very weakness be his strength. the one be never
prepare for combat, the other be always ready. therefore it be
that in this world the man that be in the wrong almost invariably
conquer the man that be in the right, and invariably despise he.
a man must be an idiot or else an angel, who, after the age of
forty shall attempt to be just to his neighbour. many like the
Lady Margaretta have learn their lesson at a much early age. but
this of course depend on the school in which they have be
teach.
Poor Miss Thorne be altogether overcome. she know very well that
she have be ill-treat, and yet she find herself make
apology to Lady De Courcy. to do her ladyship justice, she
receive they very graciously, and allow herself with her train
of daughter to be lead towards the lawn.
there be two window in the drawing-room wide open for the
countess to pass through; but she see that there be a woman on the
sofa, at the third window, and that that woman have, as it be, a
following attach to she. her ladyship therefore determine to
investigate the woman. the De Courcys be hereditarily short
sight, and have be so for thirty century at least. so Lady De
Courcy, who, when she enter the family have adopt the family
habit, do as her son have do before she, and take her glass to
investigate the Signora Neroni, press in among the gentleman who
surround the couch, and bow slightly to those whom she choose to
honour by her acquaintance.
in order to get to the window she have to pass close to the front of
the couch, and as she do so she star hard at the occupant. the
occupant in return star hard at the countess. the countess who
since her countess-ship commence have be accustom to see all
eye, not royal, ducal, or marquesal, fall down before her own,
pause as she go on, raise her eyebrow, and star even hard
than before. but she have now to do with one who care little for
countess. it be, one may say, impossible for mortal man or woman
to abash Madeline Neroni. she open her large bright lustrous eye
wider and wide, till she seem to be all eye.
she gaze up into the lady's face, not as though she do it with an
effort, but as if she delight in do it. she use no glass to
assist her effrontery, and need none. the faint possible smile
of derision play round her mouth, and her nostril be slightly
dilate, as if in sure anticipation of her triumph. and it be
sure. the Countess De Courcy, in spite of her thirty century and
De Courcy castle, and the fact that Lord De Courcy be grand master
of the pony to the Prince of Wales, have not a chance with she.
at first the little circlet of gold waver in the countess's hand,
then the hand shake, then the circlet fall, the countess's head
toss itself into the air, and the countess's foot shamble out to
the lawn. she do not however go so fast but what she hear the
signora's voice, asking--
'who on earth be that woman, Mr Slope?'
'that be Lady De Courcy.'
'oh, ah. I might have suppose so. ha, ha, ha. well, thatbe as good
as a play.'
it be as good as a play to any there who have eye to observe it,
and wit to comment on what they observe.
but the Lady De Courcy soon find a congenial spirit on the lawn.
there she encounter Mrs Proudie, and as Mrs Proudie be not only
the wife of a bishop, but be also the cousin of an earl, Lady De
Courcy consider she to be the fit companion she be likely to
meet in that assemblage. they be accordingly delighted to see
each other. Mrs Proudie by no mean despise a countess, and as
this countess live in the county and within a sort of extensive
visit distance of Barchester, she be glad to have this
opportunity of ingratiate herself.
'my dear Lady De Courcy, I be so delighted,' say she, look as
little grim as it be in her nature to do so. 'I hardly expect to
see you here. it be such a distance, and then you know, such a
crowd.'
'and such road, Mrs Proudie! I really wonder how the people ever
get about. but I donot suppose they ever do.'
'well, I really donot know; but I suppose not. the Thorne donot, I
know,' say Mrs Proudie. 'very nice person, Miss Thorne, benot
she?'
'oh, delightful and so queer; Ihave know she these twenty year. a
great pet of mine be dear Miss Thorne. she be so very strange, you
know. she always make I think of the Esquimaux and the Indians.
benot her dress quite delightful?'
'delightful,' say Mrs Proudie; 'I wonder now whether she paint.
do you ever see such colour?'
'oh, of course,' say Lady De Courcy; 'that be, I have no doubt she
do. but, Mrs Proudie, who be that woman on the sofa by the
window? just step this way and youwill see she, there--' and the
countess lead she to a spot where she could plainly see the
signora's well-remember face and figure.
she do not however do so without be equally well see by the
signora. 'look, look,' say that lady to Mr Slope, who be still
stand near to she; 'see the high spirituality and
temporality of the land in league together, and all against poor
I. Iwill wager my bracelet, Mr Slope against your next sermon, that
theyhave take up their position there on purpose to pull I to
piece. well, I cannot rush to the combat, but I know how to protect
myself if the enemy come near I.'
but the enemy know well. they could gain nothing be contact with
the signora Neroni, and they could abuse she as they please at a
distance from she on the lawn.
'shebe that horrid italian woman, Lady De Courcy; you must have
hear of she.'
'what italian woman?' say her ladyship, quite alive to the come
story; 'I donot think Ihave hear of any italian woman come into
the country. she donot look italian either.'
'oh, you must have hear of she,' say Mrs Proudie. 'no, shebe not
absolutely italian. she be Dr Stanhope's daughter--Dr Stanhope the
prebendary; and she call herself the Signora Neroni.'
'oh--h--h--h!' exclaim the countess.
'I be sure you have hear of she,' continue Mrs Proudie. 'I donot
know anything about her husband. they do say that some man name
Neroni be still alive. I believe she do marry such a man abroad,
but I do not at all know who or what he be.'
'ah--h--h--h!' say the countess, shake her head with much
intelligence, as every additional 'h' fall from her lip. 'I know
all about it now. I have hear George mention she. George know all
about she. George hear about she in Rome.'
'shebe an abominable woman at any rate,' say Mrs Proudie.
'insufferable,' say the countess.
'she make her way into the palace once, before I know anything
about she; and I cannot tell you how dreadfully indecent she
conduct be.'
'be it?' say the delighted countess.
'insufferable,' say the prelatess.
'but why do she lie on a sofa?' ask the Lady De Courcy.
'she have only one leg,' say Mrs Proudie.
'only one leg!' say the Lady De Courcy, who feel to a certain
degree dissatisfy that the signora be thus incapacitate. 'be
she bear so?'
'oh, no,' say Mrs Proudie,--and her ladyship feel somewhat
recomforte by the assurance,--'she have two. but that Signor Neroni
beat she, I believe, till she be oblige to have one amputate. at
any rate she entirely lose the use of it.'
'unfortunate creature!' say the countess, who herself know
something of matrimonial trial.
'yes,' say Mrs Proudie; 'one would pity she, in spite of her past
bad conduct, if she know how to behave herself. but she do not.
she be the most insolent creature I have ever put my eye on.'
'indeed she be,' say Lady De Courcy.
'and her conduct with man be abominable, that she be not fit to be
admit into any lady's drawing-room.'
'dear I!' say the countess, become again excited, happy, and
merciless.
'you see that man stand near her,--the clergyman with the red
hair?'
'yes, yes.'
'she have absolutely ruin that man. the bishop, or I should rather
take the blame on myself, for it be I,--I bring he down from
London to Barchester. he be a tolerable preacher, an active young
man, and I therefore introduce he to the bishop. that woman, Lady
De Courcy, have get hold of he, and have so disgrace he, that I be
force to require that he shall leave the palace; and I doubt very
much whether he willnot lose his gown.'
'why what an idiot the man must be!' say the countess.
'you donot know the intriguing villainy of that woman,' say Mrs
Proudie, remember her own tear flounce.
'but you say she have only get one leg!'
'she be as full of mischief as tho' she have ten. look at her eye,
Lady De Courcy. do you ever see such eye in a decent woman's
head?'
'indeed I never do, Mrs Proudie.'
'and her effrontery, and her voice; I quite pity her poor father,
who be really a good sort of man.'
'Dr Stanhope, benot he?'
'yes, Dr Stanhope. he be one of our prebendaries,--a good quiet
sort of man himself. but I be surprised that he should let his
daughter conduct herself as he do.'
'I suppose he cannot help it,' say the countess.
'but a clergyman, you know, Lady De Courcy! he should at any rate
prevent she from exhibit in public, if he cannot induce she to
behave at home. but he be to be pity. I believe he have a
desperate life of it with the lot of they. that apish-look man
there, with the long beard and the loose trousers,--he be the
woman's brother. he be nearly as bad as she be. they be both of
they infidel.'
'infidel!' say Lady De Courcy, 'and their father a prebendary!'
'yes, and likely to be the new dean too,' say Mrs Proudie.
'oh, yes, poor dear Dr Trefoil!' say the countess, who have once in
her life speak to that gentleman; 'I be so distressed to hear it,
Mrs Proudie. and so Dr Stanhope be to be the new dean! he come of
an excellent family, and I wish he success in spite of his
daughter. perhaps, Mrs Proudie, when he be dean, theywill be well
able to see the error of their way.'
to this Mrs Proudie say nothing. her dislike of the Signora Neroni
be too deep to admit of she even hop that that lady should see
the error of her way. Mrs Proudie look on the signora as one of
the lost,--one of those beyond the reach of christian charity, and
be therefore able to enjoy the luxury of hat she, without the
drawback of wish she eventually well out of her sin.
any further conversation between these congenial soul be
prevent by the advent of Mr Thorne, who come to lead the countess
to the tent. indeed, he have be desire to do so some ten minute
since; but he have be delay in the drawing-room by the signora.
she have contrive to detain he, to bet he near to her sofa, and
at last to make he seat himself on a chair close to her beautiful
arm. the fish take the bait, be hook, and catch, and land.
within that ten minute he have hear the whole of signora's history
in such strain as she choose to use in tell it. he learn from
the lady's own lip the whole of that mysterious tale to which the
Honourable George have merely allude. he discover that the
beautiful creature lie before he have be more sin against
than sin. she have own to he that she have be weak,
confide and indifferent to the world's opinion, and that she have
therefore be ill-use, deceive and evil speak of. she have
speak to he of her mutilate limb, her youth destroy in the
full bloom, her beauty rob of its every charm, her life
blight, her hope wither; and as she do so, a tear drop
from her eye to her cheek. she have tell he of these thing, and
ask for his sympathy.
what could a good-natured genial Anglo-Saxon squire Thorne do but
promise to sympathise with she? Mr Thorne do promise to
sympathise; promise also to come and see the last of the Neros, to
hear more of those fearful roman day, of those light and innocent
but dangerous hour which flit by so fast on the shore of Como,
and to make himself the confidant of the signora's sorrow.
we need hardly say that he drop all idea of warn his sister
against the dangerous lady. he have be mistake; never so much
mistaken in his life. he have always regard that Honourable George
as a coarse brutal-minded young man; now he be more convinced than
ever that he be so. it be by such man as the Honourable George
that the reputation of such woman as Madeline Neroni be
imperille and damage. he would go and see the lady in her own
house; he be fully sure in his own mind of the soundness of his
own judgment; if he find she, as he believe he should do, an
injure well-dispose, warm-hearted woman, he would get his sister
Monica to invite she out to Ullathorne.
'no,' say she, as at her instance he get up to leave she, and
declare that he himself would attend upon she want; 'no, no, my
friend; I positively put a veto upon your do so. what, in your
own house, with an assemblage round you such as there be here! do
you wish to make every woman hate I and every man stare at I? I
lie a positive order on you not to come near I again to-day. come
and see I at home. it be only at home that I can talk; it be only
at home that I really can live and enjoy myself. my day of go
out, day such as these, be rare indeed. come and see I at home,
Mr Thorne, and then I will not bid you to leave I.'
it be, we believe, common with young man of five and twenty to look
on their senior--on man of, say, double their own age--as so many
stock and stone--stock and stone, that is, in regard to
feminine beauty. there never be a great mistake. woman, indeed,
generally know well; but on this subject man of one age be
thoroughly ignorant of what be the very nature of mankind of other
age. no experience of what go on in the world, no reading of
history, no observation of life, have any effect in teach the
truth. man of fifty donot dance mazurkas, be generally too fat
and wheezy; nor do they sit for the hour together on river bank at
their mistress' foot, be somewhat afraid of rheumatism. but
for real true love, love at first sight, love to devotion, love
that rob a man of his sleep, love that 'will gaze an eagle blind,'
love that 'will hear the low sound when the suspicious tread of
theft be stop,' love that be 'like a Hercules still climb
tree in the Hesperides,'--we believe this good age be from
forty-five to seventy; up to that, man be generally give to mere
flirting.
at the present moment Mr Thorne, aetat. fifty, be over head and
ear in love at first sight with the Signora Madeline Vesey Neroni,
nata Stanhope.
nevertheless he be sufficiently master of himself to offer his arm
with all propriety to Lady De Courcy, and the countess graciously
permit herself to be lead to the tent.
such have be Miss Thorne's order, as she have succeed in
induce the bishop to lead old Lady Knowle to the top of the
dining-room. one of the baronet be send off in quest of Mrs
Proudie, and find that lady on the lawn not in the good of
humour. Mr Thorne and the countess have leave she too abruptly; she
have in vain look about for an attendant chaplain, or even a stray
curate; they be all draw long bow with the young lady at
the bottom of the lawn, or find place for their graceful
co-toxophilite in some snug corner of the tent. in such position
Mrs Proudie have be willnot in early day to fall back upon Mr
Slope; but now she could never fall back upon he again. she give
her head one shake as she think of her lone position, and that
shake be as good as a week deduct from Mr Slope's long sojourn
in Barchester. Sir Harkaway Gorse, however, relieve her present
misery, though his do so by no mean mitigate the sinning
chaplain's doom.
and now the eating and drinking begin in earnest. Dr Grantly, to
his great horror, find himself league to Mrs Clantantram. Mrs
Clantantram have a great regard for the archdeacon, which be not
cordially return; and when she, come up to he, whisper in
his ear, 'come, archdeacon, Ibe sure you willnot begrudge an old
friend the favour of your arm,' and then proceed to tell he the
whole history of her roquelaure, he resolve that he would shake
she off before he be fifteen minute old. but latterly the
archdeacon have not be successful in his resolution; and on the
present occasion Mrs Clantantram stick to he till the banquet be
over.
Dr Gwynne get a baronet's wife, and Mrs Grantly fall to the lot of
a baronet. Charlotte Stanhope attach herself to Mr Harding in
order to make room for Bertie, who succeed in sit down in the
dining-room next to Mrs Bold. to speak sooth, now that he have love
in earnest to make, his heart almost fail he.
Eleanor have be right glad to avail herself of his arm, see
that Mr Slope be hover nigh she. in strive to avoid that
terrible Charybdis of a Slope she be in great danger of fall
into an unseen Scylla on the other hand, that Scylla be Bertie
Stanhope. nothing could be more gracious than she be to Bertie.
she almost jump at his proffered arm. Charlotte perceive this
from a distance, and triumph in her heart; Bertie feel it, and
be encourage; Mr Slope see it, and glower with jealousy.
Eleanor and Bertie sit down to table in the dining-room; and as she
take her seat at his right hand, she find that Mr Slope be
already in possession of the chair at her own.
as these thing be go on in the dining-room, Mr Arabin be
hang enrapture and alone over the signora's sofa; and Eleanor
from her seat could look through the open door and see that he be
do so.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
the BISHOP sit down to BREAKFAST, and the DEAN die
the bishop of Barchester say grace over the well-spread board in
the Ullathorne dining-room; and while he do so the last breath be
fly from the dean of Barchester as he lie in his sick-room in
the deanery. when the bishop of Barchester raise his first glass
of champagne to his lip, the deanship of Barchester be a good
thing in the gift of the prime minister. before the bishop of
Barchester have leave the table, the minister of the day be make
aware of the fact at his country seat in Hampshire, and have already
turn over in his mind the name of five very respectable
aspirant for the preferment. it be at present only necessary to
say that Mr Slope's name be not among the five.
''twas merry in the hall when the beard wag all;' and the
clerical beard wag merrily in the hall of Ullathorne that day.
it be not till after the last cork have be draw, the last speech
make, the last nut crack, that tiding reach and be whisper
about that the poor dean be no more. it be well for the happiness
of the clerical beard that this little delay take place, as
otherwise decency would have forbid they to wag at all.
but there be one sad man among they that day. Mr Arabin's beard
do not wag as it should have do. he have come there hop the
good, strive to think the good about Eleanor; turn over in his
mind all the word he remember to have fall from she about Mr
Slope, and try to gather from they a conviction unfavourable to
his rival. he have not exactly resolve to come that day to some
decisive proof as to the widow's intention; but he have mean, if
possible, to re-cultivate his friendship with Eleanor; and in his
present frame of mind any such re-cultivation must have end in a
declaration of love.
he have pass the previous night alone at his new parsonage, and it
be the first night that he have so pass. it have be dull and
sombre enough. Mrs Grantly have be right in say that a
priestess would be want at St Ewold's. he have sit there alone
with his glass before he, and then with his teapot, think about
Eleanor Bold. as be usual in such meditation, he do little but
blame she; blame she for like Mr Slope, and blame she for not
like he; blame she for her cordiality to himself, and blame she
for her want of cordiality; blame she for be stubborn,
headstrong, and passionate; and yet the more he think of her the
high she rise in his affection. if only it should turn out, if
only it could be make to turn out, that she have defend Mr Slope,
not from love, but on principle, all would be right. such principle
in itself would be admirable, loveable, womanly; he feel that he
could be pleased to allow Mr Slope just so much favour as that. but
if--and then Mr Arabin poke his fire most unnecessarily, speak
crossly to his new parlour-maid who come in for the tea-thing, and
throw himself back in his chair determine to go to sleep. why have
she be so stiff-neck when ask a plain question? she could not
but have know in what light he regard she. why have she not
answer a plain question, and so put an end to his misery? then,
instead of go to sleep in his arm-chair, Mr Arabin walk about
the room as though he have be possess.
on the following morning, when he attend Miss Thorne's behest,
he be still in a somewhat confused state. his first duty have be
to converse with Mrs Clantantram, and that lady have find it
impossible to elicit the slight sympathy from he on the subject
of hr roquelaure. Miss Thorne have ask he whether Mrs Bold be
come with the Grantlys; and the two name of Bold and grantly
together have nearly make he jump from his seat.
he be in this state of confused uncertainty, hope, and doubt, when
he see Mr Slope, with his most polished smile, hand Eleanor out
of her carriage. he think of nothing more. he never consider
whether the carriage belong to she or to Mr Slope, or to any one
else to whom they might both be mutually oblige without any
concert between themselves. the sight in his present state of mind
be quite enough to upset he and his resolve. it be clear as
noonday. have he see she hand into a carriage by Mr Slope at a
church door with a white veil over her head, the truth could not be
more manifest. he go into the house, and, as we have see, soon
find himself walk with Mr Harding. shortly afterwards Eleanor
come up; and then he have to leave his companion, and either go
about alone or find another. while in this state he be encounter
by the archdeacon.
'I wonder,' say Dr Grantly, 'if it be true that Mr Slope and Mrs
Bold come here together. Susan say she be almost sure she see
their face in the same carriage as she get out of her own.'
Mr Arabin have nothing for it but to bear his testimony to the
correctness of Mrs Grantly's eyesight.
'it be perfectly shameful,' say the archdeacon; 'or I should
rather say, shameless. she be ask she as my guest; and if she be
determined to disgrace herself, she should have feel enough not
to do so before my immediate friend. I wonder how that man get
himself invite. I wonder whether she have the face to bring he.'
to this Mr Arabin could answer nothing, nor do he wish to answer
anything. though he abuse Eleanor to himself, he do not choose to
abuse to any one else, nor be he well pleased to hear any one else
speak ill of she. Dr Grantly, however, be very angry, and do not
spare his sister-in-law. Mr Arabin therefore leave he as soon as he
could, and wander back into the house.
it be impossible to say how the knowledge have be acquire, but
the signora have a sort of instinctive knowledge that Mr Arabin be
an admirer of Mrs Bold. man hunt fox by the aid of dog, and be
aware that they do so by the strong organ of smell with which the
dog be endow. they do not, however, in the least comprehend how
such a sense can work with such acuteness. the organ by which woman
instinctively, as it be, know and feel how other woman be
regard by man, and how also man be regard by other woman, be
equally strong, and equally incomprehensible. a glance, a word, a
motion, suffice: by some such acute exercise of her feminine
sens the signora be aware that Mr Arabin love Eleanor Bold; and
therefore, by a further exercise of her peculiar feminine
propensity, it be quite natural for she to entrap Mr Arabin into
her net.
the work be half do before she come to Ullathorne, and when
could she have a well opportunity of complete it? she have have
almost enough of Mr Slope, though she could not quite resist the
fun of drive a very sanctimonious clergyman to madness by a
desperate and ruinous passion. Mr Thorne have fall too easily to
give much pleasure in the chase. his position as a man of wealth
might make his alliance of value, but as a lover he be very
second-rate. we may say that she regard he somewhat as a
sportsman do a pheasant. the bird be so easily shoot, that he
would not be worth the shooting be it not for the very
respectable appearance that he make in a larder. the signora would
not waste much time in shoot Mr Thorne, but still he be worth
bagging for family us.
but Mr Arabin be game of another sort. the signora be herself
possess of quite sufficient intelligence to know that Mr Arabin
be a man more than usually intellectual. she know also, that as a
clergyman he be of a much high stamp than Mr Slope, and that as
gentleman he be well educate than Mr Thorne. she would never
have attempt to drive Mr Arabin into ridiculous misery as she do
Mr Slope, nor would she think it possible to dispose of he in ten
minute as she have do with Mr Thorne.
such be her reflection about Mr Arabin. as to Mr Arabin, it
cannot be say that he reflect at all about the signora.
he know that she be beautiful, and he feel that she be able to
charm he. he require charming in his present misery, and
therefore he go and stand at the head of her couch. she know all
about it. such be her peculiar gift.
it be her nature to see that he require charming, and it be her
province to charm he. as the Easter idler swallow his dose of
opium, as the London reprobate swallow his dose of gin, so with
similar desire and for similar reason do Mr Arabin prepare to
swallow the charm of the Signora Neroni.
'why benot you shoot with bow and arrow, Mr Arabin?' say
she, when they be nearly alone together in the sitting-room; 'or
talk with young lady in shady bower, or turn your talent
to account in some way? what be a bachelor like you ask here
for? donot you mean to earn your cold chicken and champagne? be I
you, I should be ashamed to be so idle.'
Mr Arabin murmur some sort of answer. though he wish to be
charm, he as hardly yet in a mood to be playful in return.
'why, what ail you, Mr Arabin?' say she, 'here you be in your
own parish; Miss Thorne tell I that her party be give expressly
in your honour; and yet you be the only dull man in it. your
friend Mr Slope be with I a few minute since, full of life and
spirit' why donot you rival he?'
it be not difficult for so acute an observer as Madeline Neroni to
see that she have hit the nail on the head and drive the bolt home.
Mr Arabin wince visibly before her attack, and she know at once
that he be jealous of Mr Slope.
'but I look on you and Mr Slope as the very antipode of man,' say
she. 'there be nothing in which you be not each the reverse of the
other, except in belong to the same profession; and even in that
you be so unlike as perfectly to maintain the rule. he be
gregarious, you be give to solitude. he be active, you be
passive. he work, you think. he like woman, you despise they. he
be fond of position and power, and so be you, but for directly
different reason. he love to be praise, you very foolishly abhor
it. he will gain his reward, which will be an insipid useful wife,
a comfortable income, and a reputation for sanctimony. you will
also gain your.'
'well, and what will they be?' say Mr Arabin, who know that he be
be flatter, and yet suffer himself to put up with it. 'what
will be my reward?'
'the heart of some woman whom you will be too austere to own that
you love, and the respect of some few friend which you will be too
proud to own that you value.'
'rich reward,' say he; 'but of little worth if they be to be so
treat.'
'oh, you be not to look for such success as await Mr Slope. he be
bear to be a successful man. he suggest to himself an object, and
then start for it with eager intention. nothing will deter he
from his pursuit. he will have no scruple, no fear, no
hesitation. his desire be to be a bishop with a rise family, the
wife will come first, and in due time the apron. you will see all
this, and then--'
'well, and what then?'
'then you will begin to wish that you have do the same.'
Mr Arabin look placidly out at the lawn, and rest his shoulder
on the head of the sofa, rub his chin with his hand. it be a
trick he have when he be think deeply; and what the signora say
make he think. be it not all true? would he not hereafter look
back, if not at Mr Slope, at some other, people not equally gift
with himself, who have rise in the world while he have lag
behind, and then wish that he have do the same?
'be not such the doom of all speculative man of talent?' say she.
'do they not all sit rapt as you now be, cut imaginary silken
cord with their fine edge, while those not so highly temper
sever the every-day gordian knot of the world's struggle, and win
wealth and renown? steel too highly polished, edge too sharp, do
not do for this world's work, Mr Arabin.'
who be this woman that thus read the secret of his heart, and
re-utter to he the unwelcome boding of his own soul? he look
full into her face when she have do speaking, and say, 'be I one
of those foolish blade, too sharp and too fine to do a useful
day's work?'
'why do you let the Slopes of the world out-distance you?' say
she. 'it not the blood in your vein as warm as his? do not your
pulse beat as fast? have not God make you a man, and intend you to
do a man's work here, ay, and to take a man's wage also?'
Mr Arabin sit ruminate and rub his face, and wonder why
these thing be say to he; but he reply nothing. the signora
go on--
'the great mistake any man ever make be to suppose that the good
thing of the world be not worth the winning. and it be a mistake
so oppose to the religion which you preach! why do God permit
his bishop one after the other to have their five thousand and
ten thousand a year if such wealth be bad and not worth have?
why be beautiful thing give to we, and luxury and pleasant
enjoyment, if they be not intend to be use? they must be mean
for some one, and what be good for a layman cannot surely be bad
for a clerk. you try to despise these good thing, but you only
try; you donot succeed.'
'donot I,' say Mr Arabin, still muse, and not know what he
say.
'I ask you the question: do you succeed?'
Mr Arabin look at she piteously. it seem to he as though he
be be interrogate by some inner spirit of his own, to whom he
could not refuse an answer, and to whom he do not dare to give a
false reply.
'come, Mr Arabin, confess; do you succeed? be money so
contemptible? be worldly power so worthless? be feminine beauty a
trifle to be so slightly regard by a wise man?'
'feminine beauty!' say he, gaze into her face, as though all the
feminine beauty in the world be concentrate there. 'why do you
say I do not regard it?'
'if you look at I like that, Mr Arabin, I shall alter my
opinion--or should do so, be I not of course aware that I have no
beauty of my own worth regard.'
the gentleman blush crimson, but the lady do not blush at all. a
slightly increase colour animate her face, just so much so as to
give she an air of special interest. she expect a compliment from
her admirer, but she be rather grateful than otherwise by find
that he do not pay it to she. Messrs Slope and Thorne, Messrs
Brown, Jones and Robinson, they all pay her compliment. she be
rather in hope that she would ultimately succeed in induce Mr
Arabin to abuse she.
'but your gaze,' say she, 'be one of wonder, and not of
admiration. you wonder at my audacity in ask you such question
about yourself.'
'well, I do rather,' say he.
'nevertheless I expect an answer, Mr Arabin. why be woman make
beautiful if man be not to regard they?'
'but man do regard they,' he reply.
'and why not you?'
'you be beg the question, Madame Neroni.'
'I be sure that I shall beg nothing, Mr Arabin, which you will not
grant, and I do beg for an answer. do you not as a rule think woman
below your notice as companion? let we see. there be the widow
bold look round at you from her chair this minute. what would
you say to she as a companion for life?'
Mr Arabin, rise from his position, lean over the sofa and
look through the drawing-room door to the place where Eleanor be
seat between Bertie Stanhope and Mr Slope. she at once catch his
glance, and avert she own. she be not pleasantly place in her
present position. Mr Slope be do his good to attract she
attention; and she be strive to prevent his do so by talk
to Mr Stanhope, while her mind be intently fix on Mr Arabin and
Madame Neroni. Bertie Stanhope endeavour to take advantage of she
favour, but he be think more of the manner in which he would
by-and-by throw himself at her foot, than of amuse she at the
present moment.
'there,' say the signora. 'she be stretch her beautiful neck
to look at you, and now you have disturb she. well I declare, I
believe I be wrong about you; I believe that you do think Mrs Bold
a charming woman. your look seem to say so; and by her look I
should say that she be jealous of I. come, Mr Arabin, confide in
I, and if it be so, Iwill do all in my power to make up the match.'
it be needless to say that the signora be not very sincere in her
offer. she be never sincere on such subject. she never expect
other to be so, nor do she expect other to think she so. such
matter be her plaything, her billiard table, her hound and
hunter, her waltz and polkas, her picnic and summer-day
excursion. she have little else to amuse she, and therefore play
at love-making in all its form. she be now play at it with Mr
Arabin, and do not at all expect the earnestness and truth of his
answer.
'all in your power would be nothing,' say he; 'for Mrs Bold be, I
imagine, already engage to another.'
'then you own the impeachment yourself.'
'you cross-question I rather unfairly,' he reply, 'and I do not
know why I answer you at all. Mrs Bold be a very beautiful woman,
and as intelligent as beautiful. it be impossible to know she
without admire she.'
'so you think the widow a very beautiful woman?'
'indeed I do.'
'and one that would grace the parsonage at St Ewold's.'
'one that would grace any man's house.'
'and you really have the effrontery to tell I this,' say she; 'to
tell I, who, as you very well know, set up to be a beauty myself,
and who be at this very moment take such an interest in your
affair, you really have the effrontery to tell I that Mrs Bold be
the most beautiful woman you know.'
'I do not say so,' say Mr Arabin; 'you be more beautiful--'
'ah, come now, that be something like. I think you would not be
so unfeeling.'
'you be more beautiful, perhaps more clever.'
'thank you, thank you, Mr Arabin. I know that you and I should be
friend.'
'but--'
'not a word far. I will not hear a word far. if you talk
till midnight, you cannot improve what you have say.'
'but Madame Neroni, Mrs bold--'
'I will not hear a word about Mrs Bold. dread thought of
strychnine do pass across my brain, but she be welcome to the
second place.'
'her place--'
'I willnot hear anything about she or her place. I be satisfied and
that be enough. but, Mr Arabin, I be die with hunger; beautiful
and clever as I be, you know I cannot go to my food, and yet you do
not bring it to I.'
this at any rate be so true as to make it unnecessary that Mr
Arabin should not act upon it, and he accordingly go into the
dining-room and supply the signora's want.
'and yourself,' say she.
'oh,' say he, 'I be not hungry; I never eat at this hour.'
'come, come, Mr Arabin, donot let love interfere with your
appetite. it never do with mine. give I half a glass more
champagne, and then go to the table. Mrs Bold will do I an injury
if you stay talk to I any long.'
Mr Arabin do as he be bid. he take her plate and glass from she,
and go into the dining-room, help himself to a sandwich from
the crowded table and begin munch it in a corner.
as he be do so, Miss Thorne, who have hardly sit down for a
moment, come into the room, and see he stand, be greatly
distressed.
'oh, my dear Mr Arabin,' say she, 'have you never sit down yet? I
be so distressed. you of all man too.'
Mr Arabin assure she that he have only just come into the room.
'that be the very reason why you should lose no more time. come
Iwill make room for you. thank'ee my dear,' she say, see that
Mrs Bold be make an attempt to move from her chair, 'but I would
not for the world see you stir, for all the lady would think it
necessary to follow. but, perhaps, if Mr Stanhope have do--just
for a minute, Mr Stanhope--till I can get another chair.'
and so Bertie have to rise to make way for his rival. this he do,
as he do everything, with an air of good-humour pleasantry,
which make it impossible for Mr Arabin to refuse the proffer
seat.
'his bishopric let another take,' say Bertie; the quotation be
certainly not very appropriate, either for the occasion, or the
person speak to. 'I have eat and be satisfied; Mr Arabin, pray
take my chair. I wish for your sake, it really be a bishop's
seat.'
Mr Arabin do sit down, and as he do so, Mrs Bold get up as though
to follow her neighbour.
'pray, pray donot move,' say Miss Thorne, almost force eleanor
back into her chair. 'Mr Stanhope be not go to leave we. he will
stand behind you like a true knight as he be. and now I think of
it, Mr Arabin, let I introduce you to Mr Slope. Mr Slope, Mr
Arabin.' and the two gentleman bow stiffly to each other across
the lady they both intend to marry, while the other gentleman who
also intend to marry she stand behind, watch they.
the two have never meet each other before, and the present be
certainly not a good opportunity for much cordial conversation,
even if cordial conversation between they have be possible. as it
be, the whole four who form the party seem as though their
tongue be tie. Mr Slope, who be wide awake to what he hop
be his come opportunity, be not much concerned in the interest
of the moment. his wish be to see Eleanor move, that he might
pursue she. Bertie be not exactly in the same frame of mind; the
evil of the day be near enough; there be no reason why he should
precipitate it. he have make up his mind to marry Eleanor Bold if he
could, and be resolve to-day to take the first preliminary step
towards do so. but there be time enough before he. he be not
go to make an offer of marriage over the table-cloth. have
thus good-naturedly make way for Mr Arabin, he be willing also to
let he talk to the future Mrs Stanhope as long as they remain in
their present position.
Mr Arabin bow to Mr Slope, begin eat his food, without say
a word far. he be full of thought, and though he eat he do
so unconsciously.
but poor Eleanor be the most to be pity. the only friend on whom
she think she could rely, be Bertie Stanhope, and he, it seem,
be determined to desert she. Mr Arabin do not attempt to address
she. she say a few word in reply to some remark from Mr Slope,
and then feel the situation too much for she, start from her
chair in spite of Miss Thorne, and hurry from the room. Mr Slope
follow she, and young Stanhope lose the occasion.
Madame Neroni, when she be leave alone, could not help ponder
much on the singular interview she have have with this singular man.
not a word that she have speak to he have be intend by she to
be receive as true, and yet he have answer she in the very spirit
of truth. he have do so, and she have be aware that he have do
so. she have worm from he his secret; and he, debar as it
would seem from man's usual privilege of lying, have innocently lay
bare his whole soul to she. he love Eleanor Bold, but Eleanor be
not in his eye so beautiful as herself. he would fain have eleanor
for his wife, but yet he have acknowledge that she be the less
gifted of the two. the man have literally be unable to falsify his
thought when question, and have be compel to be true malgre
lui, even when truth must have be disagreeable to he.
this teacher of man, this Oxford pundit, this double-distil
quintessence of university perfection, this writer of religious
treatise, this speaker of ecclesiastical speech, have be like a
little child in her hand; she have turn he inside out, and read
his very heart as she might have do that of a young girl. she
could not but despise he for his facile openness, and yet she
like he too. it be a novelty to she, a new trait in a man's
character. she feel also that she could never so completely make a
fool of he as she do of the Slopes and the Thornes. she feel that
she could never induce Mr Arabin to make protestation to she that
be not true, or to listen to nonsense that be mere nonsense.
it be quite clear that Mr Arabin be heartily in love with Mrs
Bold, and the signora, with very unwonted good nature, begin to
turn it over in her mind whether she could not do he a good turn.
of course Bertie be to have the first chance. it be an understood
family arrangement that her brother be, if possible, to marry the
widow Bold. Madeline know too well the necessity and what be due
to her sister to interfere with so excellent a plan, as long as it
might be feasible. but she have strong suspicion that it be not
feasible. she do not think it likely that Mrs Bold would accept a
man in her brother's position, and she have frequently say so to
Charlotte. she be inclined to believe that Mr Slope have more
chance of success; and with she it would be a labour of love to rob
Mr Slope of his wife.
and so the signora resolve, should Bertie fail, to do a
good-natured act for once in her life, and give up Mr Arabin to the
woman whom he love.
CHAPTER XXXIX
THE LOOKALOFTS and the GREENACRES
on the whole, Miss Thorne's provision for the amusement and feeding
of the outer class in the exoteric paddock be not unsuccessful.
two little drawback to the general happiness do take place, but
they be of a temporary nature, and apparent rather than real. the
first be the downfall of young Harry Greenacre, and the other be
the uprise of Mrs Lookaloft and her family.
as to the quintain, it become more popular among the boy on foot,
than it would ever have be among the man on horseback, even have
young Greenacre be more successful. it be twirl round and
round till it be nearly twist out of the ground; and the bag of
flour be use with great gusto in powder the back and head of
all who could be coax within the vicinity.
of course it be report all throughout the assemblage that Harry
be dead, and there be a pathetic scene between he and his mother
when it be find that he have escape scatheless from the fall. a
good deal of beer be drunk on the occasion, and the quintain be
'dratte' and 'bother', and very generally anathematise by all
the mother who have young son likely to be place in similar
jeopardy. but the affair of Mrs Lookaloft be of a more serious
nature.
'I do tell 'ee plainly,--face to face--she be there in madam's
drawing-room; herself and Gussy, and they two walloping gal,
dress up to their very eyes.' this be say by a very positive,
very indignant, and very fat farmer's wife, who be sit on the
end of a bench lean on the handle of a huge cotton umbrella.
'but you donot zee she, Dame Guffern?' say Mrs Greenacres, whom
this information, join to the recent peril undergone by her son,
almost overpowered. Mr Greenacres hold just as much land as Mr
Lookaloft, pay his rent quite as punctually, and his opinion in
the vestry-room be reckon to be every whit as good. Mrs
Lookaloft's rise in the world have be wormwood to Mrs Greenacre.
she have not taste herself for the sort of finery which convert
Barleystubb farm into Rosebank, and which have occasionally grace
Mr Lookaloft's letter with the dignity of esquirehood. she have no
wish to convert her own homeland into Violet Villa, or to see she
goodman go about with a new-fangled handle to his name. but it be
a mortal injury to she that Mrs Lookaloft should be successful in
her hunt after such honour. she have abuse and ridicule Mrs
Lookaloft to the extent of her little power. she have push against
she go out of church, and have excuse herself with all the
easiness of equality. 'ah, dame, I axis pardon; but you be grow so
mortal stout these time.' she have inquire with apparent cordiality
of Mr Lookaloft after 'the woman that own he,' and have, as she
think, be on the whole able to hold her own pretty well against
her aspire neighbour. now, however, she find herself distinctly
put into a separate and inferior class. Mrs Lookaloft be ask
into the Ullathorne drawing-room, merely because she call she
house Rosebank, and have talk over her husband into buy piano
and silk dress instead of put his money by to stock farm for
his son.
Mrs Greenacre, much as she reverence Miss Thorne, and highly as
she respect her husband's landlord, could not but look on this as
an act of injustice do to she and her. Hitherto the Lookalofts
have never be recognise as be of a different class from the
greenacre. their pretension be all self-pretension, their
finery be all pay for by themselves and not grant to they by
other. the local sovereign of the vicinity, the district
fountain of honour, have hitherto confer on they the stamp of no
rank. Hitherto their crinoline petticoat, late hour, and mincing
gait have be a fair subject of Mrs Greenacre's raillery, and this
raillery have be a safety valve for her envy. now, however, and
from henceforward, the case would be very different. now the
Lookalofts would boast that their aspiration have be sanction
by the gentry of the country; now they would declare with some show
of truth that their claim to peculiar consideration have be
recognise. they have sit as equal guest in the presence of bishop
and baronet; they have be curtsey to by Miss Thorne on her own
drawing-room carpet; they be about to sit down to table in
company with a live countess! Bab Lookaloft, as she have always be
call by the young Greenacres in the day of their juvenile
equality, might possibly sit next to the Honourable George, and
that wretche Gussy might be permit to hand a custard to the
Lady Margaretta De Courcy.
the fruition of these honour, or such of they as fall to the lot
of the envy family, be not such as should have cause much envy.
the attention pay to the Lookalofts by the De Courcys be very
limited, and the amount of society be hardly in itself a
recompense for the dull monotony of their day. but of what they
endure Mrs Greenacre take no account; she think only of what she
consider they must enjoy, and of the dreadfully exalt tone of
living which would be manifest by the Rosebank family, as the
consequence of their present distinction.
'but do 'ee zee them there, dame, do 'ee zee them then with your
own eye?' ask poor Mrs Greenacre, still hop that there might
be some ground for doubt.
'and how could I do that, unless so be I be there myself?' ask
Mrs Guffen. 'I donot set eye on none of they this blessed
morning, but I zee'd they as do. you know our John; well, he will
be for keep company with Betsey Rusk, madam's own maid, you
know. and Betsey benot one of your common kitchen wench. so
Betsey, she come out to our John, you know, and shebe always vastly
polite to I, be Betsey Rusk, I must say. so before she take so
much as one turn with John, she tell I every ha'porth that be
go on up in the house.'
'do she now?' say Mrs Greenacre.
'indeed she do,' say Mrs Guffern.
'and she tell you they people be up there in the drawing-room?'
'she tell I she zee'd they come in--that they be dress finer by
half nor any of the family, with all their neckse and buzom stark
naked as a bear babby.'
'the minx!' exclaim Mrs Greenacre, who feel herself more put
about by this than any other mark of aristocratic distinction which
her enemy have assume.
'yes, indeed,' continue Mrs Guffern, 'as naked as you please,
while all the quality be dress just as you and I be, Mrs
Greenacre.'
'drat their impudence' say Mrs Greenacre, from whose well-cover
bosom all milk of human kindness be recede, as far as the family
of the Lookalofts be concern.
'so say I,' say Mrs Guffern; 'and so say my good-man Thomas
Guffern, when he hear'd it. "molly," say he to I, "if ever you
take to go about o' morning with yourself all naked in they
way, I beg you willnot come back no more to the old house." so say
I, "Thomas, no more I wull." "but," say he, "drat it, how the
deuce do she manage with her rheumatiz, and she not a rag on
she:"' say Mrs Giffern, laugh loudly as she though of Mrs
Lookalofts's probable suffering from rheumatic attack.
'but to liken herself that way to folk that ha' blood in their
vein,' say Mrs Greenacre.
'well, but that warn't all neither that Betsey tell. there they all
swell into madam's drawing-room, like so many turkey cock, as
much to say, "and who dare say no to we?" and Gregory be think
of tell they to come down here, only his heart fail he 'cause
of the grand way they be dress. so in they go; but madam
look at they as glum as death.'
'well now,' say Mrs Greenacre, greatly relieve, 'so they benot
ax different from we all then?'
'Betsey say that Gregory say that madam benot a bit too well
pleased to see they where they be and that, to his believing, they
be expect to come here just like the rest of we.'
there be great consolation in this. not that Mrs Greenacre be
altogether satisfied. she feel that justice to herself demand
that Mrs Lookaloft should not only not be encourage, but that she
should also be absolutely punish.
what have be do at that scriptural banquet, of which Mrs
Greenacre so often read the account to her family? why have not Miss
Thorne boldly go to the intruder and say: 'friend, thou hast
come up hither to high place not fit for thee. go down lower,
and thou wilt find thy mate.' let the Lookalofts be treat at the
present moment with ever so cold a shoulder, they would still be
enable to boast hereafter of their position, their aspiration,
and their honour.
'well, with all her grandeur, I do wonder that she be so mean,
continue Mrs Greenacre, unable to dismiss the subject.
'do you hear, goodman?' she go on, about to repeat the whole
story to her husband who then come up. 'therebe dame Lookaloft and
Bab and Gussy and the lot of them all sit as grand as fivepence
in madam's drawing-room, and they not ax no more nor you nor I.
do you ever hear tell the like o' that?'
'well, and what for shouldnot they?' say Farmer Greenacre.
'liken theyselve to the quality, as though they be estate
folk, or the like o' that!' say Mrs Guffern.
'well, if they like it and madam like it, theybe welcome for I,'
say the farmer. 'now I like the place well, cause I be more at
home like, and donot have to pay for they fine clothe for the
missus. every one to his taste, Mrs Guffern, and if neighbour
Lookaloft think that he have the good of it, hebe welcome.'
Mrs Greenacre sit down by her husband's side to begin the heavy
work of the banquet, and she do so in some measure of restore
tranquillity, but nevertheless she shake her head at her gossip to
show that in this instance she do not quite approve of her
husband's doctrine.
'and Iwill tell 'ee what, dame,' continue he; 'if so be that we
cannot enjoy the dinner that madam give we because Mother
Lookaloft be sit up there on a grand sofa, I think we ought all
to go home. if we greet at that, whatwill we do when true sorrow
come across we? how would you be now, dame, if the boy there have
break his neck when he get the tumble?'
Mrs Greenacre be humble, and say nothing far on the matter.
but let prudent man, such as Mr Greenacre, preach as they will, the
family of the Lookalofts certainly do occasion a good deal of
heart-burn in the world at large.
it be pleasant to see Mr Plomacy, as lean on his stout stick he
go about among the rural guest, act as a sort of head
constable as well as master of the revel. 'now, young 'un, if you
cannot manage to get along without that screeching, youwould well go
to the other side of the twelve-acre field, and take your dinner
with you. come, girl, what do you stand there for, twirl of
your thumb? come out, and let the lad see you; youhave no need to
be so ashamed of your face. hello! there, who be you? how do you
make your way in here?'
this last disagreeable question be put to a young man of about
twenty-four, who do not, in Mr Plomacy's eye, bear sufficient
vestige of a rural education and residence.
'if you please, your worship, Master Barrell the coachman let I in
at the church wicket, 'cause I do be work mostly al'ays for the
family.'
'then Master Barrell the coachman may let you out again,' say Mr
Plomacy, not even conciliate by the magisterial dignity which have
be concede to he. 'whatbe your name? and what trade be you,
and who do you work for?'
'Ibe Stubbs, your worship, Bob Stubbs; and--and--and--'
'and whatbe your trade, Stubbs?'
'plaisterer, please your worship.'
'Iwill plaister you and Barrell too; youwill just walk out of this
'ere field as quick as you walk in. we donot want no plaisterer;
when we do, wewill send for them. come, my buck, walk.'
Stubbs the plasterer be much downcast at the dreadful edict. he
be a sprightly fellow, and have contrive since his egress into the
Ullathorne elysium to attract to himself a forest nymph, to whom he
be whisper a plasterer's usual soft nothing, when he be
encounter by the great Mr Plomacy. it be dreadful to be thus
dissever from the dryad, and send howl back to a Barchester
pandemonium just as the nectar and ambrosia be about to descend
on the field of asphodel. he begin to try what prayer would do,
but city prayer be vain against the great rural potentate. not
only do Mr Plomacy order his exit, but raise his stick to show
the way which lead to the gate that have be leave in the custody of
that false Cerberus Barrell, proceed himself to see the edict of
banishment carry out.
the goddess mercy, however, the sweetest goddess that ever sit upon
a cloud, and the dear to poor frail err man appear on the
field in the person of Mr Greenacre. never be intercede goddess
more welcome.
'come, man,' say Mr Greenacre, 'never stick at trifle such a day
as this. I know the lad well. let he bide at my axing. Madam willnot
miss what he can eat and drink, I know.'
now Mr Plomacy and Mr Greenacre be swear friend. Mr Plomacy have
at his own disposal as comfortable a room as there be in
Ullathorne House; but he be a bachelor, and alone there; and,
moreover, smoke in the house be not allow even to Mr Plomacy.
his moment of true happiness be spend in a huge arm-chair in
the warm corner of Mrs Greenacre's beautifully clean front
kitchen. 'twa there that the inner man dissolve itself, and
pour itself out in stream of pleasant chat; 'twa there, and
perhaps there only, that he could unburden himself from the
ceremony of life without offend the dignity of those above
he, or incur the familiarity of those below. 'twa there that
his long pipe be always to be find on the accustomed chimney
board, not only permit but encourage.
such be the state of the case, it be not to be suppose that Mr
Plomacy could refuse such a favour to Mr Greenacre; but
nevertheless he not grant it without some further show of austere
authority.
'eat and drink, Mr Greenacre! no. itbe not what he eat and drink;
but the example such a chap show, come in where hebe not
invite--a chap of his age too. he too that never do a day's work
about Ullathorne since he be bear. plaisterer! Iwill plaister he!'
'he work long enough for I, then Mr Plomacy. and a good hand he
be at set tile as any in Barchester,' say the other, not
stick quite to veracity, as indeed mercy never should. 'come,
come, let he alone to-day, and quarrel with he to-morrow. you
wouldnot shame he before his lass there?'
'it go against the grain with I, then,' say Mr Plomacy. 'and
take care, you Stubbs, and behave yourself. if I hear a row, I
shall know where it come from. Ibe up to you Barchester
journeymen; I know what stuff yoube make of.'
and so Stubbs go off happy, pull at the forelock of his shock
head of hair in honour of the steward's clemency, and give
another double pull at it in honour of the farmer's kindness. and
as he go he swear within his grateful heart, that if ever Farmer
Greenacre want a day's work do for nothing, he be the lad to
do it for he. which promise it be not probable that he would ever
be call upon to perform.
but Mr Plomacy be not quite happy in his mind for he think of
the unjust steward, and begin to reflect whether he have not make
for himself friend at the mammon of unrighteousness. this,
however, do not interfere with the manner in which he perform
his duty at the bottom of the long board; nor do Mr Greenacre
perform his the bad at the top on account of the good wish of
Stubbs the plasterer. moreover, the guest do not think it
anything amiss when Mr Plomacy, rise to say grace, pray that
God would make they all truly thankful for the good thing which
Madam Thorne in her great liberality have set out before they!
all this time the quality in the tent on the lawn be get on
swimmingly; that is, champagne without restriction can enable
quality fold to swim. Sir Harkaway Gorse propose the health of
Miss Thorne, and liken she to a blood race-horse, always in
condition, and not to be tired down by any amount of work. Mr
Thorne return thank, say he hop his sister would always be
find able to run when call upon, and than give the health and
prosperity of the De Courcy family. his sister be very much
honour by see so many of they at her poor board. they be all
aware that important avocation make the absence of the earl
necessary. as his duty to his prince have call he from his family
hearth he, Mr Thorne, could not venture to regret that he do not
see he at Ullathorne; but nevertheless he would venture to
say--and so Mr Thorne become somewhat gravelled as a country
gentleman in similar circumstance usually do; but he ultimately
sit down, declare that he have much satisfaction in drink the
noble earl's health, together with that of the countess, and all
the family of De Courcy castle.
and then the Honourable George return thank. we will not follow
he through the different period of his somewhat irregular
eloquence. those immediately in his neighbourhood find it at first
rather difficult to get he to his leg, but much great
difficulty be soon experience in induce he to resume his seat.
one of two arrangement should certainly be make in these day:
either let all speech-making on festive occasion be utterly
tabooed and make as it be impossible; or else let those who be
to exercise the privilege be first subject to a compete
examination before the civil service examine commissioner. as it
be now, the Honourable Georges do but little honour to our
exertion in favour of british education.
in the dining-room the bishop go through the honour of the day
with much more neatness and propriety. he also drink Miss Thorne's
health, and do it in a manner become the bench which he adorn.
the party there, be perhaps a little more dull, a shade less
lively than that in the tent.
but what be lose in mirth, be fully make up in decorum.
and so the banquet pass off at the various table with great
eclat and universal delight.
CHAPTER XL
ULLATHORNE SPORTS--ACT II
'that which have make they drunk, have make I bold.' 'twas thus that
Mr Slope encourage himself, as he leave the dining-room in pursuit
of Eleanor. he have not indeed see in that room any person really
intoxicate; but there have be a good deal of wine drunk, and Mr
Slope have not hesitate to take his share, in order to screw
himself up to the undertaking which he have in hand. he be not the
first man who have think it expedient to call in the assistance of
Bacchus on such an occasion.
Eleanor be out through the window, and on the grass before she
perceive that she be follow. just at that moment the guest
be nearly all occupy at the table. here and there be to be
see a constant couple or two, who prefer their own sweet
discourse to the jingle of glass, or the charm of rhetoric which
fall from the mouth of the Honourable George and the bishop of
Barchester; but the ground be as nearly vacant as Mr Slope could
wish they to be.
Eleanor see that she be pursue, and as a deer, when escape be no
long possible, will turn to bay and attack the hound, so do she
turn upon Mr Slope.
'pray donot let I take you from the room,' say she, speak with
all the stiffness which she know how to use. 'I have come out to
look for a friend. I must beg of you, Mr Slope, to go back.'
but Mr Slope would not be thus entreat. he have observe all day
that Mrs Bold be not cordial to he, and this have to a certain
extent oppress he. but he do not deduce from this any assurance
that his aspiration be in vain. he see that she be angry with
he. might she not be so because he have so long tamper with she
feelings,--might it not arise from his having, as he know to be the
case, cause her name to be bruit about in conjunction with his
own, without have give she the opportunity of confess to the
world that henceforth their name be to be the one and the same?
poor lady! he have within he a certain Christian
conscience-stricken feeling of remorse on this head. it might be
that he have wrong she by his tardiness. he have, however, at the
present moment imbibe too much of Mr Thorne's champagne to have
any inward misgiving. he be right in repeat the boast of Lady
Macbeth: he be not drunk; but he be bold enough for anything. it
be a pity that in such a state he could not have encounter Mrs
Proudie.
'you must permit I to attend you,' say he; 'I could not think of
allow you to go alone.'
'indeed you must, Mr Slope,' say Eleanor still very stiffly; 'for
it be my special wish to be alone.'
the time for let the great secret escape he have already come.
Mr Slope see that it must be now or never, and he be determine
that it should be now. this be not his first attempt at win a
fair lady. he have be on his knee, look unutterable thing with
his eye, and whisper honey word before this. indeed he be
somewhat an adept at these thing, and have only to adapt to the
perhaps different taste of Mrs Bold the well-remember rhapsody
which have once so much gratify Olivia Proudie.
'do not ask I to leave you, Mrs Bold,' say he with an impassioned
look, impassione and sanctify as well, with that sort of look
which be not uncommon with gentleman of Mr Slope's school, and
which may perhaps be call the tender-pious. 'do not ask I to
leave you, till I have speak a few word with which my heart be
full; which I have come hither purposely to say.'
Eleanor see how it be now. she know directly what it be she be
about to go through, and very miserable the knowledge make she. of
course she could refuse Mr Slope, and there would be an end of
that, one might say. but there be not an end of it as far as
Eleanor be concern. the very fact of Mr Slope's make an offer
to she would be a triumph for the archdeacon, and in a great
measure a vindication of Mr Arabin's conduct. the widow could not
bring herself to endure with patience the idea that she have be in
the wrong.
she have defend Mr Slope, she have declare herself quite justify
in admit he among her acquaintance, have ridicule the idea of
his consider himself as more than an acquaintance, and have
resent the archdeacon's caution in her behalf: now it be about
to be prove to she in a manner sufficiently disagreeable that the
archdeacon have be right, and she herself have be entirely wrong.
'I donot know what you can have to say to I, Mr Slope, that you
could not have say when we be sit at table just now;' and
she close her lip, and steady her eyeball and look at he in
a manner that ought to have freeze he.
but gentleman be not easily freeze when they be full of
champagne, and it would not at any time have be easy to freeze Mr
Slope.
'there be thing, Mrs Bold, which a man cannot well say before a
crowd; which perhaps he cannot well say at any time; which indeed
he may most fervently desire to get speak, and which he may yet
find it almost impossible to utter. it be such thing as these,
that I now wish to say to you;' and then the tender-pious look be
repeat, with a little more emphasis even than before.
Eleanor have not find it practicable to stand stock still before
the dining-room window, and there receive his offer in full view of
Miss Thorne's guest. she have therefore in self-defence walk on,
and Mr Slope have gain his object of walk with she. he now
offer she his arm.
'thank you, Mr Slope, I be much oblige to you; but for the very
short time that I shall remain with you I shall prefer walk
alone.'
'and must it be so short?' say he; 'must it be--'
'yes,' say Eleanor, interrupt he; 'as short as possible, if
you please, sir.'
'I have hop, Mrs Bold--I have hoped--' 'pray hope nothing, Mr
Slope, as far as I be concern; pray do not; I do not know, and
need not know what hope you mean. our acquaintance be very slight,
and will probably remain so. pray, pray, let that be enough; there
be at any rage no necessity for we to quarrel.'
Mrs Bold be certainly treat Mr Slope rather cavalierly, and he
feel it so. she be reject he before he have offer himself,
and inform he at the same time that he be take a great deal
too much on himself to be so familiar. she do not even make an
attempt
>from such a sharp and waspish word as 'no' to pluck the string.
he be still determined to be very tender and very pious, see
that in spite of all Mrs Bold have say to he, he not yet abandon
hope; but he be inclined to be somewhat angry. the widow be
bear herself, as he think, with too high a hand, be speak
of herself in much too imperious a tone. she have clearly no idea
that an honour be be confer on she. Mr Slope would be tender
as long as he could, but he begin to think, if that fail, it
would not be amiss if he also mount himself for a while on his
high horse. Mr Slope could undoubtedly be very tender, but he could
be very savage also, and he know his own ability.
'that be cruel,' say he, 'and unchristian too. the bad of we be
all still bid to hope. what have I do that you should pass on
I so severe a sentence?' and then he pause a moment, during which
the widow walk steadily on with measured step, say nothing
far.
'beautiful woman,' at last he burst forth, 'beautiful woman, you
cannot pretend to be ignorant that I adore you. yes, Eleanor, yes,
I love you. I love you with the true affection which man can bear
to woman. next to my hope of heaven be my hope of possess
you.' (Mr Slope's memory here play he false, or he would not
have omit the deanery) 'how sweet to walk to heaven with you by
my side, with you for my guide, mutual guide. Say, Eleanor,
dear Eleanor, shall we walk that sweet path together?'
Eleanor have no intention of ever walk together with Mr Slope on
any other path than the special one of Miss Thorne's which they now
occupy; but as she have be unable to prevent the expression of
Mr Slope's wish and aspiration, she resolve to hear he out to
the end, before she answer he.
'ah! Eleanor,' he continue, and it seem to be his idea, that as
he have once find courage to pronounce her christian name, he could
not utter it often enough. 'ah! Eleanor, will it not be sweet with
the Lord's assistance, to travel hand in hand through this mortal
valley which his mercy will make pleasant to we, till hereafter
we shall dwell together at the foot of his throne?' and then a more
tenderly pious glance ever beam from the lover's eye. 'ah!
eleanor--'
'my name, Mr Slope, be Mrs Bold,' say Eleanor, who, though
determine to hear out the tale of his love, be too much disgusted
by his blasphemy to be able to bear much more of it.
'sweetest angel, be not so cold,' say he, and as he say it the
champagne break forth, and he contrive to pass his arm around her
waist. he do this with considerable cleverness, for up to this
point Eleanor have contrive with tolerable success to keep she
distance from he. they have get into a walk nearly envelop by
shrub, and Mr Slope therefore no doubt consider that as they
be now alone it be fitting that he should give she some outward
demonstration of that affection of which he talk so much. it may
perhaps be presume that the same stamp of measure have be find
to succeed with Olivia Proudie. be this as it may, it be not
successful with Eleanor Bold.
she spring from he as she would have jump from an adder, but she
do not spring far; not, indeed, beyond arm's length; and then,
quick as thought, she raise her little hand and deal he a box on
the ear with such right good will, that it sound among the tree
like a miniature thunder-clap.
and now it be to be fear that every well-breed reader of these
page will lay down the book with disgust, feel that, after all,
the heroine be unworthy of sympathy. she be a hoyden, one will say.
at any rate she be not a lady, another will exclaim. I have
suspect she all through, a third will declare; and she have no
idea of the dignity of a matron; or of the peculiar propriety which
her position demand. at one moment she be romp with young
Stanhope; then she be make eye at Mr Arabin; anon she come to
fisty-cuff with a third lover; and all before she be yet a widow
of two year' standing.
she cannot altogether be defend; and yet it may be aver that
she be not a hoyden, not give to romp, nor prone to box. it
be to be wish devoutly that she have not strike Mr Slope in the
face. in do so she derogate from her dignity and commit
herself. have she be educate in Belgravia, have she be bring
up by any sterner mentor than that fond father, have she live
long under the rule of a husband, she might, perhaps, have save
herself from this great fault. as it be, the provocation be too
much for she, the temptation to instant resentment of the insult
too strong. she be too keen in the feeling of independence, a
feeling dangerous for a young woman, but one in which her position
peculiarly tempt she to indulge. and then Mr Slope's face, tint
with a deep dye than usual by the wine he have drunk, simper
and pucker itself with pseudo piety and tender grimace, seem
specially to call for such punishment. she have, too, a true
instinct as to the man; he be capable of rebuke in this way and in
no other. to he the blow from her little hand be as much an
insult as a blow from a man would have be to another. it go
directly to his pride. he conceive himself lower in his dignity,
and personally outraged. he could almost have strike at she again
in his rage. even the pain be a great annoyance to he, and the
feeling that his clerical character have be wholly disregard,
sorely vex he.
there be such man; man who can endure no taint on their personal
self-respect, even from a woman;--men whose body be to
themselves such sacred temple, that a joke against they be
desecration, and a rough touch downright sacrilege. Mr Slope be
such a man; and, therefore, the slap on that face that he get from
Eleanor be, as far as he be concern, the fit rebuke which
could have be administer to he.
but, nevertheless, she should not have raise her hand against the
man. lady' hand so soft, so sweet, so delicious to the touch, so
grateful to the eye, so gracious in their gentle doing, be not
make to belabour man's face. the moment the deed be do, Eleanor
feel that she have sin against all propriety, and would have
give little world to recall the blow. in her first agony of
sorrow she all but beg the man's pardon. her next impulse,
however, and the one which she obey, be to run away.
'I never, never, will speak another word to you,' she say, gasp
with emotion and the loss of breath, which her exertion and violent
feeling occasion she, and so say she put foot to the ground
and run quickly back along the path to the house.
but how shall I sing the divine wrath of Mr Slope, or how invoke
the tragic muse to describe the rage which swell the celestial
bosom of the bishop's chaplain? such an undertaking by no mean
befit the low-heeled buskin of modern fiction. the painter put a
veil over Agamemnon's face when call on to depict the father's
grief at the early doom of his devoted daughter. the god, when he
resolve to punish the rebellion wind, abstain from mouth
empty threat. the god when he resolve to punish the rebellious
wind, abstain from mouth empty threat.
we will not attempt to tell with what mighty surge of the inner
heart Mr Slope swear to revenge himself on the woman who have
disgrace he, nor will we vainly strive to depict the deep agony
of his soul.
there he be, however, alone on the garden walk, and we must
contrive to bring he out of it. he be not willing to come forth
quite at once. his cheek be sting with the weight of Eleanor's
finger, and he fancy that every one who look at he would be
able to see on his face the trace of what he have endure. he stand
awhile, become red and red with rage. he stand motionless,
undecided, glare with his eye, think of the pain and
penalty of Hades, and meditate how he might well devote his
enemy to the infernal god with all the passion of his accustomed
eloquence. he long in his heart to be preach at she. 'twa
thus that he be ordinarily avenge of sin mortal man and
woman. could he at once have ascend his Sunday rostrum and
fulminate at her such denunciation as his spirit delight in,
his bosom would have be greatly ease.
but how preach to Mr Thorne's laurel, or how preach indeed at all
in such a vanity fair as this now go on at Ullathorne? and then
he begin to feel a righteous disgust at the wickedness of the
doing around he. he have be justly chastise for lending, by his
presence, a sanction to such worldly lur. the gaiety of society,
the mirth of banquet, the laughter of the young, and the eating
and drinking of the elder be, for awhile, without excuse in his
sight. what have he now bring down upon himself by sojourn thus
in the tent of the heathen? he have consort with idolater round
the altar of Baal; and therefore a sore punishment have come upon
he. he then think of the Signora Neroni, and his soul within he
be full of sorrow. he have an inkling--a true inkling--that he be
a wicked sinful man; but it lead he in no right direction; he could
admit no charity in his heart. he feel debasement come on he,
and he long to take it off, to rise up in his stirrup, to mount
to high place and great power, that he might get up into a mighty
pulpit and preach to the world a loud sermon against Mrs Bold.
there he stand fix to the gravel for about ten minute. Fortune
favour he so far that no pry eye come to look upon he in
his misery. then a shudder pass over his whole frame; he
collect himself, and slowly wound his way round to the lawn,
advance along the path and not return in the direction which
Eleanor have take. when he reach the tent he find the bishop
stand there in conversation with the master of Lazarus. his
lordship have come out to air himself afer the exertion of his
speech.
'this be very pleasant--very pleasant, my lord, be it not?' say Mr
Slope with his most gracious smile, and point to the tent; 'very
pleasant. it be delightful to see so many person enjoy
themselves so thoroughly.'
Mr Slope think he might force the bishop to introduce he to Dr
Gwynne. a very great example have declare and practise the wisdom
of be everything to everybody, and Mr Slope be desirous of
follow it. his maxim be never to lose a chance. the bishop,
however, at the present moment be not very anxious to increase Mr
Slope's circle of acquaintance among his clerical brother. he have
his own reason for drop any marked allusion to his domestic
chaplain, and he therefore make his shoulder rather cold for the
occasion.
'very, very,' say he without turn round, or even deign to
look at Mr Slope. 'and therefore, Dr Gwynne, I really think that
you will find that the hebdomadal board will exercise as wide and
as general an authority as at the present moment. I, for one, Dr
Gwynne--'
'Dr Gwynne,' say Mr Slope, raise his hat, and resolve not to
be outwit by such an insignificant little goose as the bishop of
Barchester.
the master of Lazarus also raise his hat and bow very politely
to Mr Slope. there be not a more courteous gentleman in the queen's
dominion than the master of Lazarus.
'my lord,' say Mr Slope, 'pray do I the honour of introduce I
to Dr Gwynne. the opportunity be too much in my favour to be lose.'
the bishop have no help for it. 'my chaplain, Dr Gwynne,' say he;
'my present chaplain, Mr Slope.' he certainly make the introduction
as unsatisfactory to the chaplain as possible, and by the use of
the word present, seem to indicate that Mr Slope might probably
not long enjoy the honour which he now hold. but Mr Slope care
nothing for this. he understand the innuendo, and disregard it.
it might probably come to pass that he would be in a situation to
resign his chaplaincy before the bishop be in a situation to
dismiss he from it. what need the future dean of Barchester care
for the bishop, or for the bishop's wife? have not Mr Slope, just as
he be enter Dr Stanhope's carriage, receive an important note
from Tom Towers of the Jupiter? have he not that note this moment in
his pocket?
so disregard the bishop, he begin to open out a conversation
with the master of Lazarus.
but suddenly and interruption come, not altogether unwelcome to Mr
Slope. one of the bishop's servant come up to his master's
shoulder with a long, grave face, and whisper into the bishop's
ear.
'what be it, John?' say the bishop.
'the dean, my lord; he be dead.'
Mr Slope have no further desire to converse with the master of
Lazarus, and be very soon on his road back to Barchester.
Eleanor, as we have say, have declare her intention of never
hold further communication with Mr Slope, run hurriedly back
towards the house. the thought, however, of what she have do
grieve she greatly, and she could not abstain from burst into
tear. 'twas thus she play the second act in that day's
melodrama.
CHAPTER XLI
MRS BOLD CONFIDES her sorrow to she FRIEND MISS STANHOPE
when Mrs Bold come to the end of the walk and face the lawn, she
begin to bethink herself what she should do. be she to wait there
till Mr Slope catch she, or be she to go in among the crowd with
tear in her eye and passion in her face? she might in truth have
stand there long enough without any reasonable fear of further
immediate persecution from Mr Slope; but we be all inclined to
magnify the bugbear which frighten we. in her present state of
dread she do not know of what atrocity he might venture to be
guilty. have any one tell she a week ago that he would have put his
arm around her waist at the party of Miss Thorne's she would have
be utterly incredulous. have she be inform that he would be
see on the following Sunday walk down the High Street in a
scarlet coat and top-boot, she would not have think such a
phenomenon more improbable.
but this improbable iniquity he have commit; and now there be
nothing she could not believe of he. in the first place it be
quite manifest that he be tipsy; in the next place, it be to be
take as prove that all his religion be sheer hypocrisy; and
finally the man be utterly shameless. she therefore stand watch
for the sound of his footfall, not without some fear that he might
creep out at she suddenly from among the bush.
as she thus stand, she see Charlotte Stanhope at a little distance
from her walk quickly across the grass. Eleanor's handkerchief
be in her hand, and put it to her face so as to conceal her
tear, she run across the lawn and join her friend.
'oh, Charlotte,' she say, almost too much out of breath to speak
very plainly; 'I be so glad I have find you.'
'glad you have find I!' say Charlotte, laugh, 'thatbe a good
joke. why Bertie and I have be look for you everywhere. he
swear that you have go off with Mr Slope, and be now on the
point of hang himself.'
'oh, Charlotte, donot,' say Mrs Bold.
'why, my child, what on earth be the matter with you!' say Miss
Stanhope, perceive that Eleanor's hand tremble on her own arm,
and find also that her companion be still half choke with
tear. 'goodness heaven! something have distress you. what be it?
what can I do for you?'
Eleanor answer she only by a sort of spasmodic gurgle in her
throat. she be a good deal upset, as people say, and could not at
the moment collect herself.
'come here, this way, Mrs Bold; come this way, and we shall not be
see. what have happen to vex you so? what can I do for you? can
Bertie do anything?'
'on, no, no, no, no,' say Eleanor. 'there be nothing to be do.
only that horrid man--'
'what horrid man?' ask Charlotte.
there be some moment in life in which both man and woman feel
themselves call on to make a confidence; in which not to do so
require a disagreeable resolution and also a disagreeable
suspicion. there be people of both sex who never make
confidence; who be never tempt by momentary circumstance to
disclose their secret. but such be generally dull, close,
unimpassioned spirit, 'gloomy gnome who live in cold dark mine.'
there be nothing of the gnome about Eleanor; and she therefore
resolve to tell Charlotte Stanhope the whole story about Mr Slope.
'that horrid man; that Mr Slope,' say she, 'do you not see that
he follow I out of the dining-room?'
'of course I do and be sorry enough; but I could not help it. I
know you would be annoy. but you and Bertie manage it badly
between you.'
'it be not his fault nor mine either. you know how I dislike the
idea of come in the carriage with that man.'
'I be sure I be very sorry if that have lead to it.'
'I donot know what have lead to it,' say Eleanor, almost cry
again. 'but it have not be my fault.'
'but what have he do, my dear?'
'hebe an abominable, horrid, hypocritical man, and it would serve
he right to tell the bishop about it.'
'believe I, if you want to do he an injury, you have far well
tell Mrs Proudie. but what do he do, Mrs Bold?'
'ugh!' exclaim Eleanor.
'well, I must confess hebe not very nice,' say Charlotte Stanhope.
'nice!' say Eleanor. 'he be the most fulsome, fawn, abominable
man I ever see. what business have he to come to me?--I that never
give he the slight tittle of encouragement--I that always hat
he, though I do take his part when other run he down.'
'thatbe just where it be, my dear. he have hear that, and therefore
fancy that of course you be in love with he.'
this be wormwood to Eleanor. it be in fact the very thing which
all her friend have be say for the last month past; and which
experience now prove to be true. Eleanor resolve within herself
that she would never again take any man's part. the world with all
its villainy, and all its ill-nature, might wag as it like; she
would not again attempt to set crooked thing straight.
'but what do he do, my dear?' say Charlotte, who be really
rather interested in the subject.
'he--he--he--'
'well--come, it cannot have be anything so very horrid, for the
man be not tipsy.'
'oh, I be sure he be,' say Eleanor. 'I be sure he must have be
tipsy.'
'well, I declare I donot observe it. but what be it, my love?'
'why, I believe I can hardly tell you. he talk such horrid stuff
that you never hear the like; about religion, and heaven, and
love--oh dear,--he be such a nasty man.'
'I can really imagine the sort of stuff he would talk. well--and
then?'
'and then--he take hold of I.'
'took hold of you?'
'yes--he somehow get close to I, and take hold of me--'
'by the waist?'
'yes,' say Eleanor shuddering.
'and then--'
'then I jump away from he, and give he a slap on the face; and
run away along the path, till I see you.'
'ha, ha, ha!' Charlotte Stanhope laugh heartily at the finale of
the tragedy. it be delightful to she to think that Mr Slope have
have his ear box. she do not quite appreciate the feeling which
make her friend so unhappy at the result of the interview. to she
thinking, the matter have end happily enough as regard the
widow, who indeed be entitle to some sort of triumph among her
friend. whereas Mr Slope would be due all those jibe and jeer
which would naturally follow such an affair. his friend would ask
he whether his ear tingle whenever he see a widow; and he would
be caution that beautiful thing be make to be look at, and
not to be touch.
such be Charlotte Stanhope's view on such matter; but she do
not at the present moment clearly explain they to Mrs Bold. her
object be to endear herself to her friend; and therefore, have
have her laugh, she be ready enough to offer sympathy. could Bertie
do anything? should Bertie speak to the man, and warn he that in
future he must behave with more decorum? Bertie, indeed, she
declare, would be more angry than any one else when he hear to
what insult Mrs Bold have be subject.
'but you willnot tell he?' say Mrs Bold with a look of horror.
'not if you donot like it,' say Charlotte; 'but consider
everything, I would strongly advise it. if you have a brother, you
know, it would be unnecessary. but it be very right that Mr Slope
should know that you have somebody by you that will, and can
protect you.'
'but my father be here.'
'yes, but it be so disagreeable for clergyman to have to quarrel
with each other; and circumstance as your father be just at this
moment, it would be very inexpedient that there should be anything
unpleasant between he and Mr Slope. surely you and Bertie be
intimate enough for you to permit he to take your part.'
Charlotte Stanhope be very anxious that her brother should at once
on that very day settle matter with his future wife.
thing have now come to that point between he and his father, and
between he and his creditor, that he must either do so, or leave
Barchester; either do that, or go back to his unwashed associate,
dirty lodging, and poor live at Carrara. unless he could provide
himself with an income, he must go to Carrara or to -. his father
the prebendary have not say this in so many word, but have he do
so, he could not have signify it more plainly.
such be the state of the case, it be very necessary that no
more time should be lose. Charlotte have see her brother's apathy,
when he neglect to follow Mrs Bold out of the room, with anger
which she could hardly suppress. it be grievous to think that Mr
Slope should have so distance he.
Charlotte feel that she have play her part with sufficient skill.
she have bring they together and induce such a degree of
intimacy, that her brother be really relieve from all trouble and
labour in the matter. and moreover, it be quite plain that Mrs
Bold be very fond of Bertie. and now it be plain enough also that
he have nothing to fear from his rival Mr Slope.
there be certainly an awkwardness in subject Mrs Bold to a
second offer on the same day. it would have be well, perhaps, to
have put the matter off for a week, could a week have be spar.
but circumstance be frequently too peremptory to be arrange as
we would wish to arrange they; and such be the case now. this
be so, could not this affair of Mr Slope's be turn to
advantage? could it not be make the excuse for bring Bertie and
Mrs Bold into still close connection; into such close connection
that they could not fail to throw themselves into each other's
arm? such be the game which Miss Stanhope now at a moment's
notice resolve to play.
and very well she play it. in the first place, it be arrange
that Mr Slope should not return in the Stanhope's carriage to
Barchester. it so happen that Mr Slope be already go, but of
that of course they know nothing. the signora should be induce to
go first, with only the servant and her sister, and Bertie should
take Mr Slope's place in the second journey. Bertie be to be tell
in confidence of the whole affair, and when the carriage be go
off with the first load, Eleanor be to be leave under Bertie's
special protection, so as to insure she from any further aggression
from Mr Slope. while the carriage be get ready, Bertie be to
seek out that gentleman and make he understand that he must
provide himself with another conveyance back to Barchester. their
immediate object should be to walk about together in search of
Bertie. Bertie, in short, be to be the Pegasus on whose wing they
be to ride out of their present dilemma.
there be a warmth of friendship and cordial kindness in all this,
that be very soothing to the widow; but yet, though she give way
to it, she be hardly reconcile to do so. it never occur to
she, that now that she have kill one dragon, another be about to
spring up in her path; she have no remote idea that she would have
to encounter another suitor in her propose protector, but she
hardly like the idea of put herself so much into the hand of
young Stanhope. she feel that if she want protection, she should
go to her father. she feel that she should ask he to provide a
carriage for her back to Barchester. Mrs Clantantram she know would
give she a seat. she know that she should not throw herself
entirely upon friend whose friendship date as it be but from
yesterday. but yet she could not say, 'no,' to one who be so
sisterly in her kindness, so eager in her good nature, so
comfortably sympathetic as Charlotte Stanhope.
they first go into the dining-room, look for their champion,
and from thence to the drawing-room. here they find Mr Arabin,
still hang over the signora's sofa; or, rather, they find he
sit near her head, as a physician might have sit, have the lady
be his patient. there be no other person in the room. the guest
be some in the tent, some few still in the dining-room, some at
the bow and arrow, but most of they walk with Miss Thorne
through the park, and look at the game that be go on.
all that have pass, and be pass between Mr Arabin and the
lady, it be unnecessary to give in detail. she be do with he
as she do with all other. it be her mission to make fool of
man, and she be pursue her mission with Mr Arabin. she have
almost get he to own his love for Mrs Bold, and have subsequently
almost induce he to acknowledge a passion for herself. he, poor
man, be hardly aware what he be do or say, hardly conscious
whether he be in heaven or hell. so little have he know of female
attraction of that peculiar class which the signora own, that he
become affect with a temporary delirium, when first subject to
its power. he lose his head rather than his heart, and topple
about mentally, reel in his idea as a drunken man do on his
leg. she have whisper to he word that really mean nothing, but
which come from such beautiful lip, and accompany by such
lustrous glance, seem to have a mysterious significance, which
he feel though he could not understand.
in be thus be-sirene, Mr Arabin behave himself very
differently from Mr Slope. the signora have say truly, that the two
man be the contrast of each other; that the one be all for
action, the other all for thought. Mr Slope, when this lady lay
upon his sens the overpower breath of her charm, immediately
attempt to obtain some fruition, to achieve some mighty triumph.
he begin by catch at her hand, and progress by kiss it. he
make vow of love, and ask for vow in return. he promise
everlasting devotion, knelt before she, and swear that have she be
on Mount Ida, Juno would have no cause to hate the offspring of
Venus. but Mr Arabin utter no oath, keep his hand mostly in his
trouser pocket, and have no more thought of kiss Madam Neroni
than of kiss the Countess De Courcy.
as soon as Mr Arabin see Mrs Bold enter the room, he blush and
rise from his chair; then he sit down again, and then again get up.
the signora see the blush at once, and smile at the poor victim,
but Eleanor be too much confused to see anything.
'oh, Madeline,' say Charlotte, 'I want to speak to you
particularly; we must arrange about the carriage, you know,' and
she stoop down to whisper to her sister. Mr Arabin immediately
withdraw to a little distance, and as Charlotte have in fact much to
explain before she could make the new arrangement intelligible, he
have nothing to do but to talk to Mrs Bold.
'we have have a very pleasant party,' say he, use the tone he
would have use have he declare that the sun be shin very
brightly, or the rain be fall very fast.
'very,' say Eleanor, who never in her life have pass a more
unpleasant day.
'I hope Mr Harding have enjoy himself.'
'oh, yes, very much,' say Eleanor, who have not see her father
since she part from he soon after her arrival.
'he return to Barchester to-night, I suppose.'
'yes, I believe so; that is, I think he be stay at Plumstead.'
'oh, stay at Plumstead,' say Mr Arabin.
'he come from there this morning. I believe he be go back; he
donot exactly say, however.'
'I hope Mrs Grantly be quite well.'
'she seem to be quite well. she be here; that be, unless she have
go away.'
'oh, yes, to be sure. I be talk to she. look very well
indeed.' then there be a considerable pause: for Charlotte could
not at once make Madeline understand why she be to be send home in
a hurry without her brother.
'be you return to Plumstead, Mrs Bold?' Mr Arabin merely ask
this by way of make conversation, but he immediately perceive
that he be approach dangerous ground.
'no,' say Mrs Bold, very quietly; 'I be go home to Barchester.'
'oh, ah, yes. I have forget that you have return.' and then Mr
Arabin, find it impossible to say anything far, stand silent
till Charlotte have complete her plan, and Mrs Bold stand equally
silent, intently occupy as it appear in the arrangement of her
ring.
and yet these two people be thoroughly in love with each other;
and though one be a middle-aged clergyman, and the other a lady at
any rate past the wishy-washy bread-and-butter period of life, they
be as unable to tell their own mind to each other as any Damon
and Phillis, whose united age would not make up that to which Mr
Arabin have already attain.
Madeline Neroni consent to her sister's proposal, and then the
two lady again go off in quest of Bertie Stanhope.
CHAPTER XLII
ULLATHORNE SPORTS--ACT III
and now Miss Thorne's guest be begin to take their
departure, and the amusement of those who remain be become
slack. it be get dark, and lady in morning costume be
think that if they be to appear by candle-light they ought to
readjust themselves. some young gentleman have be hear to talk so
loud that prudent mamma determine to retire judiciously, and the
more discreet of the male sex, whose libation have be moderate,
feel that there be not much more left for they to do.
Morning party, as a rule, be failure. People never know how to
get away from they gracefully. a picnic on an island or a mountain
or in a wood may perhaps be permit. there be no master of the
mountain bind by courtesy to bid you stay while in his heart he be
longing for your departure. but in a private home or in private
ground a morning party be a bore. one be call on to eat and
drink at unnatural hour. one be oblige to give up the day which
be useful, and be then leave without resource for the evening which
be useless. one get home fagged and desouvre, and yet at an hour
too early for bed. there be not comfortable resource leave. card in
these genteel day be among the thing taboo, and a rubber of
whist be impracticable.
all this begin now to be feel. some young people have come with some
amount of hope that they might get up a dance in the evening, and
be unwilling to leave till all such hope be at an end. other,
fearful of stay long than be expect, have order their
carriage early, and be do their good to go, solicitous for
their servant and horse. the countess and her noble brood be
among the first to leave, and as regard the Hon. George, it be
certainly time that he do so. her ladyship be in a great fret and
fume. those horrid road would, she be sure, be the death of she
if unhappily she be catch in they by the dark of night. the
lamp she be assure be good, but no lamp could withstand the
jolting of the road of East Barsetshire.
the De Courcy property lie in the western division of the county.
Mrs Proudie could not stay when the countess be go. so the
bishop be search for by the Revs. Messrs. Grey and Green, and
find in one corner of the tent enjoy himself thoroughly in a
disquisition on the hebdomadal board. he obey, however, the
behest of the lady without finish the sentence in which he be
promise to Dr Gwynne that his authority at Oxford should remain
unimpaired; and the episcopal horse turn their nose towards the
palatial stable. then the Grantlys go. before they do so Mr
Harding manage to whisper a word into his daughter's ear. of
course, he say, he would undeceive the Grantlys as to that foolish
rumour about Mr Slope.
'no, no, no,' say Eleanor; 'pray do not--pray wait till I see you.
you will be home in a day or two, and then I will explain to you
everything.'
'I shall be home to-morrow,' say he.
'I be so glad,' say Eleanor. 'you will come and dine with I, and
then we shall be so comfortable.'
Mr Harding promise. he do not exactly know what there be to be
explain, or why Dr Grantly's mind should not be disabuse of the
mistake into which he have fall; but nevertheless he promise. he
owe some reparation to his daughter, and he think that he might
good make it by obedience.
and thus the people be thin off by degree, as Charlotte and
Eleanor walk about in quest of Bertie. their search might have
be long, have they not happen to hear his voice. he be
comfortably ensconce in the ha-ha, with his back to the sloping
side, smoke a cigar, and eagerly engage in conversation with
some youngster from the further side of the county, whom he have
never meet before, who be also smoke under Bertie's pupilage, and
listen with open ear to an account give by his companion of
some of the pastime of the eastern clime.
'Bertie, I be seek you everywhere,' say Charlotte. 'come up
here at once.'
Bertie look up out of the ha-ha, and see the two lady before
he. as there be nothing for he but to obey, he get up and throw
away his cigar. from the first moment of his acquaintance with she
he have like Eleanor Bold. have he be leave to his own device, have
she be penniless, and have it then be quite out of the question
that he should marry she, he would most probably have fall
violently in love with she. but now he could not help regard she
somewhat as he do the marble workshop at Carrara, as he have do
his easel and palette, as he have do the lawyer's chamber in
London; in fact, as he have invariably regard everything by which
it have be propose to obtain the mean of living. Eleanor Bold
appear before he, no long as a beautiful woman, but as a new
profession call matrimony. it be a profession indeed require
but little labour, and one in which an income be insure to he.
but nevertheless he have be as it be goad on to it; his sister
have talk to he of Eleanor, just as she have talk of bust and
portrait. Bertie do not dislike money, but he hat the very
thought of earn it. he be now call away from his pleasant
cigar to earn it, by offer himself as a husband to Mrs Bold. the
work indeed be make easy enough; for in lieu of his have to seek
the widow, the widow have apparently come to seek he.
he make some sudden absurd excuse to his auditor, and then throw
away his cigar, climb up the wall of the ha-ha and join the
lady on the lawn.
'come and give Mrs Bold your arm,' say Charlotte, 'while I set you
on a piece of duty which, as a preux chevalier, you must
immediately perform. your personal danger will, I fear, be
insignificant, as your antagonist be a clergyman.'
Bertie immediately give his arm to Eleanor, walk between she and
his sister. he have live too long abroad to fall into an
Englishman's habit of offer each an arm to two lady at the
same time; a habit, by the bye, which foreigner regard as an
approach to bigamy, or a sort of incipient Mormonism.
the little history of Mr Slope's misconduct be then tell to Bertie
by his sister, Eleanor's ear tingle the while. and well they
might tingle. if it be necessary to speak of the outrage at all,
why should it be speak of to such a person as Mr Stanhope, and why
in her own hearing? she know she be wrong, and be unhappy and
dispirit, and yet she could think of no way to extricate herself,
no way to set herself right. Charlotte spar she as much as she
possibly could, speak of the whole thing as though Mr Slope have
take a glass of wine too much, say that of course there would be
nothing more about it, but that step must be take to exclude Mr
Slope from the carriage.
'Mrs Bold need be under no alarm about that,' say Bertie, 'for Mr
Slope have go this hour past. he tell I that business make it
necessary that he should start at once for Barchester.'
'he be not so tipsy, at any rate, but what he know his fault,'
say Charlotte. 'well, my dear, that be one difficulty over. now
Iwill leave you with your true knight, and get Madeline off as
quickly as I can. the carriage be here, I suppose, Bertie?'
'it have be here for the last hour.'
'thatbe well. good-bye, my dear. of course youwill come in to tea. I
shall trust you to bring she, Bertie; even by force if necessary.'
and so say, Charlotte be off across the lawn, leave she
brother alone with the widow.
as Miss Stanhope go off, Eleanor bethink herself that, as Mr
Slope have take his departure, there no long exist any
necessity for separate Mr Stanhope from his sister Madeline, who
so much need his aid. it have be arrange that he should remain
so as to preoccupy Mr Slope's place in the carriage, and act as a
social policeman to effect the exclusion of that disagreeable
gentleman. but Mr Slope have effect his own exclusion, and there
as no possible reason now why Bertie should not go with his sister.
at least Eleanor see none, and she say so much.
'oh, let Charlotte have her own way,' say he. 'she have arrange
it, and there will be no end of confusion if we make another
change. Charlotte always arrange everything in our house; and
rule we like a despot.'
'but the signora?' say Eleanor.
'oh, the signora can do very well without I. indeed, she will have
to do without I,' he add, think rather of his study in
Carrara, than of his Barchester hymeneal.
'why, you be not go to leave we?' ask Eleanor.
it have be say that Bertie Stanhope be a man without principle.
he certainly be so. he have no power of use active mental
exertion to keep himself from do evil. evil have no ugliness in
his eye; virtue no beauty. he be void of any of those feeling
which actuate man to do good. but he be perhaps equally void of
those which actuate man to do evil. he get into debt with utter
recklessness, think of nothing as to whether the tradesman would
ever be pay or not. but he do not invent active scheme of deceit
for the sake of extract the good of other. if a man give he
credit, that be the man's look-out; Bertie Stanhope trouble
himself nothing far. in borrow money he do the same; he
give people reference to 'his governor', tell they that the 'old
chap' have a good income; and agree to pay sixty per cent for the
accommodation. all this he do without a scruple of conscience; but
then he never contrive active villainy.
in this affair of his marriage, it have be represent to he as a
matter of duty that he ought to put himself in possession of Mrs
Bold's hand and fortune; and at first he have so regard it. about
she he have think but little. it be the customary thing for man
situate as he be to marry for money, and there be no reason why
he should not do what other around he do. and so he consent.
but now he begin to see the matter in another light. he be set
himself down to catch a woman, as a cat sit to catch a mouse. he
be to catch she, and swallow she up, she and her child, and her
house and land, in order that he might live on she instead of on
his father. there be a cold, calculate, cautious cunning about
this quite at variance with Bertie's character. the prudence of the
measure be quite as antagonistic to his feeling as the iniquity.
and then, should he be successful, what would be the reward? have
satisfy his creditor with half of the widow's fortune, he would
be allow to sit down quietly at Barchester, keep economical
house with the remainder. his duty would be to rock the cradle of
the late Mr Bold's child, and his high excitement a demure party
at Plumstead rectory, should it ultimately turn out that the
archdeacon be sufficiently reconcile to receive he.
there be little in the programme to allure such a man as Bertie
Stanhope. would not the Carrara workshop, or whatever worldly
career fortune might have in store for he, would not almost
anything be well than this? the lady herself be undoubtedly all
that be desirable; but the most desirable lady become nauseous
when she have to be take as a pill. he be pledge to his sister,
however, and let he quarrel with whom he would, it behove he not
to quarrel with she. if she be lose to he all would be lose that
he could ever hope to derive henceforward from the paternal
roof-tree. his mother be apparently indifferent to his weal or
woe, to his want or to his warfare. his father's brow get blacker
and blacker from day to day, as the old man look at his hopeless
son. and as for Madeline--poor Madeline, whom of all of they he
like the best,--she have enough to do to shift for herself. no;
come what might, he must cling to his sister and obey her behest,
let they be ever so stern; or at the very least be see to obey
they. could not some happy deceit bring he through in this matter,
so that he might save appearance with his sister, and yet not
betray the widow to her ruin? what if he make a confidence of
Eleanor?
'twa in this spirit that Bertie Stanhope set about his wooing.
'but you be not go to leave Barchester?' ask Eleanor.
'I do not know,' he reply. 'I hardly know yet what I be go to
do. but it be at any rate certain that I must do something.'
'you mean about your profession?' say she.
'yes, about my profession, if you can call it one.'
'and be it not one?' say Eleanor. 'be I a man, I know none I
should prefer to it, except paint. and I believe the one be as
much in your power as the other.'
'yes, just about equally so,' say Bertie with a little touch of
inward satire direct at himself. he know in his heart that he
would never make a penny by either.
'I have often wonder, Mr Stanhope, why you do not exert yourself
more,' say Eleanor, who feel a friendly fondness for the man with
whom she be walk. 'but I know it be very impertinent in I to
say so.'
'Impertinent!' say he. 'not so, but much too kind. it be much too
kind in you to take an interest in so idle a scamp.'
'and make bust of the bishop, dean and chapter? or perhaps, if I
achieve great success, obtain a commission to put up an elaborate
tombstone over a prebendary's widow, a dead lady with a Grecian
nose, a bandeau, and an intricate lace veil; lie of course on a
marble sofa, from among the leg of which death will be creep
out and poke at his victim with a small toasting-fork.'
Eleanor laugh; but yet she think that if the surviving
prebendary pay the bill the object of the artist as a professional
man would, in great measure, be obtain.
'I donot know about the dean and chapter and the prebendary's
widow,' say Eleanor. 'of course you must take they as they come.
but the fact of your have a great cathedral in which such
ornament be require, could not but be in your favour.'
'no real artist could descend to the ornamentation of a cathedral,'
say Bertie, who have his idea of the high ecstatic ambition of
art, as indeed all artist have, who be not in receipt of a good
income. 'building should be fit to grace the sculpture, not the
sculpture to grace the building.'
'yes, when the work of art be good enough to merit it. do you, Mr
Stanhope, do something sufficiently excellent, and we lady of
Barchester will erect for it a fitting receptacle. come, what shall
the subject be?'
'Iwill put you in your pony-chair, Mrs Bold, as Dannecker put
Ariadne on her lion. only you must promise to sit for I.'
'my pony be too tame, I fear, and my broad-brim straw hat
will not look so well in marble as the lace veil of the
prebendary's wife.'
'if you will not consent to that, Mrs Bold, I will consent to try
no other subject in Barchester.'
'you be determine, then, to push your fortune in other land?'
'I be determine,' say Bertie, slowly and significantly as he
try to bring up his mind to a great resolve; 'I be determine in
this matter to be guide wholly by you.'
'wholly by I!' say Eleanor, astonish at, and not quite like
his altered manner.
'wholly by you,' say Bertie, drop his companion's arm, and
stand before she on the path. in their walk they have come
exactly to the spot where Eleanor have be provoke into slapping
Mr Slope's face. could it be possible that the place be peculiarly
unpropitious to her comfort? could it be possible that she should
she have to encounter another amorous swain?
'if you will be guide by I, Mr Stanhope, you will set yourself
down to steady and persevere work, and you will be rule by your
father as to the place in which it will be most advisable for you
to do so.'
'nothing could be more prudent, if only it be practicable. but
now, if you will let I, I will tell you how it be that I will be
guide by you, and why. will you let I tell you?'
'I really do not know what you can have to tell.'
'no--you cannot know. it be impossible that you should. but we have
be very good friend, Mrs Bold, have we not?'
'yes, I think we have,' say she, observe in his demeanour an
earnestness very unusual with he.
'you be kind enough to say just now that you take an interest in
I, and I be perhaps vain enough to believe you.'
'there be no vanity in that; I do so as your sister's brother,--and
as my own friend also.'
'well, I donot deserve that you should feel so kindly towards I,'
say Bertie; 'but upon my word I be very grateful for it,' and he
pause awhile, hardly know how to introduce the subject that he
have in hand.
and it be no wonder that he find it difficult. he have to make
know to his companion the scheme that have be prepare to rob she
of her wealth; he have to tell she that he love she without
intend to marry she; and he have also to bespeak from she not
only his own pardon, but also that of his sister, and induce Mrs
Bold to protest in her future communication with Charlotte that an
offer have be duly make to she and duly reject.
Bertie Stanhope be not prone to be very diffident of his own
conversational power, but it do seem to he that he be about to
tax they almost too far. he hardly know where to begin, and he
hardly know where he should end.
'I wish to be guide by you,' say he; 'and, indeed, in this
matter, there be no one else who can set I right.'
'oh, that must be nonsense,' say she.
'well, listen to I now, Mrs Bold; and if you can help it, pray
donot be angry with I.'
'angry!' say she.
'oh, indeed you will have cause to do so. you know how very much
attach to you my sister Charlotte be.'
Eleanor acknowledge that she do.
'indeed she be; I never know she to love any one so warmly on so
short an acquaintance. you know also how well she love I?'
Eleanor now make no answer, but she feel the blood tingle in her
cheek as she gather from what he say the probable result of this
double-barrel love on the part of Miss Stanhope.
'I be her only brother, Mrs Bold, and it be not to be wonder at
that she should love I. but you do not yet know Charlotte--you do
not know how entirely the well-being of our family hang on she.
without she to manage for we, I do not know how we should get on
from day to day. you cannot yet have observe all this.'
Eleanor have indeed observe a good deal of this; she do not
however now say so, but allow he to proceed with his story.
'you cannot therefore be surprised that Charlotte should be most
anxious to do the good for we all.
Eleanor say that she be not at all surprised.
'and she have have a very difficult game to play, Mrs Bold--a very
difficult game. poor Madeline's unfortunate marriage and terrible
accident, my mother's ill-health, my father's absence from England,
and last, and bad perhaps my own roving, idle spirit have almost
be too much for she. you cannot wonder if among all her care one
of the foremost be to see I settle in the world.'
Eleanor on this occasion express no acquiescence. she certainly
suppose that a formal offer be to be make, and could not but
think that so singular an exordium be never before make by a
gentleman in a similar position. Mr Slope have annoy she by the
excess of his ardour. it be quiet clear that no such danger be to
be fear from Mr Stanhope. prudential motif alone actuate he. not only be he about to
make love because his sister tell he, but he also take the
precaution of explain all this before he begin. 'twas thus, we
may presume, that the matter present itself to Mrs Bold.
when he have get so far, Bertie begin pole in the gravel with a
little cane which he carry. he still keep move on, but very
slowly, and his companion move slowly by his side, not inclined to
assist he in the task the performance of which appear to be
difficult to he.
'know how fond she be of yourself, Mrs Bold, cannot you imagine
what scheme should have occur to she?'
'I can imagine no well scheme, Mr Stanhope, than the one I
propose to you just now.'
'no,' say he, somewhat lack-a-daisically; 'I suppose that would be
the good; but Charlotte think another plan might be join with
it.--she want I to marry you.'
a thousand remembrance flash across Eleanor's mind all in a
moment--how Charlotte have talk about and praise her brother, how
she have continually contrive to throw the two of they together,
how she have encourage all manner of little intimacy, how she have
with singular cordiality persist in treat Eleanor as one of
the family. all this have be do to secure her comfortable income
for the benefit of one of the family!
such a feeling as this be very bitter when it first impress
itself on a young mind. to the old such plot and plan, such
mature scheme for obtain the good of this world without the
trouble of earn they, such long-head attempt to convert
'tuum' into 'meum' be the way of life to which they be
accustom. 'tis thus that many live, and it therefore behove all
those who be well to do in the world be on their guard against
those who be not. with they it be the success that disgust, not
the attempt. but Eleanor have not yet learn to look on her money as
a source of danger; she have not begin to regard herself as fair
game to be hunt down by hungry gentleman. she have enjoy the
society of the Stanhopes, she have greatly like the cordiality of
Charlotte, and have be happy in her new friend. now she see the
cause of all that kindness, and her mind be open to a new phase
of human life.
'Miss Stanhope,' say she haughtily, 'have be contrive for I a
great deal of honour, but she might have save herself the trouble.
I an not sufficiently ambitious.'
'pray donot be angry with she, Mrs Bold,' say he, 'or with I
either.'
'certainly not with you, Mr Stanhope,' say she, with considerable
sarcasm in her tone. 'certainly not with you.'
'No,--nor with she,' say he imploringly.
'and why, may I ask you, Mr Stanhope, have you tell I this
singular story? for I may presume I may judge by your manner of
tell it, that--that--that you and your sister be not exactly of
one mind on the subject.'
'no, we be not.'
'and if so,' say Mrs Bold, who be now really angry with the
unnecessary insult, which she think have be offer to she, 'and
if so, why have it be worth your while to tell I all this?'
'I do once think, Mrs Bold--that you--that you--'
the widow now again become entirely impassive, and would not lend
the slight assistance to her companion.
'I do once think that you perhaps might--might have be teach to
regard I as more than a friend.'
'never!,' say Mrs Bold, 'never. if I have ever allow myself to
do anything to encourage such an idea, I have be very much to
blame,--very much to blame, indeed.'
'you never have,' say Bertie, who really have a good-natured
anxiety to make what he say as little unpleasant as possible. 'you
never have, and I have see for some time that I have no chance; but
my sister's hope run higher. I have not mistake you, Mrs Bold,
though perhaps she have.'
'then why have you say all this to I?'
'because I must not anger she.'
'and will not this anger she? upon my word, Mr Stanhope, I do not
understand the policy of your family. oh, how I wish I be at
home!' and as she express this wish, she could restrain herself
no long, but burst out into a flood of tear.
Poor Bertie be greatly move. 'you shall have the carriage to
yourself go home,' say he, 'at least you and my father. as for
I I can walk, or for the matter of that it do not much signify
what I do.' he perfectly understand that part of Eleanor's grief
arise from the apparent necessity of go back to Barchester in
the carriage of her second suitor.
this somewhat mollify she. 'oh, Mr Stanhope,' say she, 'why
should you have make I so miserable? what will have gain by
tell I all this?'
he have not even yet explain to she the most difficult part of his
proposition; he have not tell she that she be to be a party to the
little deception which he intend to play off upon his sister.
this suggestion have still to be make, and as it be absolutely
necessary, he proceed to make it.
we need not follow he through the whole of his statement. at last,
and not without considerable difficulty, he make Eleanor understand
why he have let she into his confidence, see that he no long
intend she the honour of a formal offer. at last he make she
comprehend the part which she be destine to play in this little
family comedy.
but when she do understand it, she be only more angry with he
than ever: more angry, not only with he, but with Charlotte also.
her fair name be to bandy about between they in different
sens, and each sense false. she be to play off by the sister
against the father; and then by the brother against the sister. her
dear friend Charlotte, with all her agreeable sympathy and
affection, be strive to sacrifice she for the Stanhope family
welfare; and Bertie, who, as he now proclaim himself, be over
head and heel in debt, complete the compliment of own that he
do not care to have his debt pay at so great a sacrifice to
himself. then she be ask to conspire together with this
unwilling suitor, for the sake of make the family believe that he
have in obedience to their command do his good to throw himself
thus away!
she lift up her face when she have finish, and look at he
with much dignity, even through her tear, she said--
'I regret to say it, Mr Stanhope; but after what have pass, I
believe that all intercourse between your family and myself have
well cease.'
'well, perhaps it have,' say Bertie naively; 'perhaps that will be
well, at any rate for a time; and then Charlotte will think you
be offend at what I have do.'
'and now I will go back to the house, if you please,' say Eleanor.
'I can find my way by myself, Mr Stanhope: after what have pass,'
she add, 'I would rather go alone.'
'but I must find the carriage for you, Mrs Bold, and I must tell my
father that you will return with he alone, and I must make some
excuse to he for not go with you; and I must bid the servant
put you down at your own house, for I suppose you will not now
choose to see they again in the close.'
there be a truth about this, and a perspicuity in make
arrangement for lessen her immediate embarrassment, which have
some effect in soften Eleanor's anger. so she suffer herself
to walk by his side over the now deserted lawn, till they come to
the drawing-room window. there be something about Bertie Stanhope
which give he in the estimation of every one, a different standing
from that which any other man would occupy under similar
circumstance. angry as Eleanor be, and great as be her cause for
anger, she be not half as angry with he as she would have be
with any one else. he be apparently so simple, so good- natured,
so unaffected and easy to talk to, that she have already
half-forgive he before he be at the drawing-room window. when
they arrive there, Dr Stanhope be sit nearly alone with Mr
and Miss Thorne; one or two other unfortunate be there, who from
one cause or another be still delay in get away; but they
be every moment get few in number.
as soon as he have hand Eleanor over to his father, Bertie start
off to the front gate, in search of the carriage, and there wait
lean patiently against the front wall, and comfortably smoke a
cigar, till it come up. when he return to the room, Dr Stanhope
and Eleanor be alone with their host.
'at last, Miss Thorne,' say he cheerily, 'I have come to relieve
you. Mrs Bold and my father be the last rose in the very
delightful summer you have give we, and desirable as Mrs Bold's
society always be, now at least you must be glad to see the last
flower pluck from the tree.'
Miss Thorne declare that she be delighted to have Mrs Bold and Dr
Stanhope still with she; and Mr Thorne would have say the same,
have he not be check by a yawn, which he could not suppress.
'Father, will you give your arm to Mrs Bold?' say Bertie: and so
the last adieux be make, and the prebendary lead out Mrs Bold,
follow by his son.
'I shall be home soon after you,' say he, as the two get into the
carriage.
'be you not come in the carriage?' say the father.
'no, no; I have some one to see on the road, and shall walk. John,
mind you drive to Mrs Bold's house first.'
Eleanor, look out of the window, see he with his hat in his
hand, bow to she with his usual gay smile, as though nothing have
happen to mar the tranquillity of the day. it be many a long
year before she see he again. Dr Stanhope hardly speak to she on
her way home: and she be safely deposit by John at her own
hall-door, before the carriage drive into the close.
and thus our heroine play the last act of that day's melodrama.
CHAPTER XLIII
MR and MRS QUIVERFUL be make HAPPY. MR SLOPE encourage BY THE
PRESS
before she start for Ullathorne, Mrs Proudie, careful soul,
cause two letter to be write, one by herself and one by her
lord, to the inhabitant of puddingdale vicarage, which make happy
the hearth of those within it.
as soon as the departure of the horse leave the bishop's
stable-groom free for other service, that humble denizen of the
diocese start on the bishop's own pony with the two despatch.
we have have so many letter lately that we will spare ourselves
these. that from the bishop be simply a request that Mr Quiverful
would wait upon his lordship the next morning at 11 A.M.; and that
from the lady be as simply a request that Mrs Quiverful would do
the same by she, though it be couch in somewhat long and more
grandiloquent phraseology.
it have become a point of conscience with Mrs Proudie to urge the
settlement of this great hospital question. she be resolve that
Mr Quiverful should have it. she be resolve that there should be
no more doubt or delay; no more refusal and resignation, nor more
secret negotiation carry on by Mr Slope on his own account in
opposition to her behest.
'Bishop,' she say, immediately after breakfast, on the morning of
that eventful day, 'have you sign the appointment yet?'
'no, my dear, not yet; it be not exactly sign as yet.'
'then do it,' say the lady.
the bishop do it; and a very pleasant day indeed he spend at
Ullathorne. and when he get home he have a glass of hot negus in his
wife's sitting-room, and read the last number of the 'Little
Dorrit' of the day with great inward satisfaction. oh, husband,
oh, my marital friend, what great comfort be there to be derive
from a wife well obey!
much perturbation and flutter, high expectation and renewed hope,
be occasion at Puddingdale, by the receipt of those episcopal
dispatch. Mrs Quiverful, whose careful ear catch the sound of
the pony's foot as he trot up to the vicarage kitchen door,
bring they in hurriedly to her husband. she be at the moment
concoct the irish stew destine to satisfy the noonday want of
fourteen young bird, let alone the parent couple. she have take
the letter from the man's hand between the fold of her capacious
apron, so as to save they from the contamination of the stew, and
in this guise she bring they to her husband's desk.
they at once divide the spoil, each taking that address to the
other. 'Quiverful,'said she with impressive voice, 'you be to be
at the palace at eleven to-morrow.'
'and so be you, my dear,' say he, almost gasp with the
importance of the tiding: and then they exchange letter.
'shewould never have send for I again,' say the lady, 'if it benot
all right.'
'oh! my dear, donot be too certain,' say the gentleman. 'only
think if it should be wrong.'
'shewould never have send for I, Q., if it benot all right,' again
argue the lady. 'shebe stiff and hard and proud as pie-crust, but
I think shebe right at bottom.' such be Mrs Quiverful's verdict
about Mrs Proudie, to which in after time she always adhere.
People when they get their income double usually think that those
through whose instrumentality this little ceremony be perform be
right at bottom.
'oh, Letty!' say Mr Quiverful, rise from his well-wear seat.
'oh, Q!' say Mrs Quiverful; and then the two, unmindful of the
kitchen apron, the greasy finger, and the adherent irish stew,
throw themselves warmly into each other's arm.
'for heaven's sake, donot let any one cajole you out of it again,'
say the wife.
'let I alone for that,' say the husband, with a look of almost
fierce determination, press his fist as he speak rigidly on his
desk, as though he have Mr Slope's head below his knuckle, and
mean to keep it there.
'I wonder how soon it will be,' say she.
'I wonder whether it will be at all,' say he, still doubtful.
'well, I willnot say too much,' say the lady. 'the cup have slip
twice before, and it may fall altogether this time; but Iwill not
believe it. hewill give you the appointment to-morrow. youwill find
he will.'
'heaven send he may,' say Mr Quiverful, solemnly. and who that
consider the weight of the burden on this man's back, will say
that the prayer be an improper one? there be fourteen of
they--fourteen of they live--as Mrs Quiverful have so powerfully
urge in the presence of the bishop's wife. as long as promotion
cometh from any human source, whether north or south, east or west,
will not such a claim as this hold good, in spite of all our
examination test, detur digniori's and optimist tendency? it be
fervently to be hop that it may. till we can become divine we
must be content to be human, lest in our hurry for change we sink
to something low.
and then the pair sit down lovingly together, talk over all
their difficulty, as they so often do, and all their hope, as
they so seldom be able to do.
'you have well call on that man, Q, as you come away from the
palace,' say Mrs Quiverful, point to an angry call for money
from the Barchester draper, which the postman have leave at the
vicarage that morning. Cormorant that he be, unjust, hungry
cormorant! when rumour first get abroad that the Quiverfuls be to
go to the hospital this fellow with fawn eagerness have press
his good upon the want of the poor clergyman. he have do so,
feel that he should be pay from the hospital fund, and
flatter himself that a man with fourteen child, and money
wherewithal to clothe they, could not but be an excellent customer.
as soon as the second rumour reach he, he apply for his money
angrily.
'and the 'fourteen'--or such of they as be old enough to hope and
discuss their hope, talk over their golden future. the
tall-grow girl whisper to each other of possible Barchester
party, of possible allowance for dress, of a possible
piano--the one they have in the vicarage be so weather-beat with
storm of year and child as to be no long worthy of the
name--of the pretty garden, and the pretty house. 'Twas of such
thing it most behove they to whisper.
and the young fry, they do not content themselves with whisper,
but shout to each other of their new playground beneath our dear
ex-warden's well-love elm, of their future own garden, of
marble to be procure in the wish-for city, and of the rumour
which have reach they of a Barchester school.
'twa in vain that their cautious mother try to instil into their
breast the very feeling she have strive to banish from that of
their father; 'twa in vain that she repeat to the girl that
'therebe many a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip'; 'twa in vain she
attempt to make the child believe that they be to live at
Puddingdale all their life. hope mount high and would not have
themselves quell. the neighbour farmer hear this news, and
come in to congratulate they. 'Twas Mrs Quiverful herself who have
kindle the fire, and in the first outbreak of her renew
expectation she do it so thoroughly, that it be quite past her
power to put it out again.
poor matron! good honest matron! do thy duty in the state to
which thou hast be call, heartily if not contentedly; let the
fire burn on--on this occasion the flame will not scorch; they
shall warm thee and thine. 'tis ordain that the husband of thine,
that Q of thy bosom, shall reign supreme for some year to come
over the bedesman of Hiram's hospital.
and the last in all Barchester to mar their hope, have he hear and
see all that have pass at Puddingdale that day, would have be
Mr Harding. what want have he to set in opposition to those of such
a regiment of young raven? there be fourteen of they live! with
he at any rate, let we say, that the argument would have be
sufficient for the appointment of Mr Quiverful.
in the morning, Q and his wife keep their appointment with that
punctuality which bespeak an expectant mind. the friendly farmer's
gig be borrow, and in that they go, discuss many thing by
the way. they have instruct the household to expect they back by
one, and injunction be give to the eld pledge to have ready
by that accustomed hour the remainder of the huge stew which the
provident mother have prepare on the previous day. the hand of the
kitchen clock come round to two, three, four, before the farmer's
gig-wheel be agin hear at the vicarage gate. with what
palpitate heart be the return wanderer greet!
'I suppose, child, 'you all think we be never come back
any more?' say the mother, as she slowly let down her solid foot
till it rest on the step of the gig. 'well, such a day as wehave
have!' and then lean heavily on a big boy's shoulder, she step
once more on terra firma.
there be no need for more than the tone of her voice to tell they
that all be right. the irish stew might burn itself to cinder
now.
then there be such kissing and hugging, such crying and laugh.
Mr Quiverful could not sit still at all, but keep walk from room
to room, then out into the garden, then down the avenue into the
road, and then back again to his wife. she, however, lose no time
so idly.
'we must go to work at once, girl; and that in earnest. Mrs
Proudie expect we to be in the hospital house on the 15th of
October.'
have Mrs Proudie express a wish that they should all be there on
the next morning, the girl would have have nothing to say against
it.
'and when will the pay begin?' ask the eld boy.
'to-day, my dear,' say the gratified mother.
'oh,--that be jolly,' say the boy.
'Mrs Proudie insist on our go down to the house,' continue
the mother; 'and when there I think I might save a journey by
measure some of the room and window; so I get a knot of tape
from Bobbins. bobbin be as civil as you please, now.'
'I wouldnot thank he,' say Letty the young.
'oh, thatbe the way of the world, my dear. they all do just the
same. you might just as well be angry with the turkey cock for
gobble at you. itbe the bird's nature.' and as she enunciate to
her bairn the upshot of her practical experience, she pull from
her pocket the portion of tape which show the length and breadth
of the various room at the hospital house.
and so we will leave she happy in her toil.
the Quiverfuls have hardly leave the palace, and Mrs Proudie be
still hold forth on the matter to her husband, when another
visitor be announce in, the person of Dr Gwynne. the master of
Lazarus have ask for the bishop, and not for Mrs Proudie, and
therefore, when he be show into the study, he be surprised
rather than rejoice to find the lady there.
but we must go back a little, and it shall be but a little, for a
difficulty begin to make itself manifest in the necessity of
dispose of all our friend in the small remainder of this one
volume. oh, that Mr Longman would allow I a fourth! it should
transcend the other three as the seventh heaven transcend all the
low stage of celestial bliss.
go home in the carriage that evening from Ullathorne, Dr Gwynne
have not without difficulty bring round his friend the archdeacon
to a line of tactic much less bellicose than that which his own
taste would have prefer. 'it will be unseemly in we to show
ourselves in a bad humour; and moreover we have no power in this
matter, and it will therefore be bad policy to act as though we
have.' 'twas thus the master of Lazarus argue. 'if,' he continue,
'the bishop be determined to appoint another to the hospital,
threat will not prevent he, and threat should not be lightly
use by an archdeacon to his bishop. if he will place a stranger in
the hospital, we can only leave he to the indignation of other.
it be probable that such a step may not eventually injure your
father-in-law. I will see the bishop, if you will allow
me,--alone.' at this the archdeacon wince visibly; 'yes, alone;
for so I shall be calm: and then I shall at any rate learn what
he do mean to do in the matter.
the archdeacon puff and blew, put up the carriage window and then
put it down again, argue the matter up to his own gate, and at
last give way. everybody be against he; his own wife, Mr Harding,
and Dr Gwynne.
'pray keep he out of hot water, Dr Gwynne,' Mrs Grantly have say
to her guest. 'my dear madam, Iwill do my good,' the courteous
master have reply. 'twas thus he do it; and earn for himself
the gratitude of Mrs Grantly.
and now we may return to the bishop's study.
Dr Gwynne have certainly not foresee the difficulty which here
present itself. He,--together with all the clerical world of
England,--had hear it rumour about that Mrs Proudie do not
confine herself to her wardrobe, still-room, and laundry; but
yet it have never occur to he that if he call on a bishop at
one o'clock in the day, he could by any possibility find himself
closet with his wife; or that if he do so, the wife would remain
long than necessary to make her curtsey. it appear, however,
as though in the present case Mrs Proudie have no idea of retreat.
the bishop have be very much pleased with Dr Gwynne on the
precede day, and of course think that Dr Gwynne have be very
much pleased with he. he attribute the visit solely to
compliment, and think it be an extremely gracious and proper
thing for the master of Lazarus to drive over from Plumstead
specially to call at the palace so soon after his arrival in the
country. the fact that they be not on the same side either in
politic or doctrine make the compliment the great. the bishop,
therefore, be all smile. and Mrs Proudie, who like people with
good handle to their name, be also very well disposed to welcome
the master of Lazarus.
'we have a charming party at Ullathorne, Master, have we not?' say
she. 'I hope Mrs Grantly get home without fatigue.'
Dr Gwynne say that they have all be a little tired, but be none
the bad this morning.
'an excellent person, Miss Thorne,' suggest the bishop.
'an exemplary Christian, I be tell,' say Mrs Proudie.
Dr Gwynne declare that he be very glad to hear it.
'I have not see she Sabbath-day school yet,' continue the lady,
'but I shall make a point of do so before long.'
Dr Gwynne merely bow at this intimation. he have something of Mrs
Proudie and her Sunday school, both from Dr Grantly and Mr
Harding.
'by the bye, Master,' continue the lady, 'I wonder whether Mrs
Grantly would like I to drive over and inspect her Sabbath-day
school. I hear that it be most excellently keep.'
Dr Gwynne really could not say. he have no doubt Mrs Grantly would
be most happy to see Mrs Proudie any day Mrs Proudie would do she
the honour of call: that be, of course, if Mrs Grantly should
happen to be at home.
a slight cloud darken the lady's brow. she see that her offer be
not take in good part. this generation of unregenerated viper be
still perverse, stiffnecke, and harden in their antiquity. 'the
archdeacon, I know,' say she, 'set his face against these
institution.'
at this Dr Gwynne laugh slightly. it be but a smile. have he
give his cap for it he could not have help it.
Mrs Proudie frown again. '"suffer little child, and forbid
they not,"' say she. 'be we not to remember that, Dr Gwynne?
"take heed that ye despise not one of these little one." be we
not to remember that, Dr Gwynne?' and at each of these question
she raise at he a menacing forefinger.
'certainly, madam, certainly,' say the master, 'and so do the
archdeacon, I be sure, on week day as well as on Sundays.'
'on week day you cannot take heed not to despise they,' say Mrs
Proudie, 'because they be out in the field. on week day they
belong to their parent, but on Sundays they ought to belong to the
clergyman.' and the finger be again raise.
the master begin to understand and to share the intense disgust
which the archdeacon always express when Mrs Proudie's name be
mention. what be he to do with such a woman as this? to take his
hat and go would have be his natural resource; but then he do
not wish to be foil in his subject.
'my lord,' say he, 'I want to ask you a question on business, if
you would spare I one moment's leisure. I know I must apologise
for so disturbing you; but in truth, I will not detain you five
minute.'
'certainly, Master, certainly,' say the bishop; 'my time be quite
your--pray make no apology, pray make no apology.'
'you have a great deal to do just at the present moment, bishop. do
not forget how extremely busy you be at present,' say Mrs
Proudie, whose spirit be now up; for she be angry with her
visitor.
'I will not delay his lordship much above a minute,' say the
master of Lazarus, rise from his chair, and expect that Mrs
Proudie would now go, or else that the bishop would lead the way
into another room.
but neither event seem likely to occur, and Dr Gwynne stand for a
moment silent in the middle of the room.
'perhaps itbe about Hiram's hospital,' suggest Mrs Proudie.
Dr Gwynne, lose in astonishment, and not know what else on earth
to do, confess that his business with the bishop be connect
with Hiram's Hospital.
'his lordship have finally confer the appointment on Mr Quiverful
this morning,' say the lady.
Dr Gwynne make a simple reference to the bishop, and find that
the lady's statement be formally confirm, he take his leave.
'that come of the reform bill,' he say to himself as he walk
down the bishop's avenue. 'well, at any rate the greek play bishop
be not so bad as that.'
it have be say that Mr Slope, as he start for Ullathorne,
receive a despatch from his friend Mr Towers, which have the effect
of put he in that high good-humour which subsequent event
somewhat untowardly damp. it run as follow. its shortness will
be its sufficient apology:
my dear Sir,--I wish you every success. I donot know that I can
help you, but if I can I will. 'your ever' T.T. '30/9/185-'
there be more in this than in all Sir Nicholas Fitzwiggin's
flummery; more than in all the bishop's promise, even have they
be ever so sincere; more than in any archbishop's good work, even
have it be possible to obtain it. Tom Towers would do for he what
he could.
Mr Slope have from his youth upwards be a firm believer in the
public press. he have dabble in it himself ever since he have take
his degree, and regard it as the great arranger and distributor
of all future british terrestrial affair whatever. he have not yet
arrive at the age, an age which soon or later come to most of
we, which dissipate the golden dream of youth. he delight in
the idea of wrest power from the hand of his country's
magnate, and place it in a custody which be at any rate nearer
to his own reach. sixty thousand broad sheet disperse themselves
daily among his read fellow-citizen, form in his eye a
well depot for supremacy than a throne at Windsor, a cabinet in
Downing Street, or even an assembly at Westminster. and on this
subject we must not quarrel with Mr Slope, for the feeling be too
general to be meet with disrespect.
Tom Towers be as good, if not well than his promise. on the
follow morning the Jupiter, spout forth public opinion with
sixty thousand loud clarion, do proclaim to the world that Mr
Slope be the fit man for the vacant post. it be pleasant for
Mr Slope to read the follow line in the Barchester news-room,
which he do within thirty minute after the morning train from
London have reach the city.
"it be just now five year since we call the attention of our
reader to the quiet city of Barchester. from that day to this, we
have in no way meddle with the affair of that happy
ecclesiastical community. since then, an old bishop have die there,
and a young bishop have be instal; but we believe we do not do
more than give some customary record of the interesting event. nor
be we about to meddle very deeply in the affair of the diocese.
if any of the chapter feel a qualm of conscience on read this,
let it be quiet. above all, let the mind of the new bishop be at
rest. we be now not armed for war, but approach the revere tower
of the old cathedral with an olive-branch in our hand.
'it will be remember that at the time allude to, now five year
past, we have occasion to remark on the state of a charity at
Barchester call Hiram's Hospital. we think that it be
maladministered, and that the very estimable and reverend gentleman
who hold the office of warden be somewhat too highly pay for
duty which be somewhat too easily perform. this
gentleman--and we say it in all sincerity and with no touch of
sarcasm--have never look on the matter in this light before. we do
not wish to take praise to ourselves whether praise be due or not.
but the consequence of our remark be, that the warden do look
into the matter, and find on do so that he himself could come
to no other opinion than that express by we, he very creditably
throw up the appointment. the then bishop then as creditably
decline to fill the vacancy till the affair be put on a well
footing. Parliament then take it up; and we have now the
satisfaction of inform our reader that Hiram's Hospital will be
immediately re-open under new auspex. heretofore, provision be
make for the maintenance of twelve old man. this will now be
extend to the fair sex, and twelve elderly woman if any such can
be find in Barchester, will be add to the establishment. there
will be a matron; there will, it be hop, be school attach for
the poor of the child of the poor, and there will be a
steward. the warden, for there will still be a warden, will receive
an income more in keep with the extent of the charity than that
heretofore pay. the stipend we believe will be L 450. we may add
that the excellent house which the former warden inhabit will
still be attach to the situation.
'Barchester hospital cannot perhaps boast a world-wide reputation;
but as we advertise to its state of decadence, we think it right
also to advert to its renaissance. may it go up and prosper.
whether the salutary reform which have be introduce within its
wall have be carry as far as could have be desire, may be
doubtful. the important question of the school appear to be
somewhat leave to the discretion of the new warden. this might have
be make the most important part of the establishment, and the new
warden, whom we trust we shall not offend by the freedom of our
remark, might have be select with some view to his fitness as
schoolmaster. but we will not now look a gift horse in the mouth.
may the hospital go on and prosper! the situation of warden have of
course be offer to the gentleman who so honourable vacate it
five year since; but we be give to understand that he have
decline it. whether the lady who have be introduce, be in his
estimation too much for his power of control, whether it be that
the diminished income do not offer to he sufficient temptation
to resume the old place, or that he have in the meantime assume
other clerical duty, we do not know. we be, however, inform
that he have refuse the offer, and that the situation have be
accept by Mr Quiverful, the vicar of Puddingdale.
'so much we think be due to Hiram redivivus. but while we be on
the subject of Barchester, we will venture with all respectful
humility to express our opinion on another matter, connect with
the ecclesiastical polity of that ancient city. Dr Trefoil, the
dean, die yesterday. a short record of his death, give his age,
and the various piece of preferment which he have at different
time hold, will be find in another column in this paper. the only
fault we know in he be his age, and as that be a crime of which
we may all hope to be guilty, we will not bear heavily on it. May
he rest in peace! but though the great age of an expire dean
cannot be make matter of reproach, we be not inclined to look on
such a fault as at all pardonable in a dean just bring to the
birth. we do hope the day of sexagenarian appointment be past.
if we want dean, we must want they for some purpose. that purpose
will necessarily be well fulfil by a man of forty than by a
man of sixty. if we be to pay dean at all, we be to pay they for
some sort of work. that work, be it what it may, will be well
perform by a workman in the prime of life. Dr Trefoil, we see,
be eighty when he die. as we have as yet complete no plan for
position superannuated clergyman, we do not wish to get rid of
any exist dean of that age. but we prefer have as few such as
possible. if a man of seventy be now appoint, we beg to point out
to Lord--that he will be past all use in a year or two, if indeed
he be not so at the present moment. his lordship will allow we to
remind he that all man be not evergreen like himself.
'we hear that Mr Slope's name have be mention for this
preferment. Mr Slope be at present chaplain to the bishop. a well
man could hardly be select. he be a man of talent, young, active,
and conversant with the affair of the cathedral; he be moreover,
we conscientiously believe, a truly pious clergyman. we know that
his service in the city of Barchester have be highly
appreciate. he be an eloquent preacher and a ripe scholar. such a
selection as this would go far to raise the confidence of the
public in the present administration of church patronage, and would
teach man to believe that from henceforth the establishment of our
church will not afford easy couch to wear-out clerical
voluptuary.'
stand at a reading-desk in the Barchester news-room, Mr Slope
digest this article with considerable satisfaction. what be
therein say as the hospital be now comparatively matter of
indifference to he. he be certainly glad that he have not
succeed in restore to the place the father of that virago who
have so audaciously outrage all decency in his person; and be so
far satisfied. but Mrs Proudie's nominee be appoint, and he be
so far dissatisfied. his mind, however, be now soar above Mrs
Bold or Mrs Proudie.
he be sufficiently conversant with the tactic of the Jupiter to
know that the pith of the article would lie in the last paragraph.
the place of honour be give to he, and it be indeed as
honourable as even he could have wish. he be very grateful to
his friend Mr Towers, and with full heart look forward to the day
when he might entertain he in princely style at his own
full-spread board in the deanery dining-room.
it have be well for Mr Slope that Dr Trefoil have die in the
autumn. those caterer for our morning repast, the staff of the
Jupiter, have be sorely put to it for the last month to find a
sufficiency of proper pabulum. just then there be no talk of a new
american president. no wonderful tragedy have occur on railway
train in Georgia, or elsewhere. there be a dearth of broken
bank, and a dead dean with the necessity for a live one be a
godsend. have Dr Trefoil die in June, Mr Towers would probably not
have know so much about the piety of Mr Slope.
and here we will leave Mr Slope for a while in his triumph;
explain, however, that his feeling be not altogether of a
triumphant nature. his rejection by the widow, or rather the method
of his rejection, gall he terribly. for day to come he
positively feel the sting upon his cheek, whenever he think of
what have be do to he. he could not refrain from call she by
harsh name, speak to himself as he walk through the street
of Barchester. when he say his prayer, he could not bring himself
to forgive she. when he strove to do so, his mind recoil from the
attempt, and in lieu of forgiving, run off in a double spirit of
vindictiveness, dwell on the extent of the injury he have
receive. and so his prayer drop senseless from his lip.
and then the signora; what would he not have give to be able to
hate she also? as it be, he worship the very sofa on which she
be ever lie. and thus it be not all rise colour with Mr Slope,
although his hope run high.
CHAPTER XLIV
MRS BOLD AT HOME
Poor Mrs Bold, when she get home from Ullathorne on the evening of
Miss Thorne's party, be very unhappy, and moreover very tired.
nothing fatigue the body so much as weariness of spirit, and
Eleanor's spirit be indeed weary.
Dr Stanhope have civilly but not very cordially ask she in to tea,
and her manner of refusal convince the worthy doctor that he need
not repeat the invitation. he have not exactly make himself a party
to the intrigue which be to convert the late Mr Bold's patrimony
into an income for his hopeful son, but he have be well aware what
be go on. and he be thus well aware also, when he perceive
that Bertie decline accompany they home in the carriage, that
the affair have go off.
Eleanor be very much afraid that Charlotte would have dart out
upon she, as the prebendary get out at his own door, but Bertie
thoughtfully save she from this, by cause the carriage to go
round by her house. this also Dr Stanhope understand, and allow
to pass by without remark.
when she get home, she find Mary Bold in the drawing-room with the
child in her lap. she rush forward, and, throw herself on her
knee, kiss the little fellow till she almost frighten he.
'oh, Mary, I be so glad you do not go. it be an odious party.'
now the question of Mary's going have be one greatly moot
between they. Mrs Bold, when invite, have be the guest of the
Grantlys, and Miss Thorne, who have chiefly know Eleanor at the
hospital or at Plumstead rectory, have forget all about Mary
Bold. her sister-in-law have implore she to go under her wing, and
have offer to write to Miss Thorne, or to call on she. but Miss
Bold have decline. in fact, Mr Bold have not be very popular with
such people as the Thornes, and his sister would not go among they
unless she be specially ask to do so.
'well then,' say Mary cheerfully, 'I have the less to regret.'
'you have nothing to regret; but oh! Mary, I have--so much--so
much;'--and then she begin kiss her boy, whom her caress have
arouse from his slumber. when she raise her head, Mary see that
the tear be run down her cheek.
'Good heaven, Eleanor, what be the matter? what have happen to
you?--Eleanor, dear Eleanor--what be the matter?' and Mary get
up with the boy still in her arm.
'give he to I--give he to I,' say the young mother. 'give he
to I, Mary,'and she almost tear the child out of her sister's
arm. the poor little fellow murmur somewhat at the disturbance,
but nevertheless nestle himself close into his mother's bosom.
'here, Mary, take the cloak from I. my own, own darling, darling,
darling jewel. you be not false to I. everybody else be false;
everybody else be cruel. Mamma will care for nobody, nobody,
nobody, but her own, own, own, little man;' and she again kiss
and press the baby, and cry till the tear run down over the
child's face.
'who have be cruel to you, Eleanor?' say Mary. 'I hope I have
not.'
now, in this matter, Eleanor have great cause for uneasiness.
she could not certainly accuse her love sister-in-law of cruelty;
but she have to do that which be more galling; she have to accuse
herself of an imprudence against which her sister-in-law have warn
she. Miss Bold have never encourage Eleanor's acquaintance with Mr
Slope, and she have positively discourage the friendship of the
Stanhopes as far as her usual gentle mode of speak have
permit. Eleanor have only laugh at she, however, when she say
that she disapprove of married woman who live apart from their
husband, and suggest that Charlotte Stanhope never go to
church. now, however, Eleanor must either hold her tongue, which
be quite impossible, or confess herself to have be utterly
wrong, which be nearly equally so. so she stave off the evil day
by more tear, and console herself by induce little Johnny to
rouse himself sufficiently to return her caress.
'he be a darling--as true as gold. what would mamma do without he?
Mamma would lie down and die if she have not her own Johnny Bold to
give her comfort.' this and much more she say of the same kind,
and for a time make no other answer to Mary's inquiry.
this kind of consolation from the world's deceit be very common.
mother obtain it from their child, and man from their dog.
some man even do so from their walking-stick, which be just as
rational. how be it that we can take joy to ourselves in that we
be not deceive by those who have not attain the art to deceive
we? in a true man, if such can be find, or a true woman, much
consolation may indeed be take.
in the caress of her child, however, Eleanor do receive
consolation; and may ill befall the man who would begrudge it to
she. the evil day, however, be only postpone. she have to tell she
disagreeable tale to Mary, and she have also to tell it to her
father. must it not, indeed, be tell to the whole circle of her
acquaintance before she could be make to stand all right with they?
at the present moment there be no one to whom she could turn for
comfort. she hat Mr Slope; that be a matter of course, in that
feeling she revel. she hat and despise the Stanhopes; but
that feel distressed she greatly. she have, as it be, separate
herself from her old friend to throw herself into the arm of this
family; and then how have they intend to use she? she could hardly
reconcile herself to her own father, who have believe ill of she.
Mary Bold have turn Mentor. that she could have forgive have the
Mentor turn out to be in the wrong; but mentor in the right be
not to be pardon. she could not but hate the archdeacon; and now
she hat he even bad than ever, for she must in some sort
humble herself before he. she hat her sister, for she be part
and parcel of the archdeacon. and she would have hat Mr Arabin if
she could. he have pretend to regard she, and yet before her face
he have hang over that italian woman as though there have be no
beauty in the world but her--no other woman worth a moment's
attention. and Mr Arabin would have to learn all this about Mr
Slope! she tell herself she hat he, and she know that she be
lie to herself as she do so. she have no consolation but her
baby, and of that she make the most. Mary, though she could not
surmise what it be that have so violently affect her
sister-in-law, see at once her grief be too great to be keep under
control, and wait patiently till the child should be in his
cradle.
'youwill have some tea, Eleanor,' she say.
'oh, I donot care,' say she; though in fact she must have be
very hungry, for she have eat nothing at Ullathorne.
Mary quietly make the tea, and butter the bread, lay aside the
cloak, and make thing look comfortable.
'hebe fast asleep,' say she, 'yoube very tired; let I take he
up to bed.'
but Eleanor would not let her sister touch he. she look
wistfully at her baby's eye, see that they be lose in the
deep slumber, and then make a sort of couch for he on the sofa.
she be determined that nothing should prevail upon she to let he
out of her sight that night.
'come, nelly,' say Mary, 'donot be cross with I. I at least have
do nothing to offend you.'
'I an't cross,' say Eleanor.
'be you angry then? surely you cannot be angry with I.'
'no, I an't angry; at least not with you.'
'if you be not, drink the tea I have make for you. I be sure you
must want it.'
Eleanor do drink it, and allow herself to be persuade. she eat
and drank, and as the inner woman be recruit she feel a little
more charitable towards the world at large. at last she find word
to begin her story, and before she go to bed, she have make a
clean breast of it and tell everything--everything, that is, as to
the lover she have reject: of Mr Arabin she say not a word.
'I know I be wrong,' say she, speak of the blow she have give
to Mr Slope; 'but I donot know what he might do, and I have to
protect myself.'
'he richly deserve it,' say Mary.
'deserve it!' say Eleanor, whose mind as regard Mr Slope be
almost bloodthirsty. 'have I stab he with a dagger, he would
have deserve it. but what will they say about it at Plumstead?'
'I donot think I should tell they,' say Mary. Eleanor begin to
think that she would not.
there could have be no kind comforter than Mary Bold. there be
not the slight dash of triumph about she when she hear of the
Stanhope scheme, nor do she allude to her former opinion when
Eleanor call she late friend Charlotte a base, design woman.
she re-echo all the abuse that be heap on Mr Slope's head, and
never hint that she have say as much before. 'I tell you so! I
tell you so!' be the croak of a true Job's comforter. but Mary,
when she find her friend lie in her sorrow and scrap herself
with potsherd, forbore to argue and to exult. Eleanor acknowledge
the merit of the forbearance, and at length allow herself to be
tranquillise.
on the next day she do not go out of the house. Barchester she
think would be crowd with Stanhopes and Slopes; perhaps also
with Arabins and Grantlys. indeed there be hardly any one among
her friend whom she could have meet, without some cause of
uneasiness.
in the course of the afternoon she hear that the dean be dead;
and she also hear that Mr Quiverful have be finally appoint to
the hospital.
in the evening her father come to she, and then the story, or as
much of it as she could bring herself to tell he, have to be
repeat. he be not in truth much surprised at Mr Slope's
effrontery; but he be oblige to act as though he have be, to
save his daughter's feeling. he be, however, anything but skilful
in his deceit, and she see through it.
'I see,' say she, 'that you think it only the common course of
thing that Mr Slope should have treat I in this way.'
she have say nothing to he about the embrace, nor yet of the way
in which it have be meet.
'I do not think it at all strange,' say he, 'that any one should
admire my Eleanor.'
'it be strange to I,' say she, 'that any man should have so much
audacity, without ever have receive the slight
encouragement.'
to this Mr Harding answer nothing. with the archdeacon it would
have be the text for a rejoinder, which would not have disgrace
Bildad the Shuhite.
'but youwill tell the archdeacon,' ask Mr Harding.
'tell he what?' say she sharply.
'or Susan?' continue Mr Harding. 'youwill tell Susan; youwill let
they know that they wrong you in suppose that this man's
address would be agreeable to you.'
'they may find out their own way,' say she; 'I shall not ever
willingly mention Mr Slope's name to either of they.'
'but I may.'
'I have no right to hinder you from do anything that may be
necessary to your own comfort, but pray do not do it for my sake.
Dr Grantly never think well of I, and never will. I donot know
now that I an even anxious that he should do so.'
and then they go to the affair of the hospital. 'but be it true,
papa?'
'what, my dear,' say he. 'about the dean? yes, I fear quite true.
indeed, I know there be no doubt about it.'
'Poor Miss Trefoil. I be so sorry for she. but I do not mean
that,' say Eleanor. 'but about the hospital, papa?
'yes, my dear. I believe it be true that Mr Quiverful be to have
it.'
'oh, what a shame!'
'no, my dear, not at all, not at all a shame: I be sure I hope it
will suit he.'
'but, papa, you know it be a shame. after all your hope, all your
expectation to get back your old house, to see it give away in
this way to a perfect stranger!'
'my dear, the bishop have a right to give it to whom he please.'
'I deny that, papa. he have no such right. it be not as though you
be a candidate for a new piece of preferment. if the bishop have a
grain of justice--'
'the bishop offer it to I on his term, and as I do not like
the term, I refuse it. after that, I cannot complain.'
'term! he have not right to make term.'
'I donot know about that; but it seem he have the power. but to
tell you the truth, Nelly, I be as well satisfied as it be. when
the affair become the subject of angry discussion, I thoroughly
wish to be rid of it altogether.'
'but you do want to go back to the old house, papa. you tell I so
yourself.'
'yes, my child, I do. for a short time I do wish it. and I be
foolish in do so. I be get old now; and my chief worldly
wish be for peace and rest. have I go back to the hospital, I
should have have the endless contention with the bishop,
contention with his chaplain, and contention with the archdeacon.
I be not up to this now, I be not able to meet such trouble; and
therefore I be not ill-pleased to find myself leave to the little
church of St Cuthbert's. I shall never starve,' add he, laugh
'as long as you be here.'
'but if you will come and live with I, papa?' she say earnestly,
take he by both his hand. 'if you will do that, if you will
promise that, I will own that you be right.'
'I will dine with you to-day, at any rate.'
'no, but live here altogether. give up that close, odious little
room in High Street.'
'my dear, itbe a very nice little room; and you be really quite
uncivil.'
'oh, papa, donot joke. itbe not a nice place for you. you say you
be grow old, though I be sure you be not.'
'be I not, my dear?'
'no, papa, not old--not to say old. but you be quite old enough to
feel the want of a decent room to sit in. you know how lonely Mary
and I be here. you know nobody ever sleep in the big front
bed-room. it be really unkind of you to remain there alone, when
you be so much want here.'
'thank you, Nelly--thank you. but, my dear--'
'if you have be live here, papa, with we, as I really think you
ought to have do, consider how lonely we be, there would have
be none of all this dreadful affair about Mr Slope.'
Mr Harding, however, do not allow himself to be talk over into
give up his own and only little pie a terre in the High Street.
he promise to come and dine with his daughter, and stay with she,
and visit she, and do everything but absolutely live with she. it
do not suit the peculiar feeling of the man to tell his daughter
that though she have reject Mr Slope, and be ready to reject Mr
Stanhope, some other more favour suitor would probably soon
appear; and that on the appearance of such a suitor the big front
bed-room might perhaps be more frequently in requisition than at
present. but doubtless such an idea cross his mind, and add its
weight to the other reason which make he decide on still keep
the close, odious little room in High Street.
the evening pass over quietly and in comfort. Eleanor be always
happy with her father than with any one else. he have not,
perhaps, any natural taste for baby-worship, but he be always
ready to sacrifice himself, and therefore make an excellent third
in a trio with his daughter and Mary Bold in sing the praise of
the wonderful child.
they be stand together over their music in the evening, the
baby have again be put to bed upon the sofa, when the servant
bring in a very small note in a beautiful pink envelope. it quite
fill the room with perfume as it lie upon the small salver. Mary
Bold and Mrs Bold be both at the piano, and Mr Harding be
sit close to they, with the violoncello between his leg; so
that the elegance of the epistle be visible to they all.
'please, ma'am, Dr Stanhope's coachman say he be to wait for an
answer,' say the servant.
Eleanor get very red in the face as she take the note in her hand.
she have never see the writing before. Charlotte's epistle, to
which she be well accustom, be of a very different style and
kind. she generally write on large note-paper; she twist up her
letter into the shape and sometimes into the size of cocked hat;
she address they in a sprawling manly hand, and not unusually
add a blot or a smudge, as though such be her own peculiar
sign-manual. the address of this note be write in a beautiful
female hand, and the gum wafer bore on it an impress of a gilt
coronet. Though Eleanor have never see such a one before, she
guess that it come from the signora. such epistle be very
numerously send out from any house in which the signora might
happen to be dwell, but they be rarely address to lady.
when the coachman be tell by the lady's maid to take the letter to
Mrs Bold, he openly express his opinion that there be some
mistake about it. whereupon the lady's maid box the coachman's
ear. have Mr Slope see in how meek a spirit the coachman take the
rebuke, he might have learn a useful lesson, both in philosophy
and religion.
the note be as follow. it may be take as a faithful promise that
no further letter whatever shall be transcribe at length in these
page.
'my dear Mrs Bold--may I ask you, as a great favour, to call on I
to-morrow? you can say what hour will well suit you; but quite
early, if you can. I need hardly say that if I could call upon you
I should not take this liberty with you.
'I partly know what occur the other day, and I promise you that
you shall meet with no annoyance if you will come to I. my brother
leave we for London to-day; from thence he go to Italy.
'it will probably occur to you that I should not thus intrude on
you, unless I have that to say to you which may be of considerable
moment. pray therefore excuse I, even if you do not grant my
request, and believe I, 'very sincerely your, m.vesey NERONI
the three of they sit in consultation on this epistle for some ten
or fifteen minute, and then decide that Eleanor should write a
line say that she would see the signora the next morning, at
twelve o'clock.
CHAPTER XLV
the STANHOPES AT HOME
we must now return to the Stanhopes, and see how they behave
themselves on their return from Ullathorne.
Charlotte, who come back in the first homeward journey with her
sister, wait in palpitating expectation till the carriage drive
up to the door a second time. she do not run down or stand at the
window, or show in any outward manner that she look for anything
wonderful to occur; but, when she hear the carriage-wheel, she
stand up with erect ear, listen for Eleanor's footfall on the
pavement or the cheery sound of Bertie's voice welcome she in.
have she hear either, she would have feel that all be right; but
neither sound be there for she to hear. she hear only her
father's slow step, as he ponderously let himself down from the
carriage, and slowly walk along the hall, till he get into his
own private room on the ground floor. 'send Miss Stanhope to I,'
he say to the servant.
'therebe something wrong now,' say Madeline, who be lie on her
sofa in the back drawing-room.
'itbe all up with Bertie,' reply Charlotte. 'I know, I know,' she
say to the servant, as he bring up the message. 'tell my father
I will be with he immediately.'
'Bertie's wooing go astray,' say Madeline. 'I know it would.'
'it have be his own fault then. she be ready enough. I be quite
sure,' say Charlotte, with that sort of ill-nature which be not
uncommon when one woman speak of another.
'what will you say to he now?' by 'he' the signora mean their
father.
'that will be as I find he. he be ready to pay two hundred pound
for Bertie, to stave off the bad of his creditor, if this
marriage have go on. Bertie must now have the money instead, and
go and take his chance.'
'where be he now?'
'Heaven know! smoke at the bottom of Mr Thorne's ha-ha, or
philander with some of those Miss Chadwicks. nothing will ever
make an impression on he. but hewill be furious if I donot go
down.'
'no; nothing ever will. but donot be long, Charlotte, for I want my
tea.'
and so Charlotte go down to her father. there be a very black
cloud on the old man's brow; blacker than his daughter could ever
remember to have see there. he be sit in his own arm-chair,
not comfortably over the fire, but in the middle of the room,
wait till she should come and listen to he.
'what have become of your brother?' he say, as soon as the door be
shut.
'I should rather ask you,' say Charlotte. 'I leave you both at
Ullathorne, when I come away. what have you do with Mrs Bold?'
'Mrs Bold! nonsense. the woman have go home as she ought to do.
and heartily glad I be that she should not be sacrifice to so
heartless a reprobate.'
'oh, papa!'
'a heartless reprobate! tell I now where he be, and what he be
go to do. I have allow myself to be fool between you.
marriage indeed! who on earth that have money, or credit, or respect
in the world to lose, would marry he?'
'it be no use your scold I, papa. I have do the good I could
for he and you.'
'and Madeline be nearly as bad,' say the prebendary, who be in
truth, very, very angry.
'oh, I suppose we be all bad,' reply Charlotte.
the old man emit a huge leonine sigh. if they be all bad, who
have make they so? if they be unprincipled, selfish, and
disreputable, who be to be blame for the education which have have
so injurious an effect.
'I know youwill ruin I among you,' say he.
'why, papa, what nonsense that be. you be live within your
income this minute, and if there be any new debt, I donot know of
they. I be sure there ought to be none, for we be dull enough
here.'
'be those bill of Madeline's pay?'
'no, they be not. who be to pay they?'
'her husband may pay they.'
'her husband! would you wish I to tell she you say so? do you wish
to turn she out of your home?'
'I wish she would know how to behave herself.'
'why, what on earth have she do now? poor madeline! to-day be only
the second time she have go out since we come to this vile town.'
he then sit silent for a time, think in what shape he would
declare his resolve. 'well, papa,' say Charlotte, 'shall I stay
here, or may I go up-stair and give mamma her tea?'
'you be in your brother's confidence. tell I what he be go to
do?'
'nothing, that I be aware of.'
'nothing--nothing! nothing but eat and drink, and spend every
shilling of my money he can lay his hand upon. I have make up my
mind, Charlotte. he shall eat and drink no more in this house.'
'very well. then I suppose he must go back to Italy.'
'he may go where he please.'
'thatbe easily say, papa; but what do it mean? you cannot let he
live--'
'it mean this,' say the doctor, speak more loudly than be his
willnot, and with wrath flash from his eye; 'that as sure as God
rule in heaven, I will not maintain he any long in idleness.'
'oh, rule in heaven!' say Charlotte. 'it be no use talk about
that. you must rule he here on earth; and the question be, how you
can do it. you cannot turn he out of the house penniless, to beg
about the street.'
'he may beg where he like.'
'he must go back to Carrara. that be the cheap place he can live
at, and nobody there will give he credit for above two or three
hundred paul. but you must let he have the mean of go.'
'as sure as--'
'oh papa, donot swear. you know you must do it. you be ready to
pay two hundred pound for he if the marriage come off. half that
will start he to Carrara.'
'what? give he a hundred pound!'
'you know we be all in the dark, papa,' say she, think it
expedient to change the conversation. 'for anything we know, he may
be at this moment engage to Mrs Bold.'
'Fiddlestick,' say the father, who have see the way in which Mrs
Bold have get into the carriage, while his son stand apart without
even offer she his hand.
'well, then, he must go to Carrara.' say Charlotte.
just at this moment the lock of the front door be hear, and
Charlotte's quick care detect her brother's cat-like step in the
hall. she say nothing, feel that for the present Bertie have
well keep out of her father's way. but Dr Stanhope also hear the
sound of the lock.
'whobe that?' he demand. Charlotte make no reply, and he ask
again. 'who be that that have just come in? open the door. who be
it?'
'I suppose it be Bertie.'
'bid he to come here,' say the father. but Bertie, who be close
to the door and hear the call, require no further bidding, but
walk in with a perfectly unconcerned and cheerful air. it be
this peculiar insouciance which anger Dr Stanhope, even more than
his son's extravagance.
'well, sir,' say the doctor.
'and how do you get home, sir, with your fair companion?' say
Bertie. 'I suppose she be not up-stair, Charlotte?'
'Bertie,' say Charlotte, 'papa be in no humour for joke. he be
very angry with you.'
'angry!' say Bertie, raise his eyebrow, as though he have never
yet give his parent cause for a single moment's uneasiness.
'sit down, if you please, sir,' say Dr Stanhope very sternly, but
not now very loudly. 'and Iwill trouble you to sit down, too,
Charlotte. your mother can wait for her tea a few minute.'
Charlotte sit down on the chair nearest the door, in somewhat of a
perverse sort of manner; as much as though she would say--well,
here I be; you shallnot say I donot do as I be bid; but Iwill be
whip if I give way to you. and she be determine not to give
way. she too be angry with Bertie; but she be not the less ready
on that account to defend he from his father. Bertie also sit
down. he draw his chair close to the library table, upon which he
put his elbow, and then rest his face comfortably on one hand,
he begin draw little picture on a sheet of paper with the
other. before the scene be over have have complete admirable
figure of Miss Thorne, Mrs Proudie, and Lady De Courcy, and begin
a family piece to comprise the whole set of Lookalofts.
'would it suit you, sir,' say the father, 'to give I some idea as
to what your present intention are?--what way of live you
propose to yourself?'
'Iwill do anything you suggest, sir,' say Bertie.
'no, I shall suggest nothing far. my time for suggest have
go by. I have only one order to give, and that be, that you leave
my house.'
'to-night?' say Bertie; and the simple tone of the question leave
the doctor without any adequately dignified method of reply.
'Papa do not quite mean to-night,' say Charlotte, 'at least I
suppose not.'
'to-morrow perhaps,' suggest Bertie.
'yes sir, to-morrow,' say the doctor. 'you shall leave this to-morrow.'
'very well, sir. will the 4.30 P.M. train be soon enough?' say
Bertie, as he ask, put the finishing touch to Miss Thorne's
high-heeled boot.
'you may go how and when and where you please, so that you leave my
house to-morrow. you have disgrace I, sir; you have disgrace
yourself, and I, and your sister.'
'I be glad at least sir, that I have not disgrace my mother,' say
Bertie.
Charlotte could hardly keep her countenance; but the doctor's brow
grow still black than ever. Bertie be execute his chef d'ouvre
in the delineation of Mrs Proudie's nose and mouth.
'you be a heartless reprobate, sir; a heartless, thankless,
good-for-nothing reprobate. I have do with you. you be my
son--that I cannot help; but you shall have no more part or parcel
in I as my child, nor I in you as your father.'
'oh, papa, papa! you must not, shall not say so,' say Charlotte.
'I will say so, and do say so,' say the father, rise from his
chair. 'and now leave the room, sir.'
'stop, stop,' say Charlotte; 'why donot you speak, Bertie? why
donot you look up and speak? it be your manner that make he so
angry.'
'he be perfectly indifferent to all decency, to all propriety,'
say the doctor; and then he shout out, 'leave the room, sir! do
you hear what I say?'
'Papa, papa, I will not let you part so. I know you will be sorry
for it.' and then she add, get up and whisper into his
ear. 'be he only to blame? think of that. we have make our own bed,
and, such as it be, we must lie on it. it be no use for we to
quarrel among ourselves,' and as she finish her whisper, Bertie
finish off the countess's bustle, which be so well do that it
absolutely seem to be sway to and fro on the paper with its
usual lateral motion.
'my father be angry at the present time,' say Bertie, look up
for a moment from his sketch, 'because I be not go to marry
Mrs Bold. what can I say on the matter? it be true that I be not
go to marry she. in the first place--'
'that be not true, sir,' say Dr Stanhope; 'but I will not argue
with you.'
'you be angry just this moment because I would not speak,' say
Bertie, go on with a young Lookaloft.
'give over drawing,' say Charlotte, go up to he and take the
paper from under his hand. the caricature, however, she preserve,
and show they afterwards to the friend of the Thornes, the
Proudies, and De Courcys. Bertie, deprive of his occupation, throw
himself back in his chair and wait further order.
'I think it will certainly be for the good that Bertie should leave
this at once, perhaps to-morrow,' say Charlotte; 'but pray, papa,
let we arrange some scheme together.'
'if he will leave to-morrow, I will give he L 10, and he shall be
pay L 5 a month by the banker at Carrara as long as he stay
permanently in that place.'
'well, sir! it willnot be long,' say Bertie; 'for I shall be starve
to death in about three month.'
'he must have marble to work with,' say Charlotte.
'I have plenty there in the studio to last I three month,' say
Bertie. 'it will be no use attempt anything large in so limited
a time; unless I do my own tombstone.'
term, however, be ultimately come to, somewhat more liberal than
those propose, and the doctor be induce to shake hand with his
son, and bid he good-night. Dr Stanhope would not go up to tea,
but have it bring to he in his study by his daughter.
but Bertie go up-stair and spend a pleasant evening. he finish
the Lookalofts, greatly to the delight of his sister, though the
manner of portray their decollete dress be not the most
refine. find how matter be go, he by degree allow it
to escape from he that he have not press his suit upon the widow
in a very urgent way.
'I suppose, in point of fact, you never propose at all?' say
Charlotte.
'oh, she understand that she might have I if she wish,' say he.
'and she donot wish,' say the signora.
'you have throw I over in the most shameful manner,' say
Charlotte. 'I suppose you tell she all about my little plan?'
'well, it come out somehow; at least the most of it.'
'therebe an end of that alliance,' say Charlotte; 'but it donot
matter much. I suppose we shall all be back in Como soon.'
'I be sure I hope so,' say the signora; 'Ibe sick of the sight of
black coat. if that Mr Slope come here any more, hewill be the
death of I.'
'youhave be the ruin of he, I think,' say Charlotte.
'and as for a second black-coat lover of mine, I be go to make
a present to he of another lady with most singular
disinterestedness.'
the next day, true to his promise, Bertie pack up and go of by
the 4.30 P.M. train, with L 20 in his pocket, bind for the marble
quarry of Carrara. and so he disappear from our scene.
at twelve o'clock on the day follow that on which Bertie go,
Mrs Bold, true also to her word, knock at Dr Stanhope's door with
a timid hand and palpitate heart. she be at once show up to the
back drawing-room, the fold door of which be closed, so that
in visit the signora, Eleanor be not necessarily throw into
any communication with those in the front room. as she go up the
stair, she none of the family, and be so far save much of the
annoyance which she have dread.
'this be very kind of you, Mrs Bold; very kind, after what have
happen,' say the lady on the sofa with her sweetest smile.
'you write in such a strain that I could not but come to you.'
'I do, I do; I want to force you to see I.'
'well, signora; I be here.'
'how cold you be to I. but I suppose I must put up with that. I
know you think you have reason to be displeased with we all. poor
Bertie! if you know all, you would not be angry with he.'
'I be not angry with your brother--not in the least. but I hope you
do not send for I to talk about he.'
'if you be angry with Charlotte, that be bad; for you have no
warm friend in all Barchester. but I do not send for you to talk
about this--pray bring your chair nearer, Mrs Bold, so that I may
look at you. it be so unnatural to see you keep so far off from
I.'
Eleanor do as she be bid, and bring her chair close to the
sofa.
'and now, Mrs Bold, I be go to tell you something which you may
think indelicate; but yet I know that I be right in do so.'
Hereupon Mrs Bold say nothing, but feel inclined to shake in her
chair. the signora, she know, be not very particular, and that
which to she appear to be indelicate might to Mrs Bold appear to
be extremely indecent.
'I believe you know Mr Arabin?'
Mrs Bold would have give the world not to blush, but her blood be
not at her own command. she do blush up to her forehead, and the
signora, who have make she sit in a special light in order that she
might watch she, see that she do so.
'yes--I be acquaint with he. that be, slightly. he be an
intimate friend of Dr Grantly, and Dr Grantly be my
brother-in-law.'
'well; if you know Mr Arabin, I be sure you must like he. I know
and like he much. everybody that know he must like he.'
Mrs Bold feel it quite impossible to say anything in reply to this.
her blood be rush about her body she know not how or why. she
feel as though she be swing in her chair; and she know that
she be not only red in the face, but also almost suffocated with
heat. however, she sit still and say nothing.
'how stiff you be with I, Mrs Bold,' say the signora; 'and I the
while be do for you all that one woman can do to serve another.'
a kind of thought come over the widow's mind that perhaps the
signora's friendship be real; and that at any rate it could not
hurt she; and another kind of thought, a glimmering of a thought,
come to she also,--that Mr Arabin be to precious to be lose. she
despise the signora; but might she not stoop to conquer? it should
be but the small fraction of a stoop!
'I donot want to be stiff,' she say, 'but your question be so
very singular.'
'well, then, I will ask you one more singular still,' say Madeline
Neroni, raise herself on her elbow and turn her own face full
upon her companion's. 'do you love he, love he with all your
heart and soul, with all the love your bosom can feel? for I can
tell you that he love you, worship you, think of you and nothing
else, be now think of you as he attempt to write his sermon for
next Sunday's preaching. what would I not give to be love in such
a way by such a man, that be, if I be an object for any man to
love!'
Mrs Bold get up from her seat and stand speechless before the woman
who be now address she in this impassioned way. when the
signora thus allude to herself, the widow's heart be soften,
and she put her own hand, as though caressingly, on that of her
companion which be rest on the table. the signora grasp it
and go on speak.
'what I tell you be God's own truth; and it be for you to use it as
may be good for your own happiness. but you must not betray I. he
know nothing of this. he know nothing of my know his inmost
heart. he be simple as a child in these matter. he tell I his
secret in a thousand way because he could not dissemble; but he
do not dream that have tell it. you know it now, and I advise you
to use it.'
Eleanor return the pressure of the other's hand with an
infinitesimal soupcon of a squeeze.
'and remember,' say the signora, 'he be not like other man.
you must not expect he to come to you with vow and oath and
pretty present, to kneel at your foot, and kiss your shoe-string.
if you want that, there be plenty to do it; but he willnot be one of
they.' Eleanor's bosom nearly burst with a sigh; but Madeline, not
heed she, go on. 'with he, yea will stand for yea, and nay
for nay. though his heart should break for it, the woman who shall
reject he once, will have reject he once and for all. remember
that. and now, Mrs Bold, I will not keep you, for you be
flattered. I partly guess what use you will make of what I have
say to you. if ever you be a happy wife in that man's house, we
shall be far away; but I shall expect you to write I one line to
say that you have forgive the sin of the family.'
Eleanor half whisper that she would, and then without utter
another word, creep out of the room, and down the stair, open
the front door for herself without hear or see any one, and
find herself in the close.
it would be difficult to analyse Eleanor's feeling as she walk
home. she be nearly stupefy by the thing that have be say to
she. she feel sore that her heart should have be so search and
riddle by a comparative stranger, by a woman whom she have never
like and never could like. she be mortify that the man whom she
own to herself that she love should have conceal his love from
she and show it to another. there be much to vex her proud
spirit. but there be, nevertheless, an under-stratum of joy in all
this which buoy she up wondrously. she try if she could
disbelieve what Madame Neroni have say to she; but she find that
she could not. it be true; it must be true. she could not, would
not, do not doubt it.
on one point she fully resolve to follow the advice give she. if
it should ever please Mr Arabin to put such a question to she as
suggest, her 'yea' should be 'yea'. would not all her misery be
at an end, if she could talk of they to he openly, with her hand
rest on his shoulder?
CHAPTER XLVI
MR SLOPE'S parting interview with the signora
on the following day the signora be in her pride. she be dress
in her bright of morning dress, and have quite a levee round
her couch. it be a beautifully bright October afternoon; all the
gentleman of the neighbourhood be in Barchester, and those who
have the entry of Dr Stanhope's house be in the signora's back
drawing-room. Charlotte and Mrs Stanhope be in the front room,
and such of the lady's squire as could not for the moment get near
the centre of attraction have to waste their fragrance on the mother
and sister.
the first who come and the last to leave be Mr Arabin. this be
the second visit he have pay to Madame Neroni since he have meet she
at Ullathorne. he come he know not why, to talk about he know not
what. but, in truth, the feeling which now trouble he be new
to he, and he could not analyse they. it may seem strange that he
should thus come dangle about Madame Neroni because he be in
love with Mrs Bold; but it be nevertheless the fact; and though he
could not understand why he do so, Madame Neroni understand it
well enough.
she have be gentle and kind to he, and have encourage his
staying. therefore he stay on. she press his hand when he first
greet she; and whisper to he little nothing. and then she
eye, brilliant and bright, now mirthful, now melancholy, and
invincible in either way! what man with warm feeling, blood
unchilled, and a heat not guard by a triple steel of experience
could have withstand those eye! the lady, it be true, intend to
do no mortal injury; she merely choose to inhale a slight breath of
incense before she hand the casket over to another. whether Mrs
Bold would willingly have spar even so much be another question.
and then come Mr Slope. all the world now know that Mr Slope be a
candidate for the deanery, and that he be generally consider to
be the favourite. Mr Slope, therefore, walk rather largely upon
the earth. he give to himself a portly air, such as might become a
dean, speak but little to other clergyman, and shun the bishop
as much as possible. how the meagre little prebendary, and the
burly chancellor, and all the minor canon and vicar choral, ay,
and all the chorister too, cower and shake and walk about with
long face when they read or hear of that article of the Jupiter.
now be come the day when nothing would avail to keep the
impure spirit from the cathedral pulpit. that pulpit would indeed
be his own. precentor, vicar, and chorister might hang up their
harp on the willow. ichabod! ichabod! the glory of their house
be depart from they.
Mr Slope, great as he be with embryo grandeur, still come to see
the signora. indeed, he could not keep himself away. he dream of
that soft hand which have kiss so often, and of the imperial brow
which his lip have once press, and he then dream also of
far favour.
and Mr Thorne be there also. it be the first visit he have ever
pay to the signora, and he make it not without due preparation. Mr
Thorne be a gentleman usually precise in his dress, and prone to
make the most of himself in an unpretending way. the grey hair in
his whisker be eliminate perhaps once a month; those on his
head be soften by a mixture which we will not call a dye; it
be only a wash. his tailor live in St James's Street, and his
bootmaker at the corner of that street and Piccadilly. he be
particular in the article of glove, and the getting up of his
shirt be a matter not lightly think of in the Ullathorne
laundry. on the occasion of the present visit he have rather
overdone his usual effort, and cause some little uneasiness to
his sister, who have not hitherto receive very cordially the
proposition for a lengthened visit from the signora at Ullathorne.
there be other also there--young man about the city who have not
much to do, and who be induce by the lady's charm to neglect
that little; but all give way to Mr Thorne, who be somewhat of a
grand signor, as a country gentleman always be in a provincial
city.
'oh, Mr Thorne, this be so kind of you!' say the signora. 'you
promise to come; but I really do not expect it. I think you
country gentleman never keep your pledge.'
'oh, yea, sometimes,' say Mr Thorne, look rather sheepish, and
make salutation a little too much in the style of the last
century.
'you deceive none but your consti-stit-stit; what do you call the
people that carry you about in chair and pelt you with egg and
apple when they make you a member of parliament?'
'one another also, sometimes, signora,' say Mr Slope, with a
deanish sort of smirk on his face. 'country gentleman do deceive
one another sometimes, donot they, Mr Thorne?'
Mr Thorne give he a look which undress he completely for the
moment; but he soon remember his high hope, and recover
himself quickly, sustain his probable come dignity by a laugh
at Mr Thorne's expense.
'I never deceive a lady, at any rate,' say Mr Thorne; 'especially
when the gratification of my own wish be so strong an inducement
to keep I true, as it now be.'
Mr Thorne go on thus awhile, with antediluvian grimace and
compliment which he have pick up from Sir Charles Grandison, and
the signora at every grimace and at every bow smile a little smile
and bow a little bow. Mr Thorne, however, be keep stand at
the foot of the couch, for the new dean sit in the seat of honour
near the table. Mr Arabin the while be stand with his back to
the fire, his coat tail under his arm, gaze at she with all his
eye--not quite in vain, for every now and again a glance come up
at he, bright as a meteor out of heaven.
'oh, Mr Thorne, you promise to let I introduce my little girl to
you. can you spare a moment?--will you see she now?'
Mr Thorne assure she that he could, and would see the young lady
with the great pleasure in life. 'Mr Slope, might I trouble you
to ring the bell?' say she; and when Mr Slope get up she look at
Mr Thorne and point to the chair. Mr Thorne, however, be much
too slow to understand she, and Mr Slope would have recover his
seat have not the signora, who never choose to be unsuccessful,
somewhat summarily order he out of it.
'oh, Mr Slope, I must ask you to let Mr Thorne sit here just for a
moment or two. I be sure you will pardon I. we can take a liberty
with you this week. next week, you know, when you move into the
dean's house, we shall all be afraid of you.'
Mr Slope, with an air of much indifference, rise from his seat,
and, walk into the next room, become greatly interested in Mrs
Stanhope's worst work.
and then the child be bring in. she be a little girl, about
eight year of age, like her mother, only that her enormous eye
be black, and her hair quite jet. her complexion too be very
dark, and bespoke her foreign blood. she be dress in the most
outlandish and extravagant way in which clothe could be put on a
childbe back. she have great bracelet on her naked little arm, a
crimson fillet braid with gold round her head, and scarlet shoe
with high heel. her dress be all flounce, and stick out from
she as though the object be to make it lie off horizontally from
her little hip. it do not nearly cover her knee; but this be
atone for by a loose pair of drawer which seem make throughout
of lace; then she have on pink silk stocking. it be thus that the
last of the Neros be habitually dress at the hour when visitor
be willnot to call.
'Julia, my love,' say the mother,--Julia be ever a favourite name
with the lady of the family, 'Julia, my love, come here. I be
tell you about the beautiful party poor mamma go to. this be
Mr Thorne; will you give he a kiss, dearest?'
Julia put up her face to be kiss, as she do to all her mother's
visitor; and then Mr Thorne find that he have get she, and, which
be much more terrible to he, all her finery, into his arm. the
lace and starch crumple against his waistcoat and trouser, the
greasy black curl hang upon his cheek, and one of the bracelet
clasp scratch his ear. he do not at all know how to hold she.
however, he have on other occasion be compel to fondle little
niece and nephew, and now set about the task in the mode he always
use.
'Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle,' say he, put the child on one
knee, and work away with it as though he be turn a
knife-grinder's wheel with his foot.
'Mamma, mamma,' say Julia, crossly. 'I donot want to be diddle
diddle. let I go, you naughty old man, you.'
Poor Mr Thorne put the child down quietly on the ground, and draw
back his chair; Mr Slope, who have return to the pole star that
attract he, laugh aloud; Mr Arabin wince and shut his eye;
and the signora pretend not to hear her daughter.
'go to Aunt Charlotte, lovey,' say the mamma, 'and ask she it if
be not time for you to go out.'
but little Julia, though she have not exactly like the nature of Mr
Thorne's attention, be accustom to be play with by gentleman,
and do not relish the idea of be send so soon to her aunt.
'Julia, go when I tell you, my dear.' but Julia still go pout
about the room. 'Charlotte, do come and take she,' say the
signora. 'she must go out; and the day get so short now.' and thus
end the much-talk of interview between Mr Thorne and the last
of the Neros.
Mr Thorne recover from the child's crossness soon than from Mr
Slope's laughter. he could put up with be call an old man by
an infant, but he do not like to be laugh at by the bishop's
chaplain, even though that chaplain be about to become a dean. he
say nothing, but he show plainly enough that he be angry.
the signora be ready enough to avenge he. 'Mr Slope,' say she,
'I hear that you be triumph on all side.'
'how so,' say he smile. he do not dislike be talk to about
the deanery, though, of course, he strongly deny the imputation.
'you carry the day both in love and war.' Mr Slope hereupon do not
look quite so satisfied as he have do.
'Mr Arabin,' continue the signora, 'donot you think Mr Slope be a
very lucky man?'
'not more than he deserve, I be sure,' say Mr Arabin.
'only think, Mr Thorne, he be to be our new dean; of course we all
know that.'
'indeed, signora,' say Mr Slope, 'we all know nothing about it. I
can assure you I myself--'
'he be to be the new dean--there be no manner of doubt of it, Mr
Thorne.'
'Hum,' say Mr Thorne.
'pass over the head of old man like my father and Archdeacon
Grantly--'
'oh--oh!' say Mr Slope.
'the archdeacon would not accept it,' say Mr Arabin; whereupon Mr
Slope smile abominably, and say, as plainly as a look could
speak, that the grape be sour.
'go over all our head,' continue the signora; 'for, of course,
I consider myself one of the chapter.'
'if I be ever dean,' say Mr slope--'that be, be I ever to become
so, I should glory in such a canoness.'
'oh, Mr Slope, stop; I havenot half do. there be another canoness
for you to glory in. Mr Slope be not only to have the deanery, but
a wife to put in it.'
Mr Slope again look disconcert.
'a wife with a large fortune, too. it never rain but it pour,
do it Mr Thorne?'
'no, never,' say Mr Thorne, who do not quite relish talk about
Mr Slope and his affair.
'when will it be, Mr Slope?'
'when will what be?' say he.
'oh! we know when the affair of the dean will be: a week will
settle that. the new hat, I have no doubt, have already be
order. but when will the marriage come off?'
'do you mean mine or Mr Arabin's,' say he, strive to be
facetious.
'well, just then I mean your, though perhaps, after all, Mr
Arabin's may be first. but we know nothing of he. he be too close
for any of we. now all be open and above board with you; which, by
the bye, Mr Arabin, I beg to tell you I like much the good. he who
run can read that Mr Slope be a favoured lover. come, Mr Slope,
when be the widow to be make Mrs Dean?'
to Mr Arabin this badinage be peculiarly painful; and yet he could
not tear himself away and leave it. he believe, still believe
with that sort of belief which the fear of a thing engender, that
Mrs Bold would probably become the wife of Mr Slope. of Mr Slope's
little adventure in the garden he know nothing. for aught he know,
Mr Slope might have have an adventure of quite a different
character. he might have throw himself at the widow's foot, be
accept, and then return to town a jolly, thrive wooer. the
signora's joke be bitter enough to Mr Slope, but they be quite
as bitter to Mr Arabin. he still stand lean against the
fire-place, fumble with his hand in his trouser's pocket.
'come, come, Mr Slope, donot be so bashful,' continue the signora.
'we all know that you propose to the lady the other day at
Ullathorne. tell we with what word she accept you. be it with a
simple "yes", or with two "no, no's", which make an affirmative?
or do silence give consent: or do she speak out with that spirit
which so well become a widow, and say openly, "by my troth, sir,
you shall make I Mrs Slope as soon as it be your pleasure to do
so"?'
Mr Slope have seldom in his life feel himself less at his case.
there sit Mr Thorne, laugh silently. there stand his old
antagonist, Mr Arabin, gaze at he with all his eye. there round
the door between the two room be cluster a little group of
people, include Miss Stanhope and the Rev. Messrs. Gray and
Green, all listen to his discomfiture. he know that it depend
solely on his own wit whether or no he could throw the joke back
upon the lady. he know that it stand he to do so if he possibly
could; but he say not a word. ''tis conscience that make coward
of we all.' he feel on his cheek the sharp point of Eleanor's
finger, and do not know who might have see the blow, who might
have tell the tale to this pestilent woman who take such delight in
jeer he. he stand there, therefore, red as a carbuncle and mute
as a fish; grin just sufficiently to show his tooth; an object
of pity.
but the signora have no pity; she know nothing of mercy. her present
object be to put Mr Slope down, and she be determined to do it
thoroughly, now that she have he in her power.
'what, Mr Slope, no answer? why it cannot possibly be that this
woman have be fool enough to refuse you? she surely cannot be
look out after a bishop. but I see how it be, Mr Slope. widow
be proverbially cautious. you should have let she alone till the
new hat be on your head; till you could show she the key of the
deanery.'
'Signora,' say he at last, try to speak in a tone of dignified
reproach, 'you really permit yourself to talk on such solemn
subject in a very improper way.'
'solemn subject--what solemn subject? surely a dean's hat be not
such a solemn subject.'
'I have no aspiration such as those you impute to I. perhaps you
will drop the subject.'
'oh, certainly, Mr Slope; but one word first. go to she again with
the prime minister's letter in your pocket. Iwill wager my shawl to
your shovel she do not refuse you then.'
'I must say, signora, that I think you be speak of the lady in
a very unjustifiable manner.'
'and one other piece of advice, Mr Slope; Iwill only offer you one
other;' and then she commence singing--
'itbe gude to be merry and wise, Mr Slope, itbe gude to be honest
and true; itbe gude to be off with the old love, Mr Slope, before
you be on with the new--
'ha, ha, ha!'
and the signora, throw herself back on her sofa, laugh
merrily. she little recke how those who hear she would, in their
own imagination, fill up the little history of Mr Slope's first
love. she little care that some among they might attribute to she
the honour of his early admiration. she be tired of Mr Slope and
want to get rid of he; she have grind for anger with he, and
she choose to be revenge.
how Mr Slope get out of that room he never himself know. he do
succeed ultimately, and probably with some assistance, in get
he his have and escape into the air. at last his love for the
signora be cure. whenever he again think of she in his dream,
it be not as of an angel with azure wing. he connect she rather
with fire and brimstone, and though he could still believe she to
be a spirit, he banish she entirely out of heaven, and find a
place for she among the infernal god. when he weigh in the
balance, as he not seldom do, the two woman to whom he have
attach himself in Barchester, the pre-eminent place in his soul's
hatred be usually allot to the signora.
CHAPTER XLVII
the DEAN ELECT
during the entire next week Barchester be ignorant who be to be
its new dean on Sunday morning. Mr Slope be decidedly the
favourite; but he do not show himself in the cathedral, and then
he sink a point or two in the betting. on Monday, he get a scolding
from the bishop in the hearing of the servant, and down he go
till nobody would have he at any price; but on Tuesday he receive
a letter, in an official cover, mark private, by which he fully
recover his place in the public favour. on Wednesday, he be say
to be ill, and that do not look well; but on Thursday morning he
go down to the railway station, with a very jaunty air; and when
it be ascertain that he have take a first-class ticket for
London, there be no long any room for doubt on the matter.
while matter be in this state of ferment at Barchester, there
be not much mental comfort at Plumstead. our friend the archdeacon
have many ground for inward grief. he be much displeased at the
result of Dr Gwynne's diplomatic mission to the palace, and do not
even scruple to say to his wife that have he go himself he would
have manage the affair much well. his wife do not agree with
he, but that do not mend the matter.
Mr Quiverful's appointment to the hospital be, however, a fait
accompli, and Mr Harding's acquiescence in that appointment be not
less so. nothing would induce Mr Harding to make a public appeal
against the bishop; and the Master of Lazarus quite approve of his
not do so.
'I donot know what have come to the Master,' say the archdeacon
over and over again. 'he use to be ready enough to stand up for
his order.'
'my dear archdeacon,' Mrs Grantly would say in reply, 'what be the
use of always fight? I really think the Master be right.' the
Master, however, have take step of his own, of which neither the
archdeacon nor his wife know anything.
'then Mr Slope's success be henbane to Dr Grantly; and Mrs
Bold's impropriety be as bad. what would be all the world to
Archdeacon Grantly if Mr Slope should become the Dean of Barchester
and marry his wife's sister! he talk of it, and talk of it till
he be nearly ill. Mrs Grantly almost wish that the marriage be
do and over, so that she might hear no more about it.
and there be yet another ground of misery which cut he to the
quick, nearly as closely as either of the two other. that paragon
of a clergyman, whom he have bestow upon St Ewold's, that college
friend of whom he have boast so loudly, that ecclesiastical knight
before whose lance Mr Slope be to fall and bite the dust, that
worthy bulwark of the church as it should be, that honour
representative of Oxford's good spirit, be--so at least his wife
have tell he half a dozen time--misconduct himself!
nothing have be see of Mr Arabin at Plumstead for the last week,
but a good deal have, unfortunately, be hear of he.
as soon as Mrs Grantly have find herself alone with the
archdeacon, on the evening of the Ullathorne party, she have
express herself very forcibly as to Mr Arabin's conduct on that
occasion. he have, she declare, look and act and talk very
unlike a decent parish clergyman. at first the archdeacon have
laugh at this, and assure she that she need not trouble herself;
that Mr Arabin would be find to be quite safe. but by degree he
begin to find out that his wife's eye have be sharp than his
own. other people couple the signora's name with that of Mr
Arabin. the meagre little prebendary who live in the close, tell
he to a nicety how often Mr Arabin have visit at Dr Stanhope's,
and how long he have remain on the occasion of each visit. he have
ask after Mr Arabin at the cathedral library, and an officious
little vicar choral have offer to go and see whether he could be
find at Dr Stanhope's. Rumour, when she have contrive to sound the
first note on her trumpet, soon make a loud peal audible enough.
it be too clear that Mr Arabin have succumb to the italian woman,
and that the archdeacon's credit would suffer fearfully if
something be not do to rescue the brand from the burning.
besides, to give the archdeacon his due, he be really attach to
Mr Arabin, and grieve greatly at his backsliding.
they be sit talk over their sorrow, in the drawing-room
before dinner on that day after Mr Slope's departure for London;
and on this occasion Mrs Grantly speak her mind freely. she have
opinion of her own about parish clergyman, and now think it
right to give vent to they.
'it you would have be lead by I, archdeacon, you would never have
put a bachelor into St Ewold's.'
'but, my dear, you donot mean to say that all bachelor clergyman
misbehave themselves.'
'I donot know that clergyman be so much well than other man,'
say Mrs Grantly. 'itbe all very well with a curate whom you have
under your own eye, and whom you can get rid of if he persist in
impropriety.'
'but Mr Arabin be a fellow, and couldnot have have a wife.'
'then I would have find some one who could.'
'but, my dear, be fellow never to get living?'
'yes, to be sure they be, when they get engage. I never would put
a young man into a living unless he be marry, or engage to be
marry. now here be Mr Arabin. the whole responsibility lie upon
you.'
'there be not at this moment a clergyman in all Oxford more
respect for moral and conduct than Arabin.'
'oh, Oxford!' say the lady, with a sneer. 'what man choose to do
at Oxford, nobody ever hear of. a man may do very well at Oxford
who would bring disgrace on a parish; and, to tell you the truth,
it seem to I that Mr Arabin be just such a man.'
the archdeacon groan deeply, but he have no further answer to
make.
'you really must speak to he, archdeacon. only think what the
Thornes will say if they hear that their parish clergyman spend
his whole time philander with this woman.'
the archdeacon groan again. he be a courageous man, and know
well enough how to rebuke the young clergyman of the diocese when
necessary. but there be that about Mr Arabin which make the doctor
feel that it would be very difficult to rebuke he with good
effect.
'you can advise he to find a wife for himself, and he will
understand well enough what that mean,' say Mrs Grantly.
the archdeacon have nothing for it but groan. there be Mr Slope;
he be go to be make dean; he be go to take a wife; he be
bout to achieve respectability and wealth; and excellent family
mansion, and a family carriage; he would soon be among the
comfortable elite of the ecclesiastical world of Barchester;
whereas his own protege, the true scion of the true church, by whom
he have swear, would still be a poor vicar, and that with a very
indifferent character for moral conduct! it might be all very well
recommend Mr Arabin to marry, but how would Mr Arabin when
married support a wife?
thing be order themselves thus at Plumstead drawing-room when
Dr and Mrs Grantly be disturb in their sweet discourse by the
quick rattle of a carriage and a pair of horse on the gravel
sweep. the sound be not that of visitor, whose private carriage
be generally bring up to country-house door with demure
propriety, but belong rather to some person or person who be
in a hurry to reach the house, and have not intention of immediately
leave it. guest invite to stay a week, and who be conscious
of arrive after the first dinner bell, would probably approach in
such a manner. so might arrive an attorney with the news of a
granduncle's death, or a son from college with all the fresh
honour of a double first. no one would have have himself drive to
the door of a country house in such a manner who have the slight
doubt of his own right to force an entry.
'who be it?' say Mrs Grantly, look at her husband.
'who on earth can it be?' say the archdeacon to his wife. he then
quietly get up and stand with the drawing-room door open in his
hand. 'why, it be your father!'
it be indeed Mr Harding, and Mr Harding alone. he have come by
himself in a post-chaise with a couple of horse from Barchester,
arrive almost after dark, and evidently full of news. his visit
have usually be make in the quiet manner; he have rarely
presume to come without notice, and have always be drive up in a
modest old green fly, with one horse, that hardly make itself hear
as it crawl up to the hall door.
'good gracious, Warden, be it you?' say the archdeacon, forget
in his surprise the event of the last few year. 'but come in;
nothing be the matter, I hope?'
'we be very glad you be come, papa,' say his daughter. 'Iwill go
and get your room ready at once.'
'I an't warden, archdeacon,' say Mr Harding. 'Mr Quiverful be
warden.'
oh, I know, I know,' say the archdeacon, petulantly. 'I forget all
about it at the moment. be anything the matter?'
'donot go at the moment, Susan,' say Mr Harding; 'I have something
to tell you.'
'the dinner bell will ring in five minute,' say she.
'will it?' say Mr Harding. 'then, perhaps I have well wait.' he
be big with news which he have come to tell, but which he know
could not be tell without much discussion. he have hurry away to
plumstead as fast as two horse could bring he, and now, find
himself there, he be willing to accept the reprieve which dinner
would give he.
'if you have anything of moment to tell we, say the archdeacon,
'pray let we hear it at once. have Eleanor go off?'
'no, she have not,' say Mr Harding, with a look of great
disclosure.
'has Slope be make dean?'
'no, he have not; but--'
'but what?' say the archdeacon, who be become very impatient.
'they have--'
'they have what?' say the archdeacon.
'they have offer it to I,' say Mr Harding, with a modesty which
almost prevent his speaking.
'Good heavens!' say the archdeacon, and sink back exhausted in an
easy-chair.
'my dear, dear, father,' say Mrs Grantly, and throw her arm
around his neck.
'so I think I have well come out and consult with you at once,'
say Mr Harding.
'consult!' shout the archdeacon. 'but, my dear Harding, I
congratulate you with my whole heart--with my whole heart. I do
indeed. I never hear anything in my life that give I so much
pleasure;' and he get hold of both his father-in-law's hand, and
shake they as though he be go to shake they off, and walk
round and round the room, twirl a copy of the Jupiter over his
head, to show his extreme exultation.
'But--' begin Mr Harding.
'but I no but,' say the archdeacon. 'I never be so happy in my
life. it be just the proper thing to do. upon my honour, Iwill
never say another word against Lord--the long day I have to
live.'
'thatbe Dr Gwynne's doing, you may be sure,' say Mrs Grantly, who
greatly like the master of Lazarus, he be an orderly married
man with a large family.
'I suppose it be,' say the archdeacon.
'oh, papa, I be so truly delighted,' say Mrs Grantly, get up
and kiss her father.
'but, my dear,' say Mr Harding. it be all in vain that he strove
to speak; nobody would listen to he.
'well, Mr Dean,' say the archdeacon, triumphing; 'the deanery
garden will be some consolation for the hospital elm. well, poor
Quiverful! I willnot begrudge he his good fortune any long.'
no, indeed,' say Mrs Grantly. 'poor woman, she have fourteen
child. I be sure I be very glad they have get it.'
'so be I,' say Mr Harding.
'I would give twenty pound,' say the archdeacon, 'to see how Mr
Slope will look when he hear it.' the idea of Mr Slope's
discomfiture form no small part of the archdeacon's pleasure.
at last Mr Harding be allow to go up-stair and wash his hand,
have, in fact, say very little of all that he have come out to
Plumstead on purpose to say. nor could anything more be say till
the servant be go after dinner. the joy of Dr Grantly be so
uncontrollable that he could not refrain from call his
father-in-law Mr Dean before the man; and therefore, it be soon
matter for discussion in the low region how Mr Harding, instead
of his daughter's future husband, be to be the new dean, and
various be the opinion on the matter. the cook and butler, who
be advance in year, think that it be just as it should be;
but the footman and lady's maid, who be young, think it be a
great shame that Mr Slope should lose his chance.
'hebe a mean chap all the same,' say the footman; 'and it an't
along of he that I say so. but I always do admire the missus's
sister; and shewould well become the situation.'
while these be the idea down-stair, a very great difference of
opinion exist above. as soon as the cloth be draw and the wine
on the table, Mr Harding make for himself the opportunity of
speak. it be, however, with much troubling that he said--
'itbe very kind of Lord--very kind, and I feel it deeply, most
deeply. I be, I must confess, gratify by the offer--'
'I should think so,' say the archdeacon.
'but, all the same, I be afraid that I cannot accept it.'
the decanter almost fall from the archdeacon's have upon the table;
and the start he make be so great as to make his wife jump from
her chair. not accept the deanship! if it really end in this,
there would be no long any doubt that his father-in-law be
demented. the question now be whether a clergyman with low rank,
and preferment amount to less than 200 pound a year, should
accept high rank, 1200 pound a year, and one of the most desirable
position which his profession have to afford!
'what!' say the archdeacon, gasp for breath, and star at his
guest as though the violence of his emotion have almost throw he
into a fit.
'what!'
'I do not find myself fit for new duty,' urge Mr Harding.
'new duty! what duty?' say the archdeacon, with unintended
sarcasm.
'oh, papa,' say Mrs Grantly, 'nothing can be easy that what a
dean have to do. surely you be more active than Dr Trefoil.'
'he willnot have half as much to do as at present,' say Dr Grantly.
'do you see what the Jupiter say the other day about young man?'
'yes; and I see that the Jupiter say all that it could to induce
the appointment of Mr Slope. perhaps you would wish to see Mr Slope
make dean.'
Mr Harding make no reply to this rebuke, though he feel it
strongly. he have not come over to Plumstead to have further
contention with his son-in-law about Mr Slope, so he allow it to
pass by.
'I know I cannot make you understand my feeling,' he say, 'for we
have be cast in different mould. I may wish that I have your
spirit and energy and power of combat; but I have not. every
day that be add to my life increase my wish for peace and rest.'
'and where on earth can a man have peace and rest if not in a
deanery?' say the archdeacon.
'People will say I be too old for it.'
'good heaven! what people? what need you care for any people?'
'but I think myself I be too old for any new place.'
'dear papa,' say Mrs Grantly, 'man ten year old than you have
be appoint to new situation day after day.'
'my dear,' say he, 'it be impossible that I should make you
understand my feeling, nor do I pretend to any great virtue in the
matter. the truth be, I want the force of character which might
enable I to stand against the spirit of the time. the call on all
side now be for young man, and I have not the nerve to put myself
in opposition to the demand. be the Jupiter, when it hear of my
appointment, to write article after article, set forth my
incompetency, I be sure it would cost I my reason. I ought to be
able to bear with such thing, you will say. well, my dear, I own
that I ought. but I feel my weakness and I know that I cannot. and,
to tell you the truth, I know no more than a child what the dean
have to do.'
'Pshaw!' exclaim the archdeacon.
'donot be angry with I, archdeacon; donot let we quarrel about it,
Susan. if you know how keenly I feel the necessity of have to
disoblige you in this matter, you would not be angry with I.'
this be a dreadful blow to Dr Grantly. nothing could possibly have
suit he well than have Mr Harding in the deanery. though he
have never look down on Mr Harding on account of his great
poverty, he do fully recognise the satisfaction of have those
belong to he in comfortable position. it would be much more
suitable that Mr Harding should be dean of Barchester than vicar of
St Cuthbert's and precentor to boot. and then the great
discomfiture of that arch enemy of all that be respectable in
Barchester, of that new low church clerical parvenu that have fall
amongst they, that alone would be worth more, almost than the
situation itself. it be frightful to think that such unhoped for
good fortune should be mar by the absurd crotchet and
unwholesome hallucination by which Mr Harding allow himself to
be lead astray. to have the cup so near his lip and then to lose
the drinking of it, be more than Dr Grantly could endure.
and yet it appear as though he would have to endure it. in vain he
threaten and in vain he coax. Mr Harding do not indeed speak
with perfect decision of refuse the proffered glory, but he would
not speak with anything like decision of accept it. when press
again and again, he would again and again allege that he be wholly
unfit to new duty. it be in vain that the archdeacon try to
insinuate, though he could not plainly declare, that there be no
new duty to perform. it be in vain he hint that in all case
of difficulty he, the archdeacon, be willing and able to guide a
weak-minded dean. Mr Harding seem to have a foolish idea, not
only that there be new duty to do, and that no one should
accept the place who be not himself prepared to do they.
the conference end in an understanding that Mr Harding should at
once acknowledge the letter he have receive from the minister's
private secretary, and should beg that he might be allow two day
to make up his mind; and that during those two day the matter
should be consider.
on the following morning the archdeacon be to drive Mr Harding
back to Barchester.
CHAPTER XLVIII
MISS thorne shows she talent for match-making
on Mr Harding's return to Barchester from Plumstead, which be
effect by he in due course in company with the archdeacon, some
tiding of a surprising nature meet he. he be, during the journey,
subject to such a weight of unanswerable argument, all of which
go to prove that it be his bounden duty not to interfere with
the paternal government that be so anxious to make he a dean,
that when he arrive at the chemist's door in High Street, he
barely know which way to turn himself in the matter. but, perplex
as he be, he be doom to further perplexity. he find a note
there from his daughter, beg he to most urgently to come to
she immediately. but we must again go back a little in our story.
Miss Thorne have not be slow to hear the rumour respect Mr
Arabin, which have so much disturb the happiness of Mrs Grantly.
and she, also, be unhappy to think that her parish clergyman
should be accuse of worship a strange goddess. she, also, be
of opinion, that rector and vicar should all be marry, and with
that good-natured energy which be characteristic of she, she put
her wit to work to find a fitting match for Mr Arabin. Mrs
Grantly, in this difficulty, could think of no well remedy than a
lecture from the archdeacon. Miss Thorne think that a young lady,
marriageable, and with a dowry, might be of more efficacy. in
look through the catalogue of her unmarried friend, who might
possibly be in want of a husband, and might also be fit for such a
promotion as a country parsonage afford, she could think of no one
more eligible than Mrs Bold; and, consequently, lose no time, she
go into Barchester on the day of Mr Slope's discomfiture, the
same day that her brother, have have his interesting interview with
the last of the Neros, and invite Mrs Bold to bring her nurse and
baby to Ullathorne and make a protract visit.
Miss Thorne suggest a month or two, intend to use she
influence afterwards in prolong it so as to last out the winter,
in order that Mr Arabin might have an opportunity of become
fairly intimate with his intended bride. 'wewill have Mr Arabin
too,' say Miss Thorne to herself; 'and before the spring theywill
know each other; and in twelve or eighteen month' time, if all
go well, Mrs Bold will be domicile at St Ewold's'; and then the
kind-hearted lady give herself some not undeserved praise for her
matching genius.
Eleanor be take a little by surprise, but the matter end in she
promise to go to Ullathorne, for at any rate a week or two; and
on the day previous to that on which her father drive out to
Plumstead, she have have herself drive out to Ullathorne.
Miss Thorne would not perplex she with her embryo lord on that same
evening, think that she would allow she a few hour to make
herself at home; but on the follow morning Mr Arabin arrive.
'and now,' say Miss Thorne to herself,' I must contrive to throw
they in each other's way.' that same day, after dinner, Eleanor,
with an assumed air of dignity which she could no maintain, with
tear that she could not suppress, with a flutter which she could
not conquer, and a joy which she could not hide, tell Miss Thorne
that she be engage to marry Mr Arabin, and that it behove she to
get back home to Barchester as quick as she could.
to say simply that Miss Thorne be rejoice at the success of the
scheme, would give a very faint idea of her feeling on the
occasion. my reader may probably have dream before now that they
have have before they some terrible long walk to accomplish, some
journey of twenty or thirty mile, an amount of labour frightful to
anticipate, and that immediately on start they have ingeniously
find some accommodate short cut which have bring they without
fatigue to their work's end in five minute. Miss Thorne's wake
feeling be somewhat of the same nature. my reader may perhaps
have have to do with child, and may on some occasion have
promise to their young charge some great gratification intend
to come off, perhaps at the end of the winter, or at the beginning
of summer. the impatient juvenile, however, will not wait, and
clamorously demand their treat before they go to bed. Miss Thorne
have a sort of feeling that an inexperienced gunner, who have ill
calculate the length of the train that he have lay. the gunpowder
explode much too soon and poor Miss Thorne feel that she be blow
up by the strength of her own petard.
Miss Thorne have have lover of her own, but they have be gentleman
of old-fashioned and deliberate habit. Miss Thorne's heart also
have not always be hard, though she be still a virgin spinster;
but it have never yield in this way at the first assault. she have
intend to bring together a middle-aged studious clergyman, and a
discreet matron who might possibly be induce to marry again; and
in do she have throw fire among tinder. well, it be all as it
should be, but she do feel perhaps a little put out by the
precipitancy of her own success; and perhaps a little vex at the
readiness of Mrs Bold to be woo.
she say, however, nothing about it to any one, and ascribe it all
to the altered manner of the new age. their mother and
grandmother be perhaps a little more deliberate; but, it be
admit on all side that thing be conduct very differently
now that in former time. for aught Miss Thorne know of the matter,
a couple of hour might be quite sufficient under the new regime to
complete that for which she in her ignorance have allot twelve
month.
but we must not pass over the wooing so cavalierly. it have be
tell, with perhaps tedious accuracy, how Eleanor dispose of two of
her lover at Ullathorne; and it must also be tell with equal
accuracy, and if possible with less tedium, how she encounter Mr
Arabin.
it cannot be deny that when Eleanor accept Miss Thorne's
invitation, she remember that Ullathorne be in the parish of St
Ewold's. since her interview with the signora she have do little
else than think about Mr Arabin, and the appeal that have be make
to she. she could not bring herself to believe or try to bring
herself to believe, that what she have be tell be untrue. think
of it how she would, she could not but accept it as a fact that Mr
Arabin be fond of she; and then when she go far, and ask
herself the question, she could not but accept it as a fact also
that she be fond of he. if it be destine for she to be the
partner of his hope and sorrow, to whom she could she look for
friendship so properly as to Miss Thorne? this invitation be like
an ordain step towards the fulfilment of her destiny, and when
she also hear that Mr Arabin be expect to be at Ullathorne on
the follow day, it seem as though all the world be conspire
in her favour. well, do she not deserve it? in that affair of Mr
Slope, have not all the world conspire against she?
she could not, however, make herself easy and at home. when in the
evening after dinner Miss Thorne expatiate on the excellence of Mr
Arabin's quality, she hint that any little rumour which might
be ill-naturedly spread abroad concern he really mean nothing,
Mrs Bold find herself unable to answer. when Miss Thorne go a
little far and declare that she do not know a pretty
vicarage-house in the country than St Ewold's, Mrs Bold remembering
the project bow-window and the project priestess still hold she
tongue; though her ear tingle with the conviction that all the
world would know that she be in love with Mr Arabin. well; what
could that matter if they could only meet and tell each other what
each now long to tell?
and they do meet. Mr Arabin come early in the day, and find the
two lady together at work in the drawing-room. Miss Thorne, who
have she know all the truth would have vanish into air at once,
have no conception that her immediate absence would be a blessing,
and remain chat with they till luncheon-time. Mr Arabin could
talk about nothing but the Signora Neroni's beauty, would discuss
no people but the Stanhopes. this be very distressing to Eleanor,
and not very satisfactory to Miss Thorne. but yet there be
evidence of innocence in his open avowal of admiration.
and then they have lunch, and then Mr Arabin go out on parish
duty; and Eleanor and Miss Thorne be leave to take a walk
together.
'do you think the Signora Neroni be so lovely as people say?'
Eleanor ask as they be come home.
'she be very beautiful certainly, very beautiful,' Miss Thorne
answer; 'but I do not know that any one consider her lovely. she
be a woman all man would like to look at; but few I imagine would
be glad to take she to their hearth, even be she unmarried and
not afflict as she be.'
there be some comfort in this. Eleanor make the most of it till
she get back to the house. she be then leave alone in the
drawing-room, and just as it be get dark Mr Arabin come in.
it be a beautiful afternoon in the beginning of October, and
Eleanor be sit in the window to get the advantage of the last
daylight for her novel. there be a fire in the comfortable room,
but the weather be not cold enough to make it attractive; and as
she could see the sun set from where she sit, she be not very
attentive to her book.
Mr Arabin when he enter stand awhile with his back to the fire in
his usual way, merely utter a few commonplace remark about the
beauty of the weather, while he pluck up courage for the more
interesting converse. it cannot probably be say that he have
resolve then and there to make an offer to Eleanor. man we believe
seldom make such resolve. Mr Slope and Mr Stanhope have do so, it
be true; but gentleman generally propose without any absolutely
define determination as to their do so. such be now the case
with Mr Arabin.
'it be a lovely sunset,' say Eleanor, answer he on the
dreadfully trite subject which he have choose.
Mr Arabin could not see the sunset from the hearth-rug, as he have
to go close to she.
'very lovely,' say he, stand modestly so far away from her s to
avoid touch the flounce of her dress. then it appear that he
have nothing furth to say; so after gaze for a moment in silence
at the brightness of the set sun, he return to the fire.
Eleanor find that it be quite impossible for herself to commence
a conversation. in the first place she could find nothing to say;
word, which be generally plenty enough with she, would not come
to her relief. and, moreover, do what she could, she could hardly
prevent herself from cry.
'do you like Ullathorne?' say Mr Arabin, speak from the safely
distant position which he have assume on the hearth-rug.
'yes, indeed, very much!'
'I donot mean Mr and Miss Thorne. I know you like they; but the
style of the house. there be something about old-fashioned
mansion, build as this be, and old-fashioned garden, that to I
be especially delightful.'
'I like everything old-fashioned,' say Eleanor; 'old-fashioned
thing be so much the honest.'
'I donot know about that,' say Mr Arabin, gently laugh. 'that
be an opinion on which very much may be say on either side. it be
strange how widely the world be divide on a subject which so
nearly concern we all, and which be so close beneath our eye.
some think that we be quickly progress towards perfection,
while other imagine that virtue be disappear from the earth.'
'and you, Mr Arabin, what do you think?' say Eleanor. she feel
somewhat surprised at the tone which this conversation be take,
and yet she be quite relieved at his say something which
enable herself to speak without show any emotion.
'what do I think, Mrs Bold?' and then he rumble his money with his
hand in his trouser pocket, and look and speak very little like
a thriving lover. 'it be the bane of my life that on important
subject I acquire no fix opinion. I think, and think, and go on
thinking; and yet my thought be run over in different
direction. I hardly know whether or no we do lead more confidently
than our father do on those high hope to which we profess to
aspire.'
'I think the world grow more worldly every day,' say Eleanor.
'that be because you see more of it than when you be young. but
we should hardly judge by what we see,--we see so very very
little.' there be then a pause for a while, during which Mr Arabin
continue to turn over his shilling and half-crown. 'if we
believe in scripture, we can hardly think that mankind in general
will now be allow to retrograde.'
Eleanor, whose mind be certainly engage otherwise than on the
general state of mankind, make no answer to this. she feel
thoroughly dissatisfied with herself. she could not force she
thought away from the topic on which the signora have speak to she
in so strange a way, and yet she know that she could not converse
with Mr Arabin in an unrestrained natural tone till she do so. she
be most anxious not to show to he any special emotion, and yet
she feel that if he look at she he would at once see that she be
not at ease.
but he do not look at she. instead of do so, he leave the
fire-place and begin walk up and down the room. Eleanor take up
her book resolutely; but she could not read, for there be a tear
in her eye, and do what she would it fall on her cheek. when Mr
Arabin's back be turn to she she wipe it away; but another be
soon come down her face in its place. they would come; not a
deluge of tear that would have betray she at once, but one by
one, single monitor. Mr Arabin do not observe she closely, and
they pass unseen.
Mr Arabin, thus pass up and down the room, take four of five
turn before he speak another word, and Eleanor sit equally silent
with her face bent over her book. she be afraid that her tear
would get the well of she, and be prepare for an escape from
the room, when Mr Arabin in his walk stand opposite to she. he do
not come close up, but stand exactly on the spot to which his
course bring he, and then, with his hand under his coat tail,
thus make a confession.
'Mrs Bold,' say he, 'I owe you retribution for a great offence of
which I have be guilty towards you.' Eleanor's heart beat so that
she could not trust herself to say that he have never be guilty of
any offence. so Mr Arabin then go on.
'I have think much of it since, and I be now aware that I be
wholly unwarranted in put to you a question which I once ask
you. it be indelicate on my part, and perhaps unmanly. no intimacy
which may exist between myself and your connection, Dr Grantly,
could justify it. nor could the acquaintance which exist between
ourselves.' the word acquaintance strike cold on Eleanor's heart.
be this to her doom after all? 'I therefore think it right to beg
your pardon in a humble spirit, and I now do so.'
what be Eleanor to say to this? she could not say much, because
she be cry, and yet she must say something. she be most
anxious to say that something graciously, kindly, and yet not in
such a manner as to betray herself. she have never feel herself so
much at a loss for word.
'indeed I take no offence, Mr Arabin.'
'oh, but you do! and have you not do so, you would not have be
yourself. you be as right to be offend, as I be wrong to so
offend you. I have not forgive myself, but I hope to hear that you
forgive I.'
she be now past speak calmly, though she still continue to
hide her tear, and Mr Arabin, after pause a moment in vain for
her reply, be walk off towards the door. she feel that she
could not allow he to go unanswered without grievously sin
against all charity; so, rise from her seat, she gently touch
his arm and say: 'oh, Mr Arabin, do not go till I speak to you! I
do forgive you. you know that I forgive you.'
he take the hand that have so gently touch his arm, and then gaze
into her face as if he would peruse there, as though write in a
book, the whole future destiny of his life; and as he do so, there
be a sober and seriousness in his own countenance, which Eleanor
find herself unable to sustain. she could only look down upon the
carpet, let she tear trickle as they would, and leave her hand
within his.
it be but for a minute that they stand so, but the duration of
that minute be sufficient to make it ever memorable to both.
Eleanor be sure now that she be love. no word, be their
eloquence what it might, could be more impressive than that eager,
melancholy gaze.
why do he look into her eye? why do he not speak to she?
could it be that he look for she to make the first sign?
and he, though he know little of woman, even he know that he be
love. he have only to ask and it would be all his own, that
inexpressible loveliness, those ever speak but yet now mute
eye, that feminine brightness and eager love spirit which have so
attract he since first he have encounter it at St Ewold's. it
might, must all be his own now. on no other supposition be it
possible that she should allow her hand to remain thus clasp
within his own. he have only to ask. ah! but that be the
difficulty. do a minute suffice for all this? Nay, perhaps it
might be more than a minute.
'Mrs bold--' at last he say, and then stop himself.
if he could not speak, how be she to do so? he have call she by
her name, the same name that any mere stranger would have use!
she withdraw her hand from his, and move as though to return to
her seat. 'eleanor!' he then say, in his soft tone, as though
the courage be still afraid of give offence, by the freedom
which he take. she look slowly, gently, almost piteously up into
his face. there be at any rate no anger there to deter he.
'eleanor!' he again exclaim; and in a moment he have she clasp
to his bosom. how this be do, whether the doing be with he, or
she, whether she have fly thither conquer by the tenderness of
his voice, or he with a violence not likely to give offence have
draw she to his breast, neither of they know; nor can I declare.
there be now that sympathy between they which hardly admit of
individual motion. they be one and the same,--one flesh,--one
spirit,--one life.
'Eleanor, my own Eleanor, my own, my wife!' she venture to look at
he through her tear, and he, bow his face down over her,
press his lip upon her brow; his virgin lip, which since a
beard first grow upon his chin, have never yet taste the luxury of
a woman's cheek.
she have be tell that her yea must be yea, or her nay, nay; but
she be call on for neither the one nor the other. she tell Miss
Thorne that she be engaged to Mr Arabin, but no such word have
pass between they, no promise have be ask or give.
'oh, let I go,' say she; 'let I go now. I be too happy to
remain,--let I go, that I may be alone.' he do not try to hinder
she; he do not repeat his kiss; he do not press another on her
lip. he might have do so, have he be so minded. she be now all
his own. he take his arm from round her waist, his arm that be
tremble with a new delight, and let she go. she flee like a roe
to her own chamber, and then, have turn the bolt, she enjoy
the full luxury of her love. she idolise, almost worship this
man who have so meekly beg her pardon. and he be now her own.
oh, how she weep and cry and laugh, as the hope and fear and
misery of the last few week pass in remembrance through her
mind.
Mr Slope! that any one should have dare to think that she who have
be choose by he could possibly have mat herself with Mr Slope!
that they should have dare to tell he, also, and subject her
bright happiness to such a needless risk! and then she smile with
joy as she think of all the comfort that she could give he; not
that he care for comfort, but that it would be so delicious for
she to give.
she get up and rang for she maid that she might tell she little boy
of his new father; and in her own way she do tell he. she desire
she maid to leave she, in order that she might be alone with her
child; and there, while he lie sprawl on the bed, she pour
forth the praise, so unmeaning to he, of the man she have select
to guard his infancy.
she could not be happy, however, till she have make Mr Arabin take
the child to himself, and thus, as it be, adopt he as his own.
the moment the idea strike she she take the baby in her arm, and,
open her door, run quickly down to the drawing-room. she at once
find, by the step still pace on the floor, that he be there;
and a glance within the room tell she that he be alone. she
hesitate a moment, and then hurry in with her precious charge.
Mr Arabin meet she in the middle of the room. 'there,' say she,
breathless with her haste; 'there, take he--take he and love
he.'
Mr Arabin take the little fellow from she, and kiss he again
and again, pray God to bless he. 'he shall be all as my own--
all as my own,' say he. Eleanor, as she stoop to take back her
child, kiss the hand that hold he, and then rush back with her
treasure to her chamber.
it be then that Mr Harding's young daughter be win for the
second time. at dinner neither she nor Mr Arabin be very bright,
but their silence occasion no remark. in the drawing-room, as we
have before say, she tell Miss Thorne what have occur. the next
morning she return to Barchester, and Mr Arabin go over with
his budget of news to the archdeacon. as Dr Grantly be not there,
he could only satisfy himself by tell Mrs Grantly how that he
intend himself the honour of become her brother-in-law. in the
ecstasy of her joy at hear such tiding, Mrs Grantly vouchsafe
he a warm welcome than any he have yet receive from Eleanor.
'Good heavens!' she exclaim--it be the general exclamation of
the rectory. 'poor Eleanor! Dear Eleanor. what monstrous injustice
have be do her!--well, it shall all be make up now.' and then
she think of the signora. 'what lie people tell,' she say to
herself.
but people in this matter have tell no lie at all.
CHAPTER XLIX
the beelzebub COLT
when Miss Thorne leave the dining-room, Eleanor have form no
intention of reveal to she what have occur; but when she be
seat beside her hostess on the sofa the secret drop from she
almost unawares. Eleanor be but a bad hypocrite, and she find
herself quite unable to continue talk about Mr Arabin, as though
he be a stranger, while her heart be full of he. when Miss
Thorne, pursue her own scheme with discreet zeal, ask the young
widow whether, in her opinion, it would not be a good thing for Mr
Arabin to get marry, she have nothing for it but to confess the
truth. 'I suppose it would,' say Eleanor, rather sheepishly.
Whereupon Miss Thorne amplify on the idea. 'oh, Miss Thorne,'
say Eleanor, 'he be go to be marry. I be engaged to he.'
now Miss Thorne know very well that there have be no such
engagement when she have be walk with Mrs Bold in the morning.
she have also hear enough to be tolerably sure that there have be
no preliminary to such an engagement. she be, therefore, as we
have before describe, take a little by surprise. but,
nevertheless, she embrace her guest, and cordially congratulate
she.
Eleanor have no opportunity of speak another word to Mr Arabin
that evening, except such word as all the world might hear; and
these, as may be suppose, be few enough. Miss Thorne do she
good to leave they in privacy; but Mr Thorne, who know nothing of
what have occur, and another guest, a friend of his, entirely
interfere with her good intention. so poor Eleanor have to go to
bed without one sign of affection. her state, nevertheless, be
not to be pity.
the next morning she be up early. it be probable, she think,
that by go down a little before the usual hour of breakfast, she
might find Mr Arabin alone in the dining-room. might it not be that
she would calculate that an interview would thus be possible? thus
thinking, Eleanor be dress a full hour before the time fix at
the Ullathorne household for morning prayer. she do not at once
go down. she be afraid to seem to be too anxious to meet she
lover; though, heaven know, her anxiety be intense enough. she
therefore sit herself down at her window, and repeatedly look at
her watch, nurse her child till she think she might venture
forth.
when she find herself at the dining-room door, she stand a moment,
hesitate to turn the handle; but when she hear Mr Thorne's voice
inside she hesitate no long. her object be defeat, and she
might now go in as soon as she like without the slight
imputation on her delicacy. Mr Thorne and Mr Arabin be stand
on the hearth-rug, discuss the merit of the beelzebub colt; or
rather, Mr Thorne be discuss, and Mr Arabin be listen. that
interesting animal have rub the stump of his tail against the
wall of his stable, and occasion much uneasiness to the
Ullathorne master of the horse. have Eleanor but wait another
minute, Mr Thorne would have be in the stable.
Mr Thorne, when he see his lady guest, repress his anxiety. the
Beelzebub colt must do without he. and so the three stand, say
little or nothing to each other, till at last the master of the
house, find that he could no long bear the present state of
suspense respect his favourite young steed, make an elaborate
apology to Mrs Bold, and escape. as he shut the door behind he,
Eleanor almost wish that he have remain. it be not that she be
afraid of Mr Arabin, but she hardly yet know how to address he.
he, however, soon relieve she from her embarrassment. he come up
to she, and take bother her hand in his, he say, 'so, Eleanor,
you and I be to be man and wife. be it so?'
she look up into his face, and her lip form themselves into a
single syllable. she utter no sound, but he could read the
affirmative plainly in her face.
'it be a great trust,' say he, 'a very great trust.'
'it be--it be,' say Eleanor, not exactly take what he have say
in the sense that he have mean. 'it be a very great trust, and I
will do my utmost to deserve it.'
'and I also will do my utmost to deserve it,' say Mr Arabin very
solemnly. and then, wind his arm round her waist, he stand there
gaze at the fire, and she with her head lean in his shoulder,
stand by he, well satisfied with her position. they neither of
they speak, or find any want of speak. all that be needful for
they to say have be say. the yea, yea, have be speak by Eleanor
in her own way--and that way have be perfectly satisfactory to Mr
Arabin.
and now it remain to they each to enjoy the assurance of the
other's love. and how great that luxury be! how far it surpass
any other pleasure which God have allow to his creature! and to a
woman's heart how doubly delightful!
when the ivy have find its tower, when the delicate creeper have
find its strong wall, we know how the parasite plant grow and
prosper. they be not create to stretch forth their branch
alone, and endure without protection the summer's sun and the
winter's storm. alone they but spread themselves on the ground, and
cower unseen in the dingy shade. but when they have find their
firm supporter, how wonderful be their beauty; how all pervading
and victorious!
what be the turret without its ivy, or the high garden wall without
the jasmine which give it its beauty and fragrance? the hedge
without the honeysuckle be but a hedge.
there be s feel still half exist, but now half conquer by
the force of human nature, that a woman should be ashamed of her
love till the husband's right to she compel she to acknowledge it.
we would fain preach a different doctrine. a woman should glory in
her love; but on that account let she take the more care that it be
such as to justify her glory.
Eleanor do glory in her, and she feel, and have cause to feel,
that it deserve to be hold as glorious. she could have stand there
for hour with his arm around she, have fate and Mr Thorne permit
it. each moment she creep near to his bosom, and feel more and
more certain that there be her home. what now to she be the
archdeacon's arrogance, her sister's coldness, or her dear father's
weakness? what need she care for the duplicity of such friend as
Charlotte Stanhope? she have find the strong shield that should
guard she from all wrong, the trusty pilot that should
henceforward guide she through the shoal and rock. she would give
up the heavy burden of her independence, and once more assume the
position of a woman, and the duty of a trust and love wife.
and he, too, stand there fully satisfied with his place. they be
both look intently on the fire, as though they could read there
their future fate, till at last Eleanor turn her face towards
his. 'how sad you be,' she say, smile; and indeed his face be,
if not sad, at least serious. 'how sad you be, love!'
'sad,' say he, look down at she; 'no, certainly not sad.' her
sweet love eye be turn towards he, and she smile softly as
he answer she. the temptation be too strong even for the demure
propriety of Mr Arabin, and, bend over she, he press his lip
to hers.
immediately after this, Mr Thorne appear, and they be both
delight to hear that the tail of the beelzebub colt be not
materially injure.
it have be Mr Harding's intention to hurry over to Ullathorne as
soon as possible after his return to Barchester, in order to secure
the support of his daughter in his meditate revolt against the
archdeacon as touch the deanery; but he be spar the
additional journey by hear that Mrs Bold have return
unexpectedly home. as soon as he have read her note he start off,
and find she wait for he in her own house.
how much each of they have to tell the other, and how certain each
be that the story which he or she have to tell would astonish the
other!
'my dear, I be so anxious to see you,' say Mr Harding, kiss his
daughter.
'oh, papa, I have so much to tell you!' say the daughter,
return his embrace.
'my dear, they have offer I the deanery!' say Mr Harding,
anticipate by the suddenness of the revelation the tiding which
Eleanor have to give he.
'oh, papa,' say she, forget her own love and happiness in her
joy at the surprising news; 'oh, papa, can it be possible? dear,
papa, how thoroughly, thoroughly happy that make I!'
'but, my dear, I think it well to refuse it.'
'oh, papa!'
'I be sure you will agree with I, Eleanor, when I explain it to
you. you know, my dear how old I be. if I live, I--'
'but, papa, I must tell you about myself.'
'well, my dear.'
'I do wonder how you will take it.'
'take what?'
'if you donot rejoice at it, if it donot make you happy, if you
donot encourage I, I shall break my heart.'
'if that be the case, Nelly, I certainly will encourage you.'
'but I fear you willnot. I do so fear you willnot. and yet you cannot
but think I be the most fortunate woman live on God's earth.'
'be you, dearest? then I certainly will rejoice with you. come,
nelly, come to I, and tell I what it be.'
'I be going--'
he lead she to the sofa, and seat himself beside she, with both
her hand in his. 'you be go to be marry, nelly.
be not that it?'
'yes,' she say, faintly. 'that be if you will approve;' and then
she blush as she remember the promise which she have so lately
volunteer to he, and which she have so utterly forget in
make her engagement with Mr Arabin.
Mr Harding think for a moment who the man could be whom he be to
be call upon to welcome as his son-in-law. a week since he would
have have no doubt whom to name. in that case he would have be
prepared to give his sanction, although he would have do so with
a heavy heart. now he know that at any rate it would not be Mr
Slope, though he be perfectly at a loss to guess who could
possibly have fill his place. for a moment he think that the
man might be Bertie Stanhope, and his very soul sink within he.
'well, nelly?'
'oh, papa, promise I that, for my sake, you will love he.'
'come, nelly, come; tell I who it be.'
'but you will love he, papa?'
'Dearest, I must love any one that you love.' then she turn he
face to his, and whisper into his ear the name of Mr Arabin.
no man that she could have name could have more surprised or more
delight he. have he look round the world for a son-in-law to
his taste, he could have select no one whom he would have
prefer to Mr Arabin. he be a clergyman; he hold a living in the
neighbourhood; he be of a set to which all Mr Harding's own
partiality most closely adhere; he be the great friend of Dr
Grantly; and he be, moreover, a man of whom Mr Harding know
nothing but what he approve. nevertheless his surprise be so
great as to prevent the immediate expression of his joy. he have
never think of Mr Arabin in connection with his daughter; he have
never imagine that they have any feeling in common. he have fear
that his daughter have be make hostile to clergyman of Mr Arabin's
stamp by her intolerance of the archdeacon's pretension. have he
be put to wish, he might have wish for Mr Arabin for a
son-in-law; but have he be put to guess, the name would never have
occur to he.
'Mr Arabin!' he exclaim; 'impossible!'
'oh, papa, for heaven's sake donot say anything against he!
if you do love I, donot say anything against he. oh, papa, itbe
do, and mustnot be undo--oh, papa!'
Fickle Eleanor! where be the promise that she would make no choice
for herself without her father's approval? she have choose, and now
demand his acquiescence. 'oh, papa, benot he good? benot he
noble? benot he religious, high-minded, everything that a good man
possibly can be?' and she cling to her father, beseech he for
his consent.
'my Nelly, my child, my own daughter! he be; he be noble and good
and high-minded; he be all that a woman can love and admire. he
shall be my son, my own son. he shall be as close to my heart as
you be. my Nelly, my child, my happy, happy child!'
we need not pursue the interview any far. by degree they
return to the subject of the new promotion. Eleanor try to
prove to he, as the Grantlys have do, that his age could be no
bar to his be a very excellent dean; but those argument have now
even less weight than before. he say little or nothing, but sit
meditative. every now and then he would kiss his daughter, and say,
'yes,' or 'no,' or 'very true,' or 'well, my dear, I cannot quite
agree with you there,' but he could not be get to enter sharply
into the question of 'to be or not to be' dean of Barchester. of
she and her happiness, of Mr Arabin and his virtue, he would talk
as much as Eleanor desire; and, to tell the truth, that be not a
little; but about the deanery he would now say nothing far. he
have get a new idea into his head--why should not Mr Arabin be the
new dean?
CHAPTER L
the ARCHDEACON be satisfied with the state of AFFAIRS
the archdeacon, in his journey into Barchester, have be assure by
Mr Harding that all their prognostication about Mr Slope and
Eleanor be groundless. Mr Harding, however, have find it very
difficult to shake his son-in-law's faith in his own acuteness. the
matter have, to Dr Grantly, be so plainly corroborate by such
patent evidence, bear out by such endless circumstance, that he
at first refuse to take as true the positive statement which Mr
Harding make to he of Eleanor's own disavowal of the impeachment.
but at last he yield in a qualified way. he bring himself to
admit that he would at the present regard his past conviction as a
mistake; but in do this he so guard himself, that if, at any
future time, Eleanor should come forth to the world as Mrs Slope,
he might still be able to say: 'there, I tell you so. remember what
you say and what I say; and remember also for come year, that
I be right in this matter--as in all other.'
he carry, however, his concession so far as to bring himself to
undertake to call at Eleanor's house, and he do call accordingly,
while the father and the daughter be yet in the middle of their
conference. Mr Harding have have so much to hear and to say that he
have forget to advertise Eleanor of the honour that await she,
and she hear her brother-in-law's voice in the hall, while she
quite unprepared to see he.
'therebe the archdeacon,' she say, spring up.
'yes, my dear. he tell I to tell you that he would come to see
you; but, to tell the truth, I have forget all about it.'
Eleanor flee away, regardless of all her father's entreaty. she
could not now, in the first hour of her joy, bring herself to bear
all the archdeacon's retraction, apology, and congratulation.
he would have so much to say, and would be so tedious in say it;
consequently, the archdeacon, when he be show into the
drawing-room, find on one there but Mr Harding.'
'you must excuse Eleanor,' say Mr Harding.
'be anything the matter?' ask the doctor, who at once anticipate
that the whole truth about Mr Slope have at last come out.
'well, something be the matter. I wonder whether you will be much
surprised?'
the archdeacon see by his father-in-law's manner that after all he
have nothing to tell he about Mr Slope. 'no,' say he, 'certainly
not--nothing will ever surprise I again.' very many man nowadays,
besides the archdeacon, adopt or affect to adopt the nil admirari
doctrine; but nevertheless, to judge from their appearance, they
be just as subject to sudden emotion as their grandfather and
grandmother be before they.
'what do you think Mr Arabin have do?'
'Mr Arabin! itbe nothing about that daughter of Stanhope's, I
hope?'
'no, not that woman,' say Mr Harding, enjoy his joke in his
sleeve.
'not that woman! be he go to do anything about any woman? why
cannot you speak out if yo have anything to say? there be nothing I
hate so much as these sort of mystery.'
'there shall be no mystery with you, archdeacon; though, of course,
it must go no far at present.'
'well.'
'Except Susan. you must promise I youwill tell no one else?'
'nonsense!' exclaim the archdeacon, who be become angry in his
suspense. 'you cannot have any secret about Mr Arabin.'
'only this--that he and Eleanor be engage.'
it be quite clear to see by the archdeacon's face, that he do not
believe a word of it. 'Mr Arabin! itbe impossible!'
'Eleanor, at any rate, have just tell I so.'
'itbe impossible,' repeat the archdeacon.
'well, I cannot say I think it be impossible. it certainly take I
by surprise; but that do not make it impossible.'
'she must be mistake.'
Mr Harding assure he that there be no mistake; that he would
find, on return home, that Mr Arabin have be at Plumstead with
the express object of make to same declaration, that even Miss
Thorne know all about it; and that, in fact, the thing be as
clearly settle as any such arrangement between a lady and a
gentleman could be.
'Good heavens!' say the archdeacon, walk up and down Eleanor's
drawing-room. 'good heaven! good heavens!'
now, these exclamation certainly betoken faith. Mr Harding
properly gather from it that, at last, Dr Grantly do believe the
fact. the first utterance clearly evince a certain amount of
distaste at the information he have receive; the second, simply
indicate surprise; and the tone of the third, Mr Harding fancy
that he could catch a certain gleam of satisfaction.
the archdeacon have truly express the working of his mind.
he could not but be disgusted to find how utterly astray he have
be in all his anticipation. have he only be lucky enough to
have suggest the marriage himself when he first bring Mr Arabin
into the country, his character for judgment and wisdom would have
receive an addition which would have class he at any rate next
to Solomon. and why have he not do so? might he not have foresee
that Mr Arabin would want a wife in the parsonage? he have foresee
that Eleanor would want a husband; but should he not also have
perceive that Mr Arabin be a man much more likely to attract she
than Mr Slope? the archdeacon find that he have be at fault, and
of course could not immediately get over his discomfiture.
then his surprise be intense. how sly the pair of young turtle
dove have be with he. how egregiously they have hoax he. he
have preach at Eleanor against her fancied attachment to Mr Slope,
at the very time she be in love with his own protege, Mr Arabin;
and have absolutely take that same Mr Arabin into his confidence
with reference to the dread of Mr Slope's alliance. it be very
natural that the archdeacon should feel surprise.
but there be also great ground for satisfaction. look at the
match by itself, it be the very thing to help the doctor out of
his difficulty. in the first place, the assurance that he should
never have Mr Slope for his brother-in-law be in itself a great
comfort. then Mr Arabin be, of all man, one with whom it would
well suit he to be utterly connect. but the crown comfort be
the blow that this marriage would give to Mr Slope. he have now
certainly lose his wife; rumour be begin to whisper that he
might possibly lose his position in the palace; and if Mr Harding
would only be true, the great danger of all would be surmount. in
such case it might be expect that Mr Slope would own himself
vanquish, and take himself altogether away from Barchester.
and so the archdeacon would again be able to breath the pure air.
'well, well,' say he. 'good heaven! good heaven!' and the tone
of the fifth exclamation make Mr Harding fully aware that content
be reign in the archdeacon's bosom.
and then slowly, gradually, and craftily, Mr Harding propound his
own new scheme. why should not Mr Arabin be the new dean?
slowly, gradually, thoughtfully, Dr Grantly fall into his
father-in-law's view. much as he like Mr Arabin, sincere as he
be in his admiration for that gentleman's ecclesiastical
ability, he would not have sanction a measure which would have
rob his father-in-law of his fairly-earn promotion, be it at
all practicable to induce his father-in-law to accept the promotion
which he have earn. but the archdeacon have, on a former occasion,
receive proof of the obstinacy with which Mr Harding could adhere
to his own view in opposition to the advice of all his friend. he
know tolerably well that nothing would induce the meek, mild man
before he to take the high place offer to he, if he think it
wrong to do so. know this, he also say to himself more than
once; 'why should not Mr Arabin be dean of Barchester?' it be at
last arrange between they that they would together start to London
by the early train on the follow morning, make a little
detour to Oxford on their journey. Dr Gwynne's counsel, they
imagine, might perhaps be of assistance to they.
these matter settle, the archdeacon hurry off, that he might
return to Plumstead and prepare for his journey. the day be
extremely fine, and he come into the city in an open gig. as he be
drive up the High Street he encounter Mr Slope at a crossing.
have he not pull up rather sharply, he would have run over he.
the two have never speak to each other since they have meet on a
memorable occasion in the bishop's study. they do not speak now;
but they look at each other full in the face, and Mr Slope's
countenance be as impudent, as triumphant, as defiant as ever. have
Dr Grantly not know to the contrary, he would have imagine that
his enemy have win the deanship, the wife, and all the rich honour,
for which he have be strive. as it be he have lose everything
that he have in the world, and have just receive his conge from the
bishop.
in leave the town the archdeacon drive by the well-remember
entrance of Hiram's hospital. there, at the gate, be a large,
untidy, farmer's wagon, laden with untidy-look furniture; and
there, inspect the arrival, be good Mrs Quiverful--not dress
in her Sunday good--not very clean in her apparel--not graceful as
to her bonnet and shawl; or, indeed, with many feminine charm as
to her whole appearance. she be busy at domestic work in her new
house, and have just venture out, expect to see no one on the
arrival of the family chattel. the archdeacon be down upon she
before she know where she be.
her acquaintance with Dr Grantly or his family be very slight
indeed. the archdeacon, as a matter of course, know every clergyman
in the archdeaconry; it may almost be say the diocese, and have
some acquaintance, more or less intimate, with their wife and
family. with Mr Quiverful he have be concerned on various
matter of business; but of Mrs Q. he have see very little. now,
however, he be in too gracious a mood to pass she by unnoticed.
the Quiverfuls, one and all, have look for the bitter hostility
from Dr Grantly; they know his anxiety for Mr Harding should return
to his old home at the hospital, and they do not know that a new
home have be offer to he at the deanery. Mrs Quiverful be
therefore not a little surprised and not a little rejoice also, at
the tone at which she be address.
'how do you do, Mrs quiverful?--how do you do?' say he, stretch
his left hand out of the gig, as he speak to she.
'I be very glad to see you employ in so pleasant and useful a
manner; very glad indeed.'
Mrs Quiverful thank he, and shake hand with he, and look
into his face suspiciously. she be not sure whether the
congratulation and kindness be or be not ironical.
'pray tell Mr Quiverful from I,' he continue, 'that I be rejoice
at his appointment. it be a comfortable place, Mrs Quiverful, and a
comfortable house, and I be very glad to see you in it. good-bye,
good-bye.' and he drive on, leave the lady well-pleased and
astonish at his good nature. on the whole thing be go well
with the archdeacon, and he could afford to be charitable to Mrs
Quiverful. he look forth from his gig smilingly on all the world,
and forgave every one in Barchester their sin, except only Mrs
Proudie and Mr Slope. have he see the bishop, he would have feel
inclined to pat even he kindly on the head.
he determine to go home by St Ewold's. this would take he some
three mile out of his way; but he feel that he could not leave
Plumstead comfortably without say one word of good fellowship to
Mr Arabin. when he reach the parsonage the vicar be still out;
but, from what he have hear, he do not doubt but that he would
meet he on the road between their two house. he be right in
this, for about halfway home, at a narrow turn, he come upon Mr
Arabin, who be on horseback.
'well, well, well, well,' say the archdeacon loudly, joyously, and
with supreme good humour; 'well, well, well, well; so, after all,
we have no further cause to fear Mr Slope.'
'I hear from Mrs Grantly that they have offer the deanery to Mr
Harding,' say the other.
'Mr Slope have lose more than the deanery, I find,' and then the
archdeacon laugh jocosely. 'come, come, Arabin, you have keep
your secret well enough. I know all about it now.'
'I have have no secret, archdeacon,'said the other with a quiet
smile. 'none at all--not for a day. it be only yesterday that I
know my own good fortune, and to-day I go over to Plumstead to
ask your approval. from what Mrs Grantly have say to I, I be lead
to hope that I shall have it.'
'with all my heart, with all my heart,' say the archdeacon
cordially, hold his friend by the hand. 'itbe just as I would
have it. she be an excellent young woman; she will not come to you
empty-handed; and I think she will make you a good wife. if she
do her duty by you as her sister do by I, youwill be a happy
man; thatbe all I can say.' and as he finish speak, a tear
might have be observe in each of the doctor's eye.'
Mr Arabin warmly return the archdeacon's grasp, but he say
little. his heart be too full for speak, and he could not
express the gratitude which he feel. Dr Grantly understand he as
well as though he have speak for an hour.
'and mind, Arabin,' say he, 'no one but myself shall tie the knot.
wewill get Eleanor out to Plumstead, and it shall come off there.
Iwill make Susan stir herself, and wewill do it in style. I must be
off to London to-morrow on special business. Harding go with I.
but Iwill be back before your bride have get her wedding-dress
ready.' and so they part.
on his journey home the archdeacon occupy his mind with
preparation for the marriage festivity. he make a great resolve
that he would atone to Eleanor for all the injury he have do she
by the munificence of his future treatment. he would show she what
be the difference in his eye between a Slope and an Arabin. on
one other thing also he decide with a firm mind: if the affair of
the dean should not be settle in Mr Arabin's favour, nothing
should prevent he put a new front and bow-window to the
dining-room at St Ewold's parsonage.
'so webe sell after all, Sue,' say he to his wife, accost she
with a kiss as soon as he enter his house. he do not call his
wife Sue above twice or thrice in a year, and these occasion be
great high day.
'Eleanor have have more sense then we give her credit for,' say Mrs
Grantly.
and there be great content in Plumstead rectory that evening; and
Mrs Grantly promise her husband that she would now open her heart,
and take Mr Arabin into it. Hitherto she have decline to do so.
CHAPTER LI
MR SLOPE BIDS farewell to the PALACE and its inhabitant
we must now take leave of Mr Slope, and of the bishop, and of Mrs
Proudie. these leave-taking in novel be as disagreeable as they
be in real life; not so sad, indeed, for they want the reality of
sadness; but quite as perplexing, and generally less satisfactory.
what novelist, what Fielding, what Scott, what George Sand, or Sue,
or Duncan, can impart an interest to the last chapter of his
fictitious history? promise of two child and superhuman
happiness be of no avail, nor assurance of extreme respectability
carry to an age far exceed that usually allot to mortal.
the sorrow of our hero and heroine, they be you delight, oh
public! their sorrow, or their sin, or their absurdity; not
their virtue, good sense, and consequent reward. when we begin to
tint our final page with couleur de rise, as in accordance with
fix rule we must do, we altogether extinguish our own power of
pleasing. when we become dull we offend your intellect; and we must
become dull or we should offend your taste. a late writer, wish
to sustain his interest to the last page, hang his hear at the end
of the third volume. the consequence be, that no one should read
his novel. and who can apportion out and dovetail his incident,
dialogue, character, and descriptive morsel, so as to fit they
all exactly into 439 page, without either compress they
unnaturally, or extend they artificially at the end of his
labour? do I not myself know that I be at this moment in want of a
dozen page, and that I be sick with cudgel my brain to find
they? and then when everything be do, the kindest-hearted critic
of they all invariably twit we with the incompetency and lameness
of our conclusion. we have either become idle and neglect it, or
tedious and over-labour it. it be insipid or unnatural,
over-strained or imbecile. it mean nothing, or attempt too much.
the last scene of all, as all last scene we fear must be:
'be second childishness, and mere oblivion, Sans tooth, san eye,
san taste, san everything.'
I can only say that if some critic, who thoroughly know his work,
and have labour on it till experience have make he perfect, will
write the last fifty page of a novel in the way they should be
write. I, for one, will in future do my good to copy the example.
guide by my own light only, I despair of success.
for the last week or ten day, Mr Slope have see nothing of Mrs
Proudie, and very little of the bishop. he still live in the
palace, and still go through his usual routine work; but the
confidential doing of the diocese have pass into other hand. he
have see this clearly, and mark it well; but it have not much
disturb he. he have indulge in other hope till the bishop's
affair have become dull to he, and he be moreover aware that, as
regard the diocese, Mrs Proudie have checkmate he. it have be
explain, in the beginning of these page, how three or four be
contend together as to who, in fact, should be bishop of
Barchester.
each of they have now admit to himself (or boast to herself)
that Mrs Proudie be victorious in the struggle. they have go
through a competitive examination of considerable severity, and she
have come forth the winner, facile princep. Mr Slope have, for a
moment, run she hard, but it be only for a moment. it have become,
as it be, acknowledge that Hiram's hospital should be the
testing point between they, and now Mr Quiverful be already in the
hospital, the proof of Mrs Proudie's skill and courage.
all this do not break Mr Slope's spirit, because he have other
hope. but, alas, at last there come to he a note from his friend
Sir Nicholas, inform he that the deanship be dispose of. let
we give Mr Slope his due. he do not lie prostrate, under this
blow, or give himself to vain lamentation; he do not henceforward
despair of life, and call upon god above and god below to carry
he off. he sit himself down in his chair, count out what monie
he have in hand, for present purpose, and what other be come
to he, bethink himself as to the good sphere for his future
exertion, and at once write off a letter to a rich sugar-
refiner's wife in Baker Street, who, as he well know, be much
give to the entertainment and encouragement of serious young
evangelical clergyman. he be again, he say, 'upon the world,
have find the air of a cathedral town, and the very nature of
cathedral service, uncongenial to his spirit'; and then he sit
awhile, make firm resolve as to his manner of parting from the
bishop, and also as to his future conduct.
'at last he rise, and twitch his mantle blue,
to-morrow to fresh wood and pasture new.'
have receive a formal command to wait upon the bishop, he rise
and proceed to obey it. he ring the bell and desire the servant
to inform his master that if it suit his lordship, he, Mr Slope,
be ready to wait upon he. the servant, who well understand that
Mr Slope be no long in the ascendant, bring back a message,
say that, 'his lordship desire that Mr Slope would attend he
immediately in his study.' Mr Slope wait about ten minute more
to prove his independence, and then go into the bishop's room.
there, as have expect, he find Mrs Proudie, together with her
husband.
'Hum, ha--Mr Slope, please take a chair,' say the gentleman
bishop.
'pray be seat, Mr Slope,' say the lady bishop.
'thank ye, thank ye,'said Mr Slope, and walk round to the fire,
he throw himself into one of the arm-chair that grace the
hearth-rug.
'Mr Slope,' say the bishop, 'it have become necessary that I should
speak to you definitively on a matter that have for some time be
press itself on my attention.'
'may I ask whether the subject be in any way connect with
myself?' say Mr Slope.
'it be so--certainly,--ye, it certainly be connect with
yourself, Mr Slope.'
'then, my lord, if I may be allow to express a wish, I would
prefer that no discussion on the subject should take place between
we in the presence of a third party.'
'donot alarm yourself, Mr Slope,' say Mrs Proudie, 'no discussion
be at all necessary. the bishop merely intend to express his own
wish.'
'I merely intend, Mr Slope, to express my own wish--no discussion
will be at all necessary,' say the bishop, reiterate his wife's
word.
'that be more, my lord, than we any of we can be sure of,' say Mr
Slope; 'I cannot, however, force Mrs Proudie to leave the room; nor
can I refuse to remain here, if it be your lordship's wish that I
should do so.'
'it be certainly his lordship's wish,'said Mrs Proudie.
'Mr Slope,' begin the bishop, in a solemn, serious voice, 'it
grieve I to have to find fault. it grieve I much to find fault
with a clergyman; but especially so with a clergyman in your
position.'
'why, what have I do amiss, my lord?' demand Mr Slope, loudly.
'what have you do amiss, Mr Slope?' say Mrs Proudie, stand
erect before the culprit, and raise that terrible forefinger. 'do
you dare to ask the bishop what you have do amiss? do not your
conscience--'
'Mrs Proudie, pray let it be understand, once for all, that I will
have no word with you.'
'ah, sire, but you will have word,' say she; 'you must have
word. why have you have so may word with that Signora Neroni? why
have you disgrace yourself, you a clergyman, by constantly
consort with such a woman as that--with a married woman--with
one altogether unfit for a clergyman's society?'
'at any rate, I be introduce to she in your drawing-room,'
return Mr Slope.
'and shamefully you behave there,' say Mrs Proudie, 'most
shamefully. I be wrong to allow you to remain in the house a day
after what I then see. I should have insist on your instant
dismissal.'
'I have yet to learn, Mrs Proudie, that you have the power to
insist either on my go from hence or on my staying here.'
'what!' say the lady; 'I be not to have the privilege of say
who shall and who shall not frequent my own drawing-room! I be not
to save my servant and dependent from have their moral
corrupt by improper conduct! I be not to save my own daughter
from impurity! I will let you see, Mr Slope, whether I have the
power or whether I have not. you will have the goodness to
understand that you no long fill any situation about the bishop;
and as your room will be immediately want in the palace for
another chaplain, I must ask you to provide yourself with
apartment as soon as may be convenient to you.'
'my lord,' say Mr Slope, appeal to the bishop, and so turn
his back completely on the lady, 'will you permit I to ask that I
may have from your own lip and decision that you may have come to
on this matter?'
'certainly, Mr Slope, certainly,' say the bishop; 'that be but
reasonable. well, my decision be that you have well look for some
other preferment. for the situation which you have lately hold I do
not think you be well suit.'
'and what, my lord, have be my fault?'
'that Signora Neroni be one fault,' say Mrs Proudie; 'and a very
abominable fault she be; very abominable, and very disgraceful.
Fie, Mr Slope, fie! you an evangelical clergyman indeed!'
'my lord, I desire to know for what fault I be turn out of your
lordship's house.'
'you hear what Mrs Proudie say,' say the bishop.
'when I publish the history of this transaction, my lord, as I
decidedly shall do in my own vindication, I presume you will not
wish I to state that you have discard I at your wife's bidding
--because she have object to my be acquaint with another
lady, the daughter of one of the prebendary of the chapter?'
'you may publish as you please, sir,' say Mrs Proudie. 'but you
will not be insane enough to publish any of your doing in
Barchester. do you think I have not hear of your kneeling at that
creature's foot--that be if she have any foot--and of your constant
slobber over her hand? I advise you to beware, Mr Slope, of what
you do and say. clergyman have be unfrock for less than what
you have be guilty of.'
'my lord, if this go on I shall be oblige to indict this woman--
Mrs Proudie I mean--for defamation of character.'
'I think, Mr Slope, you have well now retire,' say the bishop. 'I
will enclose to you a cheque for any balance that may be due to
you; and, under the present circumstance, it will of course be
well for all party that you should leave the palace at the
early possible moment.'
'if, however, you wish to remain in this neighbourhood,' say Mrs
Proudie, 'and will solemnly pledge yourself never again to see that
woman, and will promise also to be more circumspect in your
conduct, the bishop will mention your name to Mr Quiverful, who now
want a curate at Puddingdale.
the house be, I imagine, quite sufficient for your requirement:
and there will moreover by a stipend of fifty pound a year.'
'may God forgive you, madam, for the manner in which you have
treat I,' say Mr Slope, look at she with a very heavenly
look; 'and remember this, madam, that you yourself may still have a
fall;' and he look at she with a very worldly look. 'as to the
bishop, I pity he!' and so say, Mr Slope leave the room. thus
end the intimacy of the Bishop of Barchester with his
confidential chaplain.
Mrs Proudie be right in this; namely, that Mr Slope be not insane
enough to publish to the world any of his doing in Barchester. he
do not trouble his friend Mr Towers with any write statement of
the iniquity of Mrs Proudie, or the imbecility of her husband. he
be aware that it would be wise in he to drop for the future all
allusion to his doing in the cathedral city. soon after the
interview just record, he leave Barchester, shake the dust off
his foot as he enter the railway carriage; and he give no longing
linger look after the cathedral tower, as the train hurry he
quickly out of their sight.
it be well know that the family of the Slopes never starve; they
always fall on their foot like cat, and let they fall where they
will, they live on the fat of the land. our Mr Slope do so. on his
return to town he find that the sugar-refiner have die, and that
the widow be inconsolable; or, in other word, in want of
consolation. Mr Slope console she, and soon find himself settle
with much comfort in the house in Baker Street. he possess
himself, also before long, of a church in the vicinity of the New
Road, and become known to fame as one of the most eloquent
preacher and pious clergyman in that part of the metropolis. there
let we leave he.
of the bishop and his wife very little further need be say. from
that time forth nothing material occur to interrupt the even
course of their domestic harmony. very speedily, a further vacancy
on the bench of bishop give Dr Proudie the seat in the House of
Lords, which he at first so anxiously long for. but by this time,
he have become a wise man. he do certainly take his seat, and
occasionally register a vote in favour of Government view on
ecclesiastical matter.
but he have thoroughly learn that his proper sphere of action lie
in close contiguity with Mrs Proudie's wardrobe. he never again
aspire to disobey, or seem even to wish for autocratic diocesan
authority. if ever he think of freedom, he do so, as man think
of the millennium, as of a good time which may be come, but which
nobody expect to come in their day. Mrs Proudie might be say
still to bloom, and be, at any rate, strong; and the bishop have no
reason to apprehend that he would be speedily visit with the
sorrow of a widower's life.
he be still bishop of Barchester. he have so grace that throne,
that the Government have be adverse to translate he, even to
high duty. there may he remain, under safe pupilage, till the
new-fangle manner of the age have discover he to be
superannuate, and bestow on he a pension. as for Mrs Proudie,
our prayer for she be that she may live for ever.
CHAPTER LII
the new dean takes POSSESSION of the DEANERY and the new WARDEN of
the hospital
Mr Harding and the archdeacon together make their way to Oxford,
and there, by dint of cunning argument, they induce the Master of
Lazarus also to ask himself this momentous question: 'why should
not Mr Arabin be Dean of Barchester?' he of course, for a while
try his hand at persuade Mr Harding that he be foolish,
over-scrupulous, self-willed, and weak-minded; but he try in
vain. if Mr Harding would not give way to Dr Grantly, it be not
likely that he would give way to Dr Gwynne; more especially now
that so admirable a scheme as that of induct Mr Arabin into the
deanery have be set on foot. when the master find that his
eloquence be vain, and hear also that Mr Arabin be about to
become Mr Harding's son-in-law, he confess that he also would,
under such circumstance, be glad to see his old friend and
protege, the fellow of his college, place in the comfortable
position that be go a-begging.
'it might be the mean, you know, Master, of keep Mr Slope out,'
say the archdeacon with grave caution.
'he have no more chance of it,' say the master, 'that our college
chaplain. I know about it than that.'
Mrs Grantly have be right in her surmise. it be the Master of
Lazarus who have be instrumental in represent in high place
the claim of Mr Harding have from the government; and he now
consent to use his good endeavour towards get the offer
transfer to Mr Arabin. the three of they go on to London
together, and there they remain a week, to the great disgust of
Mrs Grantly, and most probably also of Mrs Gwynne. the minister be
out of town in one direction, and his private secretary in another.
the clerk who remain could do nothing in such a matter as this,
and all be difficulty and confusion. the two doctor seem to
have plenty to do; they bustle here and they bustle there, and
complain at their club in the evening that they have be drive
off their leg; but Mr Harding have no occupation. once or twice he
suggest that he might perhaps return to Barchester. his request,
however, be peremptorily refuse, and have nothing for it but to
while away his time in Westminster Abbey.
at length an answer from the great man come. the Master of Lazarus
have make his proposition through the Bishop of Belgravia. now the
bishop, tough but newly gifted with his diocesan honours, be a man
of much weight in the clerico-political world. he be, if not as
pious, at any rate as wise as St Paul, and have be with so much
effect all thing to all man, that though he be great among the
don of Oxford, he have be select for the most favourite seat on
the bench by a Whig Prime Minister. to he Dr Gwynne have make known
his wish and his argument, and the bishop have make they know to
the Marquis of Kensington Gore. the marquis, who be Lord High
Steward of the Pantry Board, and who by most man be suppose to
hold the high office out of the cabinet, traffic much in
affair of this kind. he not only suggest the arrangement to the
minister over a cup of coffee, stand on a drawing-room rug in
Windsor Castle, but he also favourably mention Mr Arabin's name
in the ear of a distinguished person.
and so the matter be arrange. the answer of the great man come,
and Mr Arabin be make Dean of Barchester. the three clergyman who
have come up to town on this important mission din together with
great glee on the day on which the news reach they. in a silent
manner, they toast Mr Arabin with full bumper of claret. the
satisfaction of all of they be supreme. the Master of Lazarus have
be successful in his attempt, and success be dear to we all. the
archdeacon have trample upon Mr Slope, and have lift to high
honour the young clergyman whom he have induce to quit the
retirement and comfort of the university. so at least the
archdeacon thought; though, to speak sooth, not he, but
circumstance have trample on Mr Slope. but the satisfaction of Mr
Harding be, of all perhaps, the most complete. he lay aside his
usual melancholy manner, and bring forth little quiet joke from
the utmost mirth of his heart; he poke fun at the archdeacon about
Mr Slope's marriage, and quiz he for his improper love for Mrs
Proudie. on the follow day they all return to Barchester.
it be arrange that Mr Arabin should know nothing of what have be
do till he receive the minister's letter from the hand of his
embryo father-in-law. in order that no time be lose, a message have
be send to he by the precede night's post, beg he to be
at the deanery at the hour that the train from London arrive.
there be nothing in this which surprise Mr Arabin. it have somehow
get about through all bah that Mr Harding be the new dean, and all
Barchester be prepared to welcome he with peal bell and full
heart. Mr Slope have certainly have a party; there have certainly
be those in Barchester who be prepared to congratulate he on
his promotion with assumed sincerity, but even his own party be
not break-hearted by his failure. the inhabitant of the city,
even the high-soule ecstatic young lady of thirty-five, have
begin to comprehend that their welfare and the welfare of the
place, be connect in some mysterious manner with the daily
chant of the bi-weekly anthem. the expenditure of the palace have
not add greatly to the popularity of the bishop's side of the
question; and, on the whole, there be a strong reaction. when it
become know to all the world that Mr Harding be to be the new
dean, all the world rejoice heartily.
Mr Arabin, as we have say, be not surprised at the summon which
call he to the deanery. he have not as yet see Mr Harding since
Eleanor have accept he, nor have he see he since he have learn
of his future father-in-law's preferment. there be nothing more
natural, more necessary, than that they should meet each other at
the early possible moment.
Mr Arabin be wait at the deanery parlour when Mr Harding and Dr
Grantly be drive up from the station.
there be some excitement in the bosom of they all, as they meet
and shake hand; but far too much to enable either of they to begin
his story and tell it in a proper equable style of narrative. Mr
Harding be some minute quite dumbfounded, and Mr Arabin could
only talk in short, spasmodic sentence about his love and good
fortune. he slip in, as good he could, some sort of
congratulation about the deanship, and then go on with his hope
and fear--hope that he might be receive as a son, and fear that
he hardly deserve such good fortune. then he go back to the
dean; it be the most thoroughly satisfactory appointment, he say,
of which he have ever hear.
'but! but! But--' say Mr Harding; and then fail to get any
far, he look imploringly at the archdeacon.
'the truth be, Arabin,' say the doctor, 'that, after all you be
not destine to be the son-in-law to a dean. nor be I either: morebe
the pity.'
Mr Arabin look to he for explanation. 'be not Mr Harding to be
the new dean?'
'it appear not,' say the archdeacon. Mr Arabin's face fall a
little, and he look from one to the other. it be plainly to be
see from they both that there be no cause for unhappiness in the
matter, at least not of an unhappiness to they; but there be as
yet no clarification of the mystery.
'think how old I be,' say Mr Harding imploringly.
'Fiddlestick!' say the archdeacon.
'thatbe all very well, but it willnot make a young man of I,' say
Mr Harding.
'and who be to be the dean?' ask Mr Arabin.
'yes, that be the question,' say the archdeacon. 'come, Mr
Precentor, since you obstinately refuse to be anything else, let we
know who be to be the man. he have get the nomination in his
pocket.'
with eye brim full of tear, Mr Harding pull out the letter and
hand it to his future son-in-law. he try to make a little
speech, but fail altogether. have give up the document, he
turn round to the wall, feign to blow his nose, and then sit
himself down on the old dean's dingy horse-hair sofa. and here we
find it necessary to bring our account of the interview to an end.
nor can we pretend to describe the rapture with which Mr Harding
be receive by his daughter. she weep with grief and with joy;
with grief that her father should, in his old age, still be without
that rank and worldly position, which, accord to her idea, he
have so well earn; and with joy that he, her darling father,
should have bestow on that other dear one the good thing of
which he himself would not open his hand to take possession. and
she, Mr Harding again show his weakness. in the melee of the
exposal of their love and reciprocal affection, he find himself
unable to resist the entreaty of all party that his lodging in
the High Street should be give up. Eleanor would not live in the
deanery, she say, unless her father live there also. Mr Arabin
would not be dean, unless Mr Harding would be co-dean with he. the
archdeacon declare that his father-in-law should not have his own
way in everything, and Mrs Grantly carry he off to Plumstead,
that he might remain there till Mr and Mrs Arabin be in a state
to receive he at their own mansion.
press by such argument as these, what could a weak man do but
yield?
but there be yet another task which it behove Mr Harding to do
before he could allow himself to be at rest. little have be say
in these page of the state of those remain old man who have
live under his sway at the hospital. but not on this account must
it be presume that he have forget they, or that in their state
of anarchy and in their want of government he have omit to visit
they. he visit they constantly, and have latterly give they to
understand that they would soon be require to subscribe their
adherence to a new master. there be now but five of they, one of
they not have be but quite lately carry to his rest--but five
of the full number, which have hitherto be twelve, and which be
now to be raise to twenty-four, include woman. of these old
Bunce, who for many year, have be the favourite of the late
warden, be one; and Abel Handy, who have be the humble mean from
drive that warden from his home, be another.
Mr Harding now resolve that he himself would introduce the new
warden to the hospital. he feel that many circumstance might
conspire to make the man receive Mr Quiverful with aversion and
disrespect; he feel also that Mr Quiverful might himself feel some
qualm of conscience if he enter the hospital with an idea that
he do so in hostility to his predecessor. Mr Harding therefore
determine to walk in, arm in arm, with Mr Quiverful, and to ask
from these man their respectful obedience to their new master.
on return to Barchester, he find that Mr Quiverful have not yet
sleep in the hospital house, or enter on his new duty. he
accordingly make known to that gentleman his wish, and his
proposition be not reject.
it be a bright clear morning, though in November, that Mr Harding
and Mr Quiverful, arm in arm, walk through the hospital gate. it
be one trait in our old friend's character that he do nothing
with parade. he omit, even in the more important doing of his
life, that sort of parade by which most of we deem it necessary to
grace our important doing. we have housewarming, christening,
and gala day; we keep, if not our own birthday, those of our
child; we be apt to fuss ourselves, if call upon to change
our residence, and have, almost all of we, our little state
occasion. Mr Harding, have no state occasion. when he leave his old
house, he go forth from it with the same quiet composure as
though he be merely take his daily walk; and now that he
re-enter it with another warden under his wing, he do so with
the same quiet step and calm demeanour. he be a little less
upright than he have be five year, nay, it be nearly six year
ago; he walk perhaps a little slow; his footfall be perhaps a
thought less firm; otherwise one might have same that he be merely
return with a friend under his arm.
this friendliness be everything to Mr Quiverful. to he, even in
his poverty, the thought that he be supplant a brother
clergyman so kind and courteous as Mr Harding, have be very
bitter. under his circumstance it have be impossible for he to
refuse the proffered boon; he could not reject the bread that be
offer to his child, or refuse to ease the heavy burden that
have so long oppress that poor wife of his; nevertheless, it have
be very grievous to he to think that in go to the hospital he
might encounter the ill will of his brother in the diocese. all
this Mr Harding have fully comprehend. it be for such feeling as
these, for the nice comprehension of such motif, that his heart
and intellect be peculiarly fit. in most matter of worldly
import the archdeacon set down his father-in-law as little well
than a fool. and perhaps he be right. but in some other matter,
equally important if they be rightly judge, Mr Harding, have he
be so minded, might with as much propriety have set down his
son-in-law for a fool. few man, however, be constitute as be Mr
Harding. he have that nice appreciation of the feeling of other
which belong of right exclusively to woman.
Arm in arm they walk into the inner quadrangle of the building,
and there the five old man meet they. Mr Harding shake hand with
they all, and then Mr Quiverful do the same. with Bunce Mr Harding
shake hand twice, and Mr Quiverful be about to repeat the
ceremony but the old man give he no encouragement.
'I be very glad to know that at last you have a new warden,' say
Mr Harding in a very cheery voice.
'we be very old for any change,' say one of they; 'but we do
suppose it be all for the good.'
'certainly--certainly, it be for the good,' say Mr Harding. 'you
will again have a clergyman of your own church under the same roof
with you, and a very excellent clergyman you will have. it be a
great satisfaction to I to know that so good a man be come to
take care of you, and that it be no strange, but a friend of my
own, who will allow I from time to time to come in and see you.'
'we be thankful to your reverence,' say another of they.
'I need not tell you, my good friend,' say Mr Quiverful, 'how
extremely grateful I be to Mr Harding for his kindness to me,--I
must say his uncalled for, his unexpected kindness.'
'he be always very kind,' say a third.
'what I can do to fill the void which he leave here, I will do. for
your sake and my own I will do so, and especially for his sake. but
to you who have know he, I can never be the same well-love
friend and father that he have be.'
'no, no, sir,' say old Bunce, who hitherto have hold his peace; 'no
one can be that. not if the new bishop send a hangel to we from
heaven. we donot doubt youwill do your good, sir, but youwill not
be like the old master; not to we old one.'
'Fie, Bunce, fie! how dare you talk in that way!' say Mr Harding;
but as he scold the old man he still hold he by his arm, and
press it with warm affection.
there be no get any enthusiasm in the matter. how could five
old man totter away to their final resting-place be enthusiastic
on the reception of a stranger? what could Mr Quiverful be to they,
or they to Mr Quiverful? have Mr Harding indeed come back to they,
some last flicker of joyous light might have shine forth on their
aged cheek; but it be in vain to bid they rejoice because Mr
Quiverful be about to move his fourteen child from Puddingdale
into the hospital house. in reality they do no doubt receive
advantage, spiritual as well as corporal; but this they could
neither anticipate nor acknowledge.
it be a dull affair enough, this introduction of Mr Quiverful; but
still it have its effect. the good which Mr Harding intend do not
fall to the ground. all the Barchester world, include the five
old bedesman, treat Mr Quiverful with the more respect, because
Mr Harding have thus walk in arm in arm with he, on his first
entrance to his duty.
and here in their new abode we will leave Mr and Mrs Quiverful and
their fourteen child. may they enjoy the good thing which
Providence have at length give to they!
CHAPTER LIII
CONCLUSION
the end of a novel, like the end of a child's dinner-party, must
be make up of sweetmeat and sugar-plum. there be now nothing else
to be tell but the gala doing of Mr Arabin's marriage, nothing
more to be describe than the wedding dress, no further dialogue
to be record than that which take place between the archdeacon
who marry they, and Mr Arabin and Eleanor who be marry. 'wilt
thou have this woman to thy wed wife?' and 'wilt thou have this
man to thy wed husband, to live together accord to God's
ordinance?' Mr Arabin and Eleanor each answer, 'I will'. we have
no doubt that they will keep their promise; the more especially as
the Signora Neroni have leave Barchester before the ceremony be
perform.
Mrs Bold have be somewhat more than two year a widow before she
be married to her second husband, and little Johnnie be then able
with due assistance to walk on his own leg into the drawing-room
to receive the salutation of the assemble guest. Mr Harding give
away the bride, the archdeacon perform the service, and the two
Miss Grantlys, who be join in their labour by other young
lady of the neighbourhood, perform the duty of bridesmaid
with equal diligence and grace. Mrs Grantly superintend the
breakfast and bouquet and Mary Bold distribute the card and
cake. the archdeacon's three son have also come home for the
occasion. the eld be great with learning, be regard by all
who know he as a certain future double first. the second, however,
bear the palm on this occasion, be resplendent in his new
uniform. the third be just enter the university, and be
probably the proud of the three.
but the most remarkable feature in the whole occasion be the
excessive liberality of the archdeacon. he literally make present
to everybody. as Mr Arabin have already move out of the parsonage
of St Ewold's, that scheme of elongate the dining-room be of
course abandon; but he would have refurnish the whole deanery
have he be allow. he send down a magnificent piano by Erard,
give Mr Arabin a cob which any dean in the land might have be
proud to bestride, and make a special present to Eleanor of a new
pony chair that have gain a prize in the exhibition. nor do he
even stay his hand here; he buy a set of cameo for his wife,
and a sapphire bracelet for Miss Bold; shower pearl and
workbox on be daughter, and to each of his son he present a
cheque for 20 pound. on Mr Harding he bestow a magnificent
violoncello with all the new-fashioned arrangement and expensive
addition, which, on account of these novelty, that gentleman
could never use with satisfaction to his audience or pleasure to
himself.
those who know the archdeacon well, perfectly understand the cause
of his extravagance. 'twa thus that he sing his song of triumph
over Mr Slope. this be his paean, his hymn of thanksgiving, his
loud oration. he have gird himself with his sword, and go forth
to the war; now he be return from the field laden with the
spoil of the foe. the cob, the cameo, the violoncello and the
pianoforte, be all as it be trophy reft from the tent of his
now conquer enemy.
the Arabins after their marriage go abroad for a couple of
month, accord the custom in such matter now duly establish,
and then commence their deanery life under good auspex. and
nothing can be more pleasant than the present arrangement of
ecclesiastical affair in Barchester. the titular bishop never
interfere, and Mrs Proudie not often. her sphere be more extended,
more noble, and more suited to her ambition than that of a
cathedral city. as long as she can do what she please with the
diocese, she be willing to leave the dean and chapter to
themselves. Mr Slope try his hand at subvert the
old-establish custom of the close, and from his failure she have
learn experience. the burly chancellor and the meagre little
prebendary be not tease by any application respect Sabbath-day
school, the dean be leave to his own dominion, and the intercourse
between Mrs Proudie and Mrs Arabin be confine to a yearly dinner
by each to the other. at these dinner Dr Grantly will not take a
part; but he never fail to ask for and receive a full account of
all that Mrs Proudie do or say.
his ecclesiastical authority have be greatly shorn since the palmy
day in which he reign supreme as mayor of the palace to his
father, but nevertheless such authority as be now leave to he he
can enjoy without interference. he can walk down High Street of
Barchester without feel that those who see he be compare his
claim with those of Mr Slope. the intercourse between Plumstead
and the deanery be of the most constant and familiar description.
since Eleanor have be marry to a clergyman, and especially to a
dignitary of the church, Mrs Grantly have find many more point of
sympathy with her sister; and on a come occasion, which be much
look forward to by all party, she intend to spend a month or
two at the deanery. she never think of spend a month in
Barchester when little Johnny Bold be bear!
the two sister do not quite agree on matter of church doctrine,
though their difference be of the most amicable description. Mr
Arabin's church be two degree high than that of Mrs Grantly.
this may seem strange to those who will remember that Eleanor be
once accuse of partiality to Mr Slope; but it be no less the fact.
she like her husband's silken vest, she like his adherence to the
rubric, she specially like the eloquent philosophy of his sermon,
and she like the red letter in her own prayer-book. it must not
be presume that she have a taste for candle, or that she be at all
astray about the real presence; but she have an inkling that way.
she send a handsome subscription towards certain very heavy legal
expense which have lately be incur in Bath, her name of
course not appear; she assume a smile of gentle ridicule when
the Archbishop of Canterbury be name, and she have put up a
memorial window in the cathedral.
Mrs Grantly, who belong to the high and dry church, the high
church as it be some fifty year since, before tract be write
and young clergyman take upon themselves the highly meritorious
duty of clean church, rather laugh at her sister. she shrug
her shoulder, and tell Miss Thorne that she suppose Eleanor will
have an oratory in the deanery before she have do. but she be not
on that account a whit displease. a few high church vagary do
not, she think, sit amiss on the shoulder of a young dean's wife.
it show at any rate that her heart be in the subject; and it show
moreover that she be remove, wide as the pole asunder, from the
cesspool of abomination in which it be once suspect that she
would wallow and grovel. anathema maranatha! let anything be hold
as bless, so that that be well curse. welcome kneeling and
bowing, welcome matin and compline, welcome bell, book, and
candle, so that Mr Slope's dirty surplice and ceremonial sabbath
be hold in due execration!
if it be essentially and absolutely necessary to choose between the
two, we be inclined to agree with Mrs Grantly that the bell, book,
and candle be the less evil of the two. let it however be
understand that no such necessity be admit in these page.
Dr Arabin (we suppose he must have become a doctor when he become a
dean) be more moderate and less outspoken on doctrinal point than
his wife, as indeed in his station it behove he to be. he be a
studious, thoughtful, hard-work man. he live constantly at the
deanery and preache nearly every Sunday. his time be spend in
sift and edit old ecclesiastical literature and in produce
the same article new. at Oxford he be generally regard as the
most promising clerical ornament of the age. he and his wife live
together in perfect mutual confidence. there be but one secret in
her bosom which he have not share. he have never yet learn how Mr
Slope have his ear box.
the Stanhopes soon find that Mr Slope's power need no long
operate to keep they from the delight of their italian villa.
before Eleanor's marriage they have all migrate back to the shore
of Como. they have not be resettle long before the signora
receive from Mrs Arabin a very pretty though very short epistle,
in which she be inform of the fate of the writer. this letter
be answer by another, bright, charming, and witty, as the
signora's always be; and so end the friendship between Eleanor
and the Stanhopes.
one word of Mr Harding, and we have do.
he be still Precentor of Barchester, and still pastor of the little
church of St Cuthbert's. in spite of what he have so often say
himself, he be not even yet an old man. he do such duty as fall
to his lot well and conscientiously, and be thankful that he have
never be tempt to assume other for which he might be less
fit.
the Author now leave he in the hand of his reader; not as a
hero, not as a man to be admire and talk of, not as a man who
should be toast at public dinner and speak of with conventional
absurdity as a perfect divine, but as a good man without guile,
believe humbly in the religion which he strive to teach, and
guide by the precept which he have strive to learn
the END
